---
title: "Remarks by opposition leader on Portuguese Naval deserters"
date: "1962-01-10"
creators:
  - "Barwick, Garfield"
source: "Minister for External Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213591124
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10006689%22
---

 DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 

 CANBERRA

 PR ,10

 .. January.. . . l . Q . t i i . , . . .  i  e&2.*..

 REMARKS BY OPPOSITION LEADER ON PORTUGUESE NAVAL DESERTERS 

 Statement by the Minister for External Affairs.

 '  The Minister for External Affairs, Sir Garfield Berwick, 

 said today that Mr. Calwell's insatiable propensity to jump on 

 any band wagon was too obvious to need comment, but his utter­

 ances on the matter of the Portugese naval ratings showed h o w ,  

 in this as in other cases, his zeal oustripped his memory.

 Sir Garfield said Mr. Colwell was reported as saying 

 "If the Department of External Affairs has involved itself in 

 this m a t t e r , this represents a new and dangerous departure 

 from established practice".

 Sir Garfield said s "The fact is that the Minister for 

 Immigration has n e v e r , in the life of the present Parliament 

 and as far as I can ascertain, not even in Mr. Calwell's 

 period of office, had the decision as to whether or not 

 political asylum should be granted nor has he ever received, 

 or had to decide upon, a request by a foreign Government for 

 the arrest and surrender of servicemen who have deserted from 

 the service of that Government' .

 "Mr, Calwell has failed to observe the distinction 

 between granting political asylum and exercising a Ministerial 

 discretion under the Immigration .ct not to enforce deportation 

 of a prohibited immigrant,

 "If no more than a refusal of political asylum has taken 

 place the Minister for Immigration could exercise his 

 discretion to allow the' person to remain in Australia and to 

 waive Immigration formalities, .  But, if in addition to the 

 refusal of political asylum, a decision has been made to grant 

 the foreign Government's request for the arrest and surrender 

 of -"the servicemen, the Minister for Immigration would have, 

 as in this c a s e ,  no option but to enforce the law as to 

 prohibited immigrants.

 OR T H E  PRESS ILEASED ONLY IN CANBERRA

 Page 2.

 ?·«’  3 

 Sir Garfield said there had obviously been a good 

 deal of misunderstanding about the case of the Portugese 

 servicemen. They were naval Ratings under the obligations 

 of a disciplined Service who decided to desert their ship 

 because , a s '  they said, they "liked the look ,of ^Australia"Vv-.y '  

 Having dbserted, they claimed to be frightened of the 

 consequences of their desertion.

 "Interrogation showed that they had no background of 

 political activity in their own country, that they were not 

 in trouble with the Portuguese Authorities for any 

 political action or belief and that they, had no fear of 

 political consequences in their own country," the Minister 

 said. ·

 "The Portugese- Authorities confirm this by stating 

 that ’there were- no charges pending against the three men 

 on political .grounds1. .

 .  "In dealing with applications for political asylum, 

 Governments take into account, amongother things, the 

 applicant's political background, if any, and the possibility 

 of his being penalised by his own Government for his 

 political beliefs should he be returned to his country of 

 origin. .

 .  "To grant 1  political asylum1  is to accept a person 

 as a political refugee - that is to say either a person 

 seeking escape from the consequences of some political 

 activity in his own country or a person ’defecting* on 

 political grounds from a- system to which he had previously 

 adhered. It is an Act of State raising as a rule general 

 issues of international relations.

 .  "In the case of these naval ratings, there were no 

 elements whatever to warrant a grant of political asylum.

 "Nor were there any reasons why the request of the 

 Government in whose service they were to refuse their 

 return to the service of-their country according to their 

 obligation should be refused. Their offence of desertion 

 had no doubt rendered them liable to the discipline of their 

 service; however, as the Minister, for Immigration has 

 already pointed o u t , the Portugese authorities have said 

 that the tribunal which will deal with them will fee asked 

 to deal leniently with them because being y o u n g , they had 

 yielded to a natural temptation". ·  ’

 Sir Garfield said that by' granting the Portugese / 

 Government's request concerning the naval ratings, the 

 Australian Government did not identify itself with any 

 aspect of Portugese colonial administration.

