---
title: "Marked upward trend in immigration programme to be maintained"
date: "1965-08-18"
creators:
  - "Opperman, Hubert"
source: "Minister for Immigration"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213598242
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10008993%22
---

 32/65

 PRESS STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION,  

 THE HON. HUBERT OPPERMAN, M.P.

 The Minister for Immigration, Mr. Opperman, said 

 to-day that the Government intended to maintain the marked 

 upward trend in the immigration programme.

 Its aim for 1965/66 was at least 145,000 settlers,

 5.000 more than last year's result which was the best for any 

 year except 1949/50.

 The figure would include 90,000 assisted migrants -70.000 from Britain and 20,000 recruited by Australian migration 

 missions in 11 countries in Europe.

 Another 55,000 settlers paying their own fares were 

 expected to come to Australia, mainly from British and· southern 

 European countries.

 Most of the southern European settlers would be from .  

 Italy and Greece and sponsored by people already settled in 

 Australia.

 Mr. Opperman said that the arrival of 140,157 

 settlers during 1964/65 was the best result since 1949/50.

 "In that year, when we received 133,929 assisted 

 settlers, as well as many thousands who paid their own fares,  

 Australia was a haven for refugees from countries still suffering 

 the effects of the w a r .

 "It is a considerable achievement that, in these days 

 of prosperity and comport in Britain and Europe,  Australia can 

 still attract migrants in increasing numbers.

 "Over the past three years the intake of settlers 

 has been rising steadily. In 1962/63 we received 101,888 

 settlers. In 1963/64 the figure rose to 122,318.

 "In the past year we have received more than 140,000 

 settlers and now we look forward to at least 145,000.

 "As in the past, the past, the progress of the programme 

 will be kept under review and the flow increased if opportunity 

 offers", Mr. Opperman said.

 Department of Immigration, 

 CANBERRA.  A .C .T .

 August 18, 1965 ·

