---
title: "Middle East"
date: "1967-06-16"
creators:
  - "Hasluck, Paul"
source: "Minister for External Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211169345
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/745149%22
---

 - a

 DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS CANBERRA

 FOR THE PRESS

 PR 58

 16th June, 1967.

 MIDDLE EAST

 The Minister for External Affairs (Mr Paul Hasluck) today made

 the following statement:

 "The calling of the Emergency Special Session of the United

 Nations General Assembly, which will probably begin on June 19, moves

 the discussion of Middle Eastern questions into a new forum.

 Australia will be represented at the meeting.

 The primary responsibilities in this difficult matter fall

 on the countries of the region and on those in a position to bring

 their influence to bear on them. Although Australia is not

 directly involved as a party we will be glad to play our part in

 furthering constructive efforts for peace and will give careful

 attention to the views of all countries of the region.

 The recent fighting was an episode in a long history of

 tension in the Middle East. The fighting did not settle any of

 the old problems but may have created some new ones. The underlying

 problems and the interest of other nations in peace and stability

 in the region are still there.

 Our objective now that fighting has ceased is not only to

 ensure that hostilities do not start again but to seek the

 commencement of an effort to build a long—term peace. It is to be

 hoped that the General Assembly will keep this objective clearly in

 mind and not engage in recriminations or in diplomatic hostilities

 but seek to reach a greater sense of magnanimity and tolerance than

 has existed in the past. Arguments about who is to blame will not

 carry us far.

 Among the issues that can be clearly identified are recognition

 of Israel as having a national existence and status; respect and

 2/...

 -2-

 support for the territorial integrity and political independence of

 states, be they Arab or Israeli; an assurance of security by both

 Arab and Israeli states; the position of Palestinian Arab refugees;

 the right of transit of ships of all nations through the Suez

 Canal and Gulf of Aqaba; the future status of Jerusalem; the

 possibility of limiting the supply of arms to various countries of

 the region; and co— operation over the use of Jordan waters. These are difficult and serious matters. They require new approaches and will not be made easier if the debates are used to

 inflame feelings and harden attitudes. Our efforts will be used wherever possible first to prevent a recurrence of fighting and

 second to bring a constructive approach to the discussion of the

 basic causes of the struggle."

