---
title: "Compensation for refugees"
date: "1967-02-14"
creators:
  - "Hasluck, Paul"
source: "Minister for External Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211169037
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/742559%22
---

 DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS,

 CANBERRA.

 FOR THE PRESS

 (Released only in Canberra)

 PR 21

 14th February, 19 67 .

 COMPENSATION FOR REFUGEES

 The Department of External Affairs has announced that an

 agreement which could be of interest to persons in Australia has been

 concluded between the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and

 the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany.

 Under this agreement the Government of the Federal Republic

 of Germany has undertaken to place at the disposal of the United Nations

 High Commissioner for Refugees the sum of 3,500,000 Deutschmarks (A$790,866) to assist persons persecuted under the National-Socialist government in Germany by reason of their nationality, who, because they

 were not refugees on 1st October, 1953, did not qualify under the UNHCR Indemnification Fund established in 1960.  Payments may be made to such persons who were detained in concentration camps, prisons or similar

 places of detention for at least three months or to the surviving dependants

 of such persons who have died as a result of National-Socialist persecution,

 if the applicants either:

 (a) as refugees within the meaning of the Geneva Convention

 relating to the Status of Refugees, acquired a new nationality

 after the end of persecution but before 1st October 1953; or (b) became refugees within the meaning of that Convention after 1st October 1953, but not later than 31st December 1965.

 The Department said that persons wishing to benefit from this fund should submit new applications. Applications previously submitted to any other authority, or to the High Commissioner's first Indemnification

 Fund were not valid for the new fund. Application forms could be obtained by writing directly to The United Nations High Commissioner for

 Refugees, Branch Office for Australia and New Zealand, 44 Martin Place,

 Sydney.

 The closing date for submitting claims is 30th September, 1967.

