---
title: "Significant progress at resettlement village"
date: "1968-05-22"
creators:
  - "Lynch, Phillip"
source: "MINISTER FOR THE ARMY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211170428
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/762524%22
---

 FOR PRESS

 NO .  PRL 16

 SIGNIFICANT PROGRESS AT RESETTLE. VT VILLAGE 2. S.

 Statement by the Minis ter for the Ar Q

 the Ron. Phil,li-g L

 y nch,,, M,P .

 About 12.00 South Vietnamese refugees are beginning to till land

 allocated to them last weekend at the resettlement village of Ap Suoi Nghe, two miles

 north of the Australian Task Force base at Nui Dat0

 Commenting on the progress being made at Ap Suoi Ngtre, the Minister for the

 Ary 9 Mr. Phillip Lynch, said the allocation of two-and-a-half acres of land to each of the families in the village, was a significant step forward in the Australian

 Army°s civic action programme in Pbuoc Tay Province,,

 It is the first time in the lives of many of the peasants re=settled at Ap Suoi

 Nghe that they have owned a blc;ok of land.

 Mr. Lynch. said the village was established by the Australians last year

 following an operation by two Australian battalions, .Before they were moved to Ap

 Suoi Nghe the peasants were farming rented land at high rates or were squatting on

 government land. The Viet Gong imposed taxes on them and collected rice and salt

 from them and also obtained recruits from among the peasant families.

 Ap Soui Nghe has been fostered and largely aided by the 1st Australian Civil

 Affairs unit, now commanded by Lieuter..ant- Colonel Kevin Latchford of Mosman 9 NSW,, Four hundred and fifty acres of thick jungle and bamboo around the new village was

 cleared earlier this year by engineers from the Australian Task Force and army

 surveyors surveyed the area and subdivided it into family blocks.

 Allocation of the land will mean that the people of Ap Soul Ng he  will soon

 be able to be taken off South Vie w's list of refugees and will cease to rely on

 Government Assistance,

 Lists-. A and B

 Further informations

 CANBERRAa Lieutenant°Colonel Lo Logan (65-o461) (86-1895)

 OTHER SPATES s-  ADPR AT COMMAND HEADQUARTERS

 22 May 9 1968

