---
title: "Czechoslovakians wishing to re-settle in Australia"
date: "1968-08-28"
creators:
  - "Snedden, Billy"
source: "Minister for Immigration"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211170880
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/790872%22
---

 News Release

 FROM THE MINISTER FOR I MMIGRATION

 Statement by the Hon. B. M. Sniedden, Q.C.,.

 in the House of Representatives on 28 August, 1968.

 CZECHOSLOVAKIANS jWISHING TO RE-SETTLE IN ATJSTRAI[IA

 Last week this House unanimously approved a motion expressing its distress at events in Czechoslovakia and stating its sympathy for the people of Czechoslovakia in their ordeal.

 Yesterday the Honourable Member for Ryan (Mr. Nigel Drury) asked me if I could assure the Rouse that the Australian Government will provide maximum facilities to enable refugees from Csechoslovakia to come to this country. In reply I said that, in the event of a refugee situation arising from the circumstances that have been precipitated upon Czechoslovakia, the Australian Government =mould

 respond as it has in similar situations in the past. I am sure that the question reflected the concern of other Honourable Members and of the community generally, that Czechoslovakians wishing to begin a new life in Australia should have the opportunity of doing so.

 At this stage there is no suggestion that a major refugee situation has arisen. However I have just received reports from overseas posts that there is a large number of Czechoslovakians temporarily in countri es outside their homeland and that there is interest amongst -ahem in re-settlement here.

 We have for many years been granting assisted._ passages to refugees from countries of Eastern Europe including Czechoslovakia.

 In line with this, I have instructed im-migration posts overseas that they are to offer every help to Czechoslovakians wishing to come to Australia for re--settlement.

 Department of Immigration, Canberra.

