---
title: "Scholarships for Czechoslovak refugee students"
date: "1970-02-04"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Nigel"
source: "Minister for Education and Science"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211173375
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/830400%22
---

 PRESS STATEMENT -- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

 STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SCIENCE, TI HON. -^Tl7 Tl/11_1TlTT  (l /Y - -. 'I.

 SCHOLARSHIPS FOR CZECHOSLOVAK REFUGEE STUDENTS

 The Commonwealth Minister for Education and Science, the Hon. Nigel Bowen, M.P., announced today that special scholarship assistance would be provided for Czechoslovak refugee students wishing to undertake approved courses of higher education in Australia.

 Mr Bowen explained that in 1969 the Government had provided scholarships for Czechoslovak students who had left Czechoslovakia during or after the crisis of August 1968. However, many students were unable to begin their studies

 in 1969 as some had arrived after the academic year had started and others had found that their command of English was inadequate for tertiary studies. It had therefore been decided to continue the practice in 1970 of awarding special

 scholarships to Czech students.

 Students who left Czechoslovakia after the August crisis of 1968 and have arrived in Australia before the beginning of the 1970 academic year are eligible to apply for a scholarship. They should contact the regional office of the Department of Education and Science for details of the scheme and for application forms.

 Applications should be made no later than 20 February 1970.

 Department of Education and Science.

 4 February 1970.

