---
title: "Additional aid for East Pakistan refugees"
date: "1971-06-08"
creators:
  - "Bury, Leslie"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213774705
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10017985%22
---

 OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 8th June, 1-971·

 ADDITIONAL AID FOR EAST PAKISTAN REFUGEES

 .  "The Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Hon. Leslie Bury, said 

 tonight, following the Government's decision to provide additional .  

 assistance of up to $500,000 in aid for East Pakistan refugees in India, 

 that consideration was already being given to the most effective ways 

 of using the additional assistance in consultation with the Indian 

 authorities. .  .

 Some of the things which the Government could help with 

 would be the provision of additional vaccines, medical supplies such 

 as antibiotics and vitamin pills, shelter materials and other items which 

 continued to have high priority.

 This would be additional to discussions now under way with 

 Indian authorities about the possibility of Australia providing compact 

 medical teams experienced in mass vaccination techniques. In fact the 

 Government had already offered the services of three such teams and 

 was awaiting Indian confirmation that they were needed. The first of 

 these”would be ready to leave in the next few days, if required.

 We had also said that we could supply one million doses 

 of cholera vaccine.

 Mr. Bury said that in these emerging and rapidly changing 

 conditions it was important to keep the priority needs of the refugees 

 constantly under review..  We would continue to keep in close touch with 

 the Indian Government and international relief agencies so as to adapt 

 our programme of emergency help quickly to meet changing needs."

