---
title: "Double standards on refugees"
date: "1975-08-08"
creators:
  - "Sinclair, Ian"
source: "Shadow Minister for Primary Industry"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213717295
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR06000739%22
---

 m m  RELEASE STATEMENT BY HON. I. SINCLAIR -DEPUTY LEADER NATIONAL COUNTRY PARTY OF AUSTRALIA.

 DOUBLE STANDARDS ON REFUGEES

 Prime Minister Mr. Whitlam's guidelines for Vietnamese refugees 

 are as rigid now as they were when first announced.

 The inflexability of these guidelines originally excluded 

 practically all of the refugees who have relatives resident 

 in Australia.

 Until this week, 201 refugees were allowed to enter Australia 

 since the fall of Saigon.

 Now some 300 more are to be given entry visas.

 The adequacy of Australia's humanitarian response in this 

 respect must be seriously questioned.

 The Prime Minister has ignored his own guidelines for these 

 refugees, yet insists that these same guidelines be strictly 

 adhered to by refugees with close family ties with Vietnamese 

 and Cambodian students resident in Australia.

 Why are these particular refugees not acceptable to enter 

 Australia?

 All have been sponsored by Australian families who undertake to 

 give them free accomodation for one year.

 Most speak English and are professionally or tertiary trained.

 Many have been interviewed on Guam by Australian volunteers and 

 found to be in no way political activists.

 There are 440 Vietnamese students living in Australia today.

 Approximately 250 relations of these students escaped to Guam,

 Waik Island and Thailand.

 .../2

 John McEwen House Telephone Canberra 73 3822 Box 41 GPO Telex AA 62543

 Canberra ACT 2600 Telegrams NATIONALCP 

 N a tio n a l C o u n try  P arty o f  A ustralia

 NEWS RELEASE

 Does the Prime Minister intend to go back on his statement that 

 he believes in 'family reunion1?

 What could possibly be his reason for not allowing these 

 refugees to enter Australia?

 Could it be that the Communist PRG Government has suggested 

 that it would disapprove of a sympathetic Australian response.

 I wonder if these relatives of Vietnamese and Cambodian students 

 are not allowed into Australia, will the students on completion 

 of their studies be forced to leave Australia to join their 

 families in other countries?

 They will be trade and fuel technoligists, technical engineers, 

 scientists and so on.

 Their professors here have said they are some of their most 

 intelligent students.

 Australia has paid for their education.

 Surely, it is unecconomic and inhumane not to encourage these 

 students to stay and contribute to the Australian community.

 The Prime Minister's guidelines are unclear.

 No one seems to know just what they are or why they are.

 Why do these educated students with relations still living in 

 Vietnam and Cambodia have to be physiologically influenced to 

 leave Australia?

 Why require them to take their Australian education overseas 

 particulally to communist-run countries if they are forced to 

 return against their free will and rejoin their families?

 The only Icgical answer to all these questions is that the 

 Prime Minister would prefer to meet the wishes of communist

 countries than recognise the aspirations and talents of  individual Vietnamese and Cambodians.

 ENDS

 R8875/305

 Canberra, August 8, 1975.

 N a tio n a l C o u n try  f o r t y  o f  A u s t r i a John McEwen House Box 41 GRO Canberra ACT 2600 Telephone Canberra 73 3822  Telex AA 62543

 Telegrams NATIO N ALCP

