---
title: "Minister welcomes new director"
date: "1975-10-22"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
source: "Minister for Education"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213821965
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10023500%22
---

 media release

 Ministerial 119 22 October 1978

 MINISTER WELCOMES MEW DIRECTOR

 The new Director of the Northern Territory Division of the  Australian Department of Education, Dr James Eedle, arrived in Darwin  today.

 Dr Eedle, whose appointment was announced on September 22, has  most recently been an Assistant Director in the Commonwealth Secretariat  in London. He has had more than 20 years* experience in education  administration in Britain and West Africa. He replaces Dr Hedley Beare,  who left the Territory in early January to become the Chief Education  Officer of the Interim ACT Schools Authority.

 Since December, Mr Jim Gallacher has been acting as Director  of the N.T. Division. With the arrival of Dr Eedle, Mr Gallacher returns  to his former position of Assistant Director (Special Projects).

 "I take this opportunity to welcome Dr Eedle", the Minister for  Education, Mr Kim Beazley, said today.

 "I would also like to express my warm personal appreciation for  the work of Mr Gallacher and his staff in recent months.

 "One of Mr Gallacher*s most significant achievements was the  co-ordination of the Department's staff during the very difficult weeks  after Cyclone Tracy destroyed Darwin.

 "Mr Gallacher*s personal leadership has won deserved loyalty  from his staff and widespread praise from throughout the Territory.

 "He has been responsible for the swift re-establishment of the  education system in Darwin.

 "Schools have been renovated and repaired to cater for the  Darwin school population which has now grown to 8,000.

 "And in recent weeks the unstable situation in East Timor has  meant an influx of refugees into Darwin. The N.T. Division of my  Department, under the direction of Mr Gallacher, has created a special  school for the children of these refugees.

 "He also has achieved considerable progress in other areas of  N.T. education-. For all his efforts I wish to express my appreciation".

 Mr Gallacher, 52, has been involved in education in the Territory  for 24 years, since moving from Victoria to become head teacher at  Areyonga School, west of Alice Springs, in 1951.

 Inquiries:  Chris Lindsay 089-818755

