---
title: "Opposition sends mission to Vietnam and Cambodia"
date: "1975-03-30"
creators:
  - "Fraser, Malcolm"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213696499
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10023746%22
---

 / (File 162/75)

 THE .  LIBERAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA FEDERAL SECRETARIAT 

 u

 STATEMENT BY THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 OPPOSITION SENDS MISSION TO VIETNAM AND CAMBODIA

 The Federal Opposition is sending its own fact-finding mission to  South-East Asia to gather firsthand information on the rapidly  deteriorating situation in Vietnam and Cambodia.

 The Leader of the Opposition,  Mr. Malcolm Fraser, announced today  that the shadow minister for foreign affairs, Mr. Andrew Peacock,  together with the Deputy. Leader of the Country Party, Mr. Ian  Sinclair, would leave for the area tomorrow. The mission would also 

 include Mr. John Sullivan, MP. «  They would make an on-the-spot assessment of conditions in both  Vietnam and Cambodia, visiting Phnom Penh and Saigon. They were 

 likely to be away for about six days.

 Mr.- Fraser said he had asked the mission to make a particular study  of the tragic refugee situation. He wanted recommendations on ways  in which Australia might give further assistance to the tens of  thousands of Vietnamese trying to escape from the communists.

 The Opposition wanted all the facts it could muster, especially about  the plight of the refugees and information on ways in which Australia  might help them, both directly and through the United Nations.

 The American Government had offered assistance to the Liberal/Country  Party mission which was being undertaken on behalf of the Opposition  and the people of Australia.

 They would report to shadow cabinet as soon as they returned to  Australia, probably next Sunday. The Opposition would press for  an immediate foreign affairs debate in the Parliament.

 Mr. Fraser added that he had hoped the.new shadow minister for .   defence, Mr. Killen, would have been able to participate in the mission  but this had not proved practicable in the time available. Mr. Killen  did not have the necessary inoculations to permit him to travel  -to Asia this week.

 * * * * * *

 March 30, 1975

 /

 BLACKALL & MACQUARIE STS, BARTON, A.C.T. G.P.O. BOX 13, CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600. TEL. 73 2564. TELEX AA 62630

