---
title: "Political activity by Vietnamese refugees"
date: "1975-08-21"
creators:
  - "Whitlam, Gough"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/242204558
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10030528%22
---

 fc*

 P R I M E  miNISTER

 Press Statement No. (546

 POLITICAL ACTIVITY BY VIETNAMESE REFUGEES

 The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today described as  false and misleading suggestions made by the Opposition  during Question Time that the Australian Government had  proscribed the- -right·  of domestic political activity of  Vietnamese refugees who have entered this country.

 Mr Whitlam said that only nine of the nearly 1000  Vietnamese who have so far come to Australia had been asked  to provide an undertaking that they would eschew political  activity.

 These nine persons were all admitted as special  cases because of the high risks to their security caused by  the change of Government. Each had been politically active  and involved in the policies of the previous Government.

 Mr Whitlam recalled that such undertakings were  not .novel. The policy was first developed by previous  Liberal/Country Party Governments. He had been informed  that Mr Mikis Theodorakis had been requested to give a similar  undertaking. All Colombo Plan students were required by  previous Governments to sign a guarantee that they would not  engage in political activity during the period of their  residence in this country.

 "It is to be expected", said Mr Whitlam, "that  refugees who were forced to leave their homeland will resent  the fact and long remember it. But it cannot be accepted  that this is justification for using.-Australia as a base 

 for futile political activity intended to change political  arrangements in their native land% he said. "For too long  now Australians and Australia have had to suffer the violence  and lawlessness of some emigre political groups who,  in fantasy 

 fashion, believe that by their efforts they can alter these  political facts."

 _  Mr Whitlam said that the Australian Government did  not discriminate between refugees in its requirement for such  undertakings.  If Australian officials thought it possible  that certain refugees could cause dissension, disruption or 

 strife within ethnic groups, then, they would be asked for such  an undertaking whether, for instance, they were Chilean or  Vietnamese. No discrimination between ethnic groups has been 

 practised or will be practised. The requirement will continue  to be put whenever it is justified and whatever the ethnic  origin of the refugees.

 .  .  ./2

 2

 Mr Whitlam said the Opposition charges were  designed to mask its guilt over Australia's intervention  in Vietnam. Mr Whitlam said that,  unlike previous  Governments,  the present Australian Government granted  citizenship to applicants irrespective of their political  views.  Quite obviously, he said,  a written undertaking  could not diminish the rights conferred by Australian 

 citizenship which all of the refugees were now entitled  to seek under Government policies. The requirement is  justified by the need to maintain peace and order in the  community.  It is, he said,  clear that upon becoming  citizens they could ignore that undertaking as no such  requirement can be made of an Australian citizen.

 Mr Whitlam said no Government could tolerate its  territory being used as a base for action designed to  overthrow the recognised Government of another country.  Whatever the Australian people or Government might think  of another Government's policies, there is no choice but 

 to prevent persons in Australia from taking action to  remove such a Government. This is the only reason for  such an undertaking being required.  Its need is regrettably  apparent because of events in certain of the migrant . communities.

 "As I have said before about other places, it  is no kindness and in fact a delusion to suggest to refugees  that there is any prospect of altering the political  arrangements in their former homelands. Unfortunately,  as we have seen often, such suggestions are promoted by  the disaffected within ethnic communities, generally to  the detriment of those communities and the wider Australian  community",  Mr Whitlam said.

 Mr Whitlam said that he would like to assure  any person who had been required to give an undertaking by  the present or previous Governments,  that they were entitled  to all rights of political activity in the Australian  community provided by Australian lav;. He said he regretted 

 that yet again,  by its deliberate tactics, the Opposition  had set out to confuse migrants.

 CANBERRA,

 21 August 1975

