---
title: "Aid to refugees in Indo-China"
date: "1975-04-02"
creators:
  - "Whitlam, Gough"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213696538
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10023590%22
---

 AID TO REFUGEES IN INDO CHINA

 2.4.75 — The Prime Minister, and Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Gough  Whitlam, announced a further contribution of $lm  for relief work among refugees  in Indo-China. This sum had been offered to the United Nations High Commis­ sioner for Refugees (UNHCR). It was additional to the $200,000 announced on 28 

 March for the Indo-China operational group of the International Committee of  the Red Cross. The grants would assist UNHCR relief and rehabilitation projects for 

 refugees in all parts of Indo-China. UNHCR was one of the international  humanitarian organisations qualified to assist refugees on both sides of lines of  military control in Indo-China. The funds could be used by UNHCR to purchase  food, medical supplies and other commodities if necessary from Australia. Aus­ tralian aid for the activities of these organisations in Indo-China during the current  financial year now totalled $2.35m.

 Mr Whitlam had earlier decided to make, available seven Hercules transport  aircraft together with other aircraft currently based at Butterworth for use in a  humanitarian role in Vietnam. The task of the aircraft was to ferry supplies and  materials intended to meet immediate and critical human needs.

 Mr Whitlam had also given approval for the use of RAAF aircraft for the  transport from Vietnam of orphans for whom adoption formalities had been com­ pleted in Vietnam and Australia, and for whom prospective Australian parents were ,  waiting. Mr Whitlam had asked for the co-operation of the State Premiers in  speeding up the processes for admission of these children to Australia (see below).

 As he had indicated on 28 March, the Government was keeping the situation  under continuing review and the Prime Minister believed that further generous  Australian help could be expected if such were necessary'. Over and beyond these immediate humanitarian actions, the Australian Govern­ ment reaffirmed its commitment entered into within weeks of assuming office  over two years ago to contribute generously to the reconstruction of post-war  Indo-China.

 Message to State Premiers Text of a message sent by the Prime Minister earlier today to each State  Premier:

 You will be aware of my Government's concern that Australia should play  its part in helping to alleviate the hardship and suffering now being endured  by the people of South Vietnam. The adoption by Australian parents of numbers of Vietnamese children has  been a noteworthy aspect of our past contribution to the relief of this suffering  in the past and I should therefore be grateful if in the light of the rapid  escalation of the human problems in South Vietnam in recent days you could 

 now ask your regulatory authorities to make special efforts to finalise as  expeditiously as possible decisions on applications by residents of your State  for permission to adopt Vietnamese children. The Australian Government for its part will endeavour to facilitate the entry  of such children for whom approved parents are selected and for whom South 

 Vietnamese authorities have granted authority to leave.

 E. G. Whitlam

