---
title: "Entry of further group of Vietnamese refugees"
date: "1975-08-06"
creators:
  - "Whitlam, Gough"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/242204541
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10030515%22
---

 J_U A U S T R A L I A  ,.·Î¹

 PRIfVlE 'MINISTER

 PRESS STATEMENT NO.  6 August 1975

 ENTRY OF FURTHER GROUP OF VIETNAMESE REFUGEES

 The Prime Minister announced today that Australia  had agreed to resettle approximately 300 more refugees  from Vietnam.

 The refugees will be flown by chartered Qantas 747  jet to Brisbane on Saturday morning, 9 August, where they  are due at 11.00 a.m. .  .

 "  They will be resettled in Brisbane, where Queensland authorities have assured support and assistance.

 At present about two-thirds of the refugees are on  St John's Island in Singapore harbour, with the remainder .   on Perhentian Island off the East coast of Malaysia. .

 In June Australia selected 200 refugees who have been  settled in East Hills, Sydney,

 Mr Whitlan said that as part of its commitment to  the United Nations High Commission for Refugees program  Australia had new taken refugees from Hong Kong, ,

 Singapore and Malaysia. .

 In each case, Mr Whitlam said, Australia had selected  refugees who were least likely to be selected for entry to  other countries and those who appeared most in need of the  humanitarian assistance which entry to Australia would provide.

 Most of the refugees have no recognised skills or  qualifications and under normal migration criteria would not be  eligible for entry to Australia. They would need extensive  long-term assistance from the Australian Government and the 

 community, Mr Whitlam said. .

 He recalled his announcement of 23 July of a long-term  ^  study of the Vietnamese refugees and the problems which they  J  encounter and said that he hoped this study would identify  early any problems which refugees were facing and the means of 

 resolving them. ,  :

 .  . ./2

 I

 2 .

 .  Mr Whitlam said the refugees ranged in age from  infants to an 81 year old woman,  and included a Cistercian  Monk, a former interpreter for an Australian civil  affairs unit stationed in Phuoc Tuy Province,  a number 

 of single parent families and a number of adolescents who  had become separated from their parents.  .  '

 He emphasised that in their immediate resettlement all  the refugees would be provided with the maximum assistance .   available through agencies of the Australian Government ,   for housing, welfare, language training and.employment.

 Mr Whit lam expressed his. gratitude for assistance  provided to the Australian Immigration selection team by the^  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and the  Governments of Singapore and Malaysia. .

 CANBERRA, A.C.T.

