---
title: "PM turning his back on Vietnamese refugees"
date: "1975-04-29"
creators:
  - "Lynch, Phillip"
source: "Deputy Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213709874
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10023843%22
---

 (File 199/75)

 THE LIBERAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA FEDERAL SECRETARIAT .

 FROM THE HON. PHILLIP LYNCH, MP .

 DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION .

 MEDIA RELEASE

 The Deputy.Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Phillip Lynch, today  accused Mr. Whitlam of callously endangering the lives of thousands  of South Vietnamese in an effort to curry favour with the Hanoi  communists.  ·

 Mr. Lynch was speaking in Brisbane.

 Mr. Lynch said the Prime Minister had turned his back on the more  than 3/000 South Vietnamese who had applied for refuge in Australia.

 Many of these were the friends,  parents, sisters and brothers of  Vietnamese already living in Australia, he said.

 "Mr. Whitlam will have to live with his own conscience if these  people lose their lives in communist reprisal killings.

 "The Prime Minister's response to the refugee problem has been  despicably cold-blooded. .  .

 "Nearly 4,000 South Vietnamese applied to enter Australia.

 "Only 342 were approved for entry and only 76 have actually arrived  in Australia. .

 "The rest have been abandoned.

 "It.appears clear that Mr. Whitlam misled the Parliament on 9 April  when he claimed that the Government's approaches to Hanoi and Saigon  were substantially the same. .

 "The Australian Government has taken sides with the Hanoi regime in  its military aggression against South Vietnam.

 "It has even offered advice to the Provisional Revolutionary Government  on how to justify the communist military operations.

 "Mr. Whitlam's refusal to help the South Vietnamese refugees derives  simply from his wish not to offend Hanoi and his Government's open  support for a communist military victory."

 * * * * * *

 April 29, 1975

 ACKALL & MACQUARIE STS., BARTON, A.C.T. G.P.O. BOX 13, CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600. TEL. 73 2564. TELEX AA 62630

