---
title: "Population policies high on agenda for Immigration Minister's conference"
date: "1977-10-12"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213721050
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08003089%22
---

 N E W S  R E L E A S E  FRO M  THE M INISTER FOR 

 Immigratiii and Ethnic AffairsTH E  HO N. M . J . R .  M A C K E L L A R M .P .12 October 1977 IEA 67/77 POPULATION POLICIES HIGH ON AGENDA FOR  IMMIGRATION MINISTERS' CONFERENCE

 The development of future population and immigration 

 policies in the light of the issues and options dealt with in the 

 Green Paper tabled in Federal Parliament in March will be 

 discussed at a high-level meeting on Friday.

 The Green Paper will be one of the main agenda items 

 for a conference of Commonwealth and State Ministers for .  .

 Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in Canberra.

 Conference chairman, Federal Immigration and Ethnic 

 Affairs Minister, Mr Michael MacKellar, said State governments had 

 been evaluating closely population trends in the light of planning 

 goals for the States up to the year 2000 and beyond.

 .  The outcome of these studies would have a significant

 bearing on the development of future national policies and the 

 means of their implementation, he said.

 Other items listed for discussion at the conference

 include

 . Commonwealth/State co-ordination on ethnic affairs 

 matters;

 . Australia's response to refugee situations 

 overseas; and

 . the migrant intake in 1977/78 and future years.

 Conferences of Commonwealth and State Ministers for 

 Immigration and Ethnic Affairs are normally held each six months. 

 Each Minister in turn hosts the conference.

 ... . ./2

 2

 Tomorrow's conference will be attended by:

 The Hon. D.A. Dunstan, Q.C., M.L.A., Premier of South Australia, 

 Treasurer and Minister of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.

 The Hon. W. Jona, M.L.A., Victorian Minister of Immigration and 

 Ethnic Affairs and Assistant Minister for Health.

 Mr G. Paciullo, M.L.A., Parliamentary Secretary to the Premier of 

 New South Wales, representing the Hon. N.K. Wran, Q.C., M.L.A. 

 (in relation to ethnic affairs matters) and the Hon. R.F. 

 Jackson, M.L.A., Minister for Youth and Community Services (in 

 relation to immigration matters).

 The Hon. N.T.E. Hewitt, M.L.A., Queensland Minister for Water .  .

 .  Resources, representing the Hon. F.A. Campbell, M.L.A., 

 Minister for Industrial Development, Labour Relations and 

 Consumer Affairs.

 The Hon. W.L. Grayden, M.L.A., Western Australian Minister for 

 Labour and Industry·, Consumer Affairs and Immigration. .

 The Hon. N.L.C. Batt, M.H.A., Tasmanian Minister for Education,

 Recreation and the Arts, representing the Hon. W.A. Neilson, .  

 M.H.A., Premier of Tasmania.

 .....—0..*..

