---
title: "Australia's refugee resettlement program"
date: "1977-09-19"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213720757
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08003093%22
---

 N E W S  R E L E A S E  FRO M  THE M INISTER FOR 

 iBinigration and Ethnic AdairsTH E H O N . M . J . R . M A C K E L L A R  M .P .19 September 1977 IEA 63/77AUSTRALIA'S REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT PROGRAM"Australia will continue a strong refugee resettlement program but it must balance the claims of compassion and humanity with the" needs of the w o r k p l a c e t h e Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairsy. the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, said last night.It had to heed the warning signs that Australia did not have an unlimited capacity to resettle mainly unskilled refugees —  or migrants, Mr MacKellar told a Sydney meeting of the NSW Indo-Chinese Refugee Association."I do not believe that the Australian community would favour the introduction of groups of refugees or other migrants to live in enclaves with a standard of living and separate culture vastly different from those of the Australian community," Mr MacKellar said."The Government is committed to assisting in overcoming the plight of refugees."However,' it must regulate the intakes of refugees to obtain a cross-section from among them."This means that we'should ensure that there will be people who will settle readily into the Australian community, and there are many such people in the refugee camps."We must take our share of the more difficult settlement cases and we must take our share of the compassionate cases, but we must not forget also that Indo-Chinese refugees are not the only refugees of concern to the international community and to Australia,V Mr MacKellar said.In the past year alone Australia had also taken refugees and displaced persons from many countries, among them being Chileans,Soviet Jews, White Russians from China, Assyrians, Ethiopians, Laotians, Cambodians, Vietnamese, Ugandans. '"And even then the list is i n c o m p l e t e M r MacKellar said. "It does not include the more than 12,000 Lebanese who arrived in Australia,”________/2

 2

 Two senior Departmental officers had recently been 

 sent to Bangkok to arrange processing and movement of Indo-Chinese refugees 

 from Thailand and nearby countries.

 "They are already operating in the refugee camps and 

 the first of the regular intakes of refugees from these countries will 

 arrive in the next few weeks,” Mr MacKellar said.

 "The system of priorities used will ensure that the 

 selection and processing of Indo-Chinese refugees proceed in a humane,  

 prompt and equitable manner.

 "In Australia we have our faults and our problems but .  

 we have our good points and our advantages. To the millions of refugees 

 in so many countries we must appear as an attractive haven for the 

 distressed, the threatened and the insecure.

 "We cannot provide refuge for all of them. We cannot 

 provide refuge for as many as we would like, but as a nation built on 

 immigration we do have a duty to accept and to assist as many refugees as 

 we can.

 "The Government has entered into a commitment to do this 

 and it will honour that commitment," Mr MacKellar said.

 NOTE: Copies of the full text of Mr MacKellar1s address to the

 Cultural Studies Conference can be obtained from the Media 

 Liaison Officer, Department of Immigration and Ethnic 

 Affairs, Canberra.

 - 0-

