---
title: "Conference on refugees"
date: "1977-07-24"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213720094
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08003107%22
---

 N EW S RELEASE FROM THE MINISTER FOR 

 I n iig r a liiD  a i l  Ethnic A ffairs$ THE HON. M . J . R . M A C KE LLA R  M.P. 24 July 1977 IEA 49/77

 CONFERENCE ON REFUGEES

 Representatives of voluntary agencies involved in the resettlement of 

 refugees will meet with a panel of senior Government officers in Canberra 

 on Tuesday.

 .  The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. 

 MacKellar, said today the voluntary agencies would confer with members of 

 the Standing Inter-Departmental Committee on Refugees (SIDCOR).

 SIDCOR is a panel of senior officers from the Federal Departments of 

 Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Education, Employment and Industrial 

 Relations, Finance, Foreign Affairs, Health, Prime Minister and Cabinet, 

 Social Security, and the Public Service Board.

 The committee's role is to advise the Minister for Immigration and 

 Ethnic Affairs on arrangements and opportunities for resettlement of refugees.

 It meets periodically in a consultative body with voluntary agencies 

 about their role in resettlement, recommends on the co-ordination of refugee 

 work, and regularly reviews the refugee intake.

 "When I announced the Government's refugee policy in Parliament in May 

 I emphasised the important role of the voluntary agencies in Australia's 

 work among refugees," Mr MacKellar said.

 "The Government wants to encourage them to participate in this very 

 necessary work and to keep us informed of the extent of assistance they 

 can provide."

 Voluntary agencies to be represented at Tuesday's conference in Canberra 

 include Austcare, the Australian Council of Churches, Australian Catholic 

 Relief, The Australian Council of Social Service, the Australian Baptist 

 World Aid and Relief Committee, Australian Jewish Welfare Societies, the 

 Australian Red Cross Society, the Federal Catholic Immigration Committee, the 

 Indo-China Refugee Association, International Social Service, the Lutheran 

 World Federation, the Salvation Army, the St. Vincent de Paul Society, the 

 Smith Family, and the Uniting Church of Australia.

 Others attending the conference will include Mr G. Rizzo, representing 

 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; Mr A.G.W. Keys,

 National Secretary of the Returned Services League of Australia; and 

 Mrs B. Kennard, Co-ordinating Welfare Officer for Commonwealth Hostels.

 The conference will be held at John McEwan House, in Barton.

 . - 0 - .

