---
title: "Government accused of breaking the U.N. resolution prohibiting the entry into Australia of Rhodesian immigrants who support the illiegal Smith regime"
date: "1978-10-18"
creators:
  - "Cass, Moss"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213725893
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR06001688%22
---

 /? 

 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE :  18 October 1978

 NEWS RELEASE OF: S .

 DR MOSS CASS., OPPOSITION SPOKESMAN FOR IMMIGRATION $ ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 The Opposition Spokesman for Immigration,  Dr Moss Cass, today- 

 accused the Government of in effect breaking the United Nations .  

 resolution prohibiting the entry into Australia of Rhodesian 

 immigrants who support the illegal and racist Smith regime.

 The Government was actively assisting Rhodesians to launder 

 their nationality through South Africa, now the fourth largest 

 source country for newly arriving settlers.  One wonders how 

 many others are coming in via Great Britain and New Zealand.

 Dr Cass said that by automatically allowing the 1  boat people'  

 resident status, the Government was establishing a precedent 

 for granting immediate resident status to all Rhodesians who 

 arrived in Australia claiming to be refugees.

 The Minister, Mr MacKellar has recently stated that Australia 

 would be able to respond if a refugee situation arose in .

 Rhodesia.

 I am shocked to think Rhodesian politicians, government officials, 

 army officers and others who had prospered on the racist policies 

 of the Smith regime who chartered aircraft and arrived in 

 Australia illegally, could be automatically granted resident 

 status like the boat people.

 Of course Australia should be prepared to take its fair share of 

 political refugees from anywhere irrespective of their race,  

 creed or nationality,  as determined in discussion with the 

 United Nations High Commission on Refugees.

 .  ./2

 Despite the U.N. resolution to the contrary,  large numbers 

 of Rhodesians who are not political refugees are already 

 being allowed to settle in Australia.

 The number of Rhodesians entering has trebled in the last three 

 years - from 135 in 1975/76 to 380 in 1977/78. !

 In the last three months, 740 applications have been received.

 . .  ' f

 Dr Cass said that the Government was only giving lip service to 

 the internationally accepted ban by issuing Rhodesians with a 

 1  letter of authority' which is in reality equivalent to a visa.

 Rhodesian applicants are merely required to sign an affirmation 

 that they have not furthered or encouraged the illegal Smith 

 regime.

 The recent farcial entry of a Lieutenant Colonel from the 

 Rhodesian Army who had signed such a form is evidence that 

 no checks are made.

 .  I 

 For further information contact Dr Moss Cass,  Tel: 72 6668.

 I

 18 October 1978 

 Canberra

