---
title: "Mr MacKellar for refugee talks"
date: "1978-07-04"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213724262
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08003712%22
---

 N E W S  R E L E A S E  F R O M  T H E  M IN IS T E R  FOR 

 I m i j r a t i n  and [limit AffairsT H E  H O N . M . J . R . M A C K E L L A R  M . P .

 4 July 1978 60/78

 MR MACKELLAR FOR REFUGEE TALKS

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, will leave Sydney on Friday  on a three week mission to South-East Asian countries.

 He will visit Djakarta, Singapore, Manila, Bangkok  and Kuala Lumpur for discussions with Heads of Governments  and senior ministers. In Thailand and Malaysia he will  visit refugee camps to assess the situation at first hand.

 Mr MacKellar said today he would be exploring with  regional governments ways of maintaining orderly  processing of refugees and of achieving greater co­ operation by the international community to deal with the  growing problem of Indo Chinese refugees.

 "The situation is becoming increasingly serious -  so serious that the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees has recently referred to it as one of 1  unprecedented  gravity1  .

 "It is a problem for the world - not for one region  and certainly not for one country. Australia is already  accepting its share of the burden and expects that other  countries will play their part.

 "Our capacity is not unlimited. Our ability to  continue to accept large numbers of refugees must be  related to the broad range of Australian community concerns."

 NOTE TO EDITORS: Mr MacKellar will leave Sydney for Djakarta on QF 729 at 12.30 on Friday  7 July and will be available for interview  before departure.

