---
title: "Australian community could aid refugee resettlement"
date: "1978-10-22"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213725943
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08003672%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY COULD AID  REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT....

 22 October 1978 99/78

 .  The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  the

 Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar,  said today that he got many letters from 

 community organisations asking how they might help in dealing 

 with ethnic affairs problems.

 There was no doubt that there was an immense reservoir 

 of charitable good-will in the community waiting to be tapped, 

 he said.

 Mr MacKellar said that with respect to refugees,  there 

 were roles for community-based service organisations,  for parish 

 groups and other persons of good conscience in the community.

 Many of the refugees settling in Australia might welcome 

 the opportunity to establish themselves in country towns,  finding 

 jobs suited to their skills.

 "It could be helpful if community-based organisations 

 could adopt refugee families, generally giving them support- in 

 understanding and coming to terms with the Australian way of life, 

 in finding housing and in finding work or business opportunities," 

 Mr MacKellar said. .  -

 Even while refugees are in hostels learning the language 

 and other aspects of Australian life, there is good opportunity 

 for home tutoring and for hosting families on small social 

 occasions."

 Any persons or organisations interested in these ideas 

 should get in touch with the Commonwealth Regional Directors of 

 Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in each State capital or directly 

 in touch with the Assistant Secretary of the Refugee and Special

 Programs Branch in the Department's Canberra offices at Belconnen.

