---
title: "New South Wales migrant teachers' strike unnecessary"
date: "1978-09-20"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213725484
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08003691%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 20 September 1978 81/78

 NEW SOUTH WALES MIGRANT TEACHERS' STRIKE UNNECESSARY

 The Press Release from the New South Wa.les Teachers

 Federation about Adult Migrant Education Programme and the Galbally 

 Report was mischievous and misrepresented the real situation, the 

 Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs said today. The facts 

 were Mr MacKellar said:

 a. the Commonwealth had nearly doubled funds for the Adult 

 Migrant Education Programme in Australia over the last

 2 years.  It has risen from an expenditure of $8.82 million 

 in 1976/77 to $12.4 million in 1977/78. $17.17 million has

 been provided in the 1978/79 budget. In addition $965,000 

 had been made available over the last 12 months for additional 

 classroom accommodation at hostels;

 b. the Commonwealth had accepted the recommendations of the 

 Galbally Report which among other initiatives had 

 introduced an initial settlement "on-arrival" provision 

 for migrants as well as refugees. This was the first step

 in a comprehensive system to broaden opportunities for migrants 

 to learn English and learn about Australia; '

 c. this first step was an intensive full-time course. Depending 

 on individual needs the length of this first step and first 

 opportunity would be up to 12 weeks;

 d. after completion of this "on-arrival" course migrants and 

 refugees may continue to learn English on part-time courses.

 The Minister stressed that this is a new and additional provision for 

 migrants and it was being progressively introduced following the 

 Government's acceptance of the Galbally recommendations.

 2

 Commenting on the statement by the Teachers'  Federation the Minister 

 said he could not understand that organisation's talk about cuts to 

 the Programme.

 It was a fact the Minister .said that from late in 1977 Indo-Chinese 

 refugees had been given an "on arrival" course of about 300 hours. 

 Before October 1977 these courses did not exist Mr MacKellar stressed 

 While in some cases this period was provided on a full-time basis in 

 most cases it was a mixture of full and part-time arrangements.

 The Minister reiterated that the 'bn arrival" arrangement for new 

 arrivals - both migrants and refugees - looked to initial full-time 

 courses. This would be followed by opportunities to attend part­

 time courses for those wanting, and needing, additional help.

 These full-time course segments would vary in length depending on 

 the particular needs and circumstances of individuals, Mr MacKellar 

 said. -

 The Minister said he found the Teachers' Federation's press release 

 hard to follow. Clearly that organisation misunderstood the position 

 The Minister said that he was surprised that that was the case 

 because a senior officer of his Department had clarified the issues 

 and explained the overall situation to Officers of the.Federation 

 during discussions in Sydney yesterday.

 Mr MacKellar said,"Iam arranging for my Officers to have further 

 discussions with the Teachers' Federation to clarify their 

 misconceptions about the Adult Migrant Education System. It is 

 scarcely helpful to migrants for teachers to go on strike just 

 when the new system is being introduced around Australia."

 .'fllSifc:,.

