---
title: "Nearly half million dollars for migrant policies"
date: "1978-09-24"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213725532
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08003689%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P. 83/78

 NEARLY HALF MILLION DOLLARS FOR MIGRANT PROJECTS

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  

 the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, today annoxmced details of a 

 special Migrant Project Funding Scheme which will make 

 $450,000 available over the next three years for projects 

 initiated by ethnic groups and voluntary organisations.

 The scheme is a small part of the Commonwealth's 

 initiatives to assist migrant settlement which will involve 

 an additional $50m. in expenditure over the three year period. 

 The new initiatives arise out of the Government's acceptance 

 of the recommendations of the Galbally review of post arrival 

 services.

 Mr MacKellar said the Migrant Project Funding Scheme 

 would give priority to pilot programs for initiatives or for 

 changes in direction of existing services in welfare related 

 areas.  He said it as being particular help to disadvantaged 

 groups such as women,  the handicapped and refugees.  Projects 

 emanating from trades unions,  States Trades and Labour Councils 

 and the A.C.T.U.,  and the Trade Training Authority would also 

 be eligible.

 The Minister issued an invitation to ethnic groups,  

 voluntary organisations and trade union organisations to submit 

 projects to the Regional Director of his Department in the 

 relevant State or Territory. Mr MacKellar said that a maximum 

 grant of $5,000 would be available on a "once only" basis 

 under the scheme.  He said that he would particularly welcome 

 applications from organisations which had already demonstrated 

 their capacity for self-help by raising part of the project 

 funds themselves.  Groups and organisations which required 

 much less than $5,000 should feel free to apply.

 2 .

 At the same time as he issued his invitation for 

 applications the Minister launched the scheme by announcing 

 6 grants to organisations which applied following the 

 publication of the Galbally report after its acceptance by 

 the Government in May 1978. The 6 organisations to receive 

 the first grants are:  "

 Clearing House on- Migrant Issues (a national organisation located 

 in Melbourne); $5,000 for information services.

 North Melbourne Social Service:  $380 for audio-visual tapes

 and equipment;

 Geelong Ethnic Communities Council:  $5,000 for information

 project;

 Greek Orthodox Church and Benevolent Society of St George,

 Hobart:  $2,000 for classroom equipment and books for social

 and educational centre;

 Spanish Latin-American Mothers’  Association, Adelaide,

 South Australia:  $3,800 for equipment for a meeting place

 for Spanish speaking mothers;

 Turkish Association of Western Australia, Perth:  $3,000 to assist

 in the purchase of equipment in the establishment of a community 

 centre.

