---
title: "Text of statement by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, delivered to the UNHCR consultative meeting on the Indo-Chinese refugee situation at Geneva, 11 December 1978"
date: "1978-12-11"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213726714
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08003635%22
---

 I *1

 TEXT OF STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND, ETHNIC  AFFAIRS,  THE HON. M.J.R. MACKELLAR, DELIVERED TO THE UNHCR  CONSULTATIVE MEETING ON THE INDO-CHINESE REFUGEE SITUATION AT GENEVA, 11 DECEMBER 1978

 Mr Chairman,  my Government regards this as an historic  meeting seeking to deal with problems of great consequence for  mankind.  This is a consultation about a problem in South-East  Asia, but one whose implications will be felt in many other places.

 We welcome your initiative, Sir, in arranging this  meeting. We will be depending heavily on your qualities of  leadership and great international experience in leading us all  through the difficult considerations that are before us.

 The office of the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees is a strong and potent symbol of the aspiration of every  member Government to protect and develop the dignity of the  individual.

 In the relatively short but problem-filled time of  your appointment,  you have displayed qualities of compassion,  of leadership and of persuasiveness which, beyond doubt, will be  long and thankfully remembered. Australia pledges itself to  continue to work with you and your officers.

 The General Plight of Refugees

 My Government,  in encouraging, as we have, particular  discussion about the South-East Asian refugee situation, is not  unmindful of the problem of refugees on several continents or of  the scale of the global demands on the resources of the High 

 Commissioner's office.

 Neither does it overlook the great and compassionate  response made by many nations to emergent refugee crises over the  forty years. But none of us can rest on past achievements. History never stands still.

 Australia believes that compassionate concern for all  refugees must continue to be shown, in both material and human  resources. The forms and levels of those responses can only be  determined by individual countries in the light of their assessed 

 capacity.

 South-East Asian Refugees

 These consultations have been arranged to consider a  crisis, and that word is justified. The crisis is precipitated  by the movement of thousands of people, described as refugees, out  of Kampuchea, Laos and Vietnam.

 These consultations have been arranged because so large  and so rapid a movement of people is now putting intolerable  strains on the nearby countries of first refuge, and also  challenging the capacities of countries of final settlement.

 The Australian Government wishes to place firmly on the  record its recognition and admiration for the humanitarian

 2 . Î¯

 A '

 contribution of the ASEAN countries,  particularly Malaysia and  Thailand in providing temporary sanctuary to those in distress.

 Mr Chairman, we are pleased to see the socialist Republic  of Vietnam represented here today.  The Vietnamese presence is  important especially for two reasons.  Vietnam itself has spoken of  a refugee problem of considerable proportion, involving up to 

 150,000 persons who have crossed their border seeking refuge.  It,  therefore, well knows the problems in coping with such a dramatic  flow.

 There have been suggestions that some of the present out­ flow of people from the region is encouraged or at least facilitated  officially. It is of great importance to this meeting that there  can be some frank and constructive discussion about such allegations  with the representative of interested Government with a view 

 to seeking firm assurances that these rumours and speculations have  no foundation. We would hope that all Governments represented  here would resile from suggestions that national problems are best  solved by the involuntary movement of large numbers of people across  borders or across seas.

 Australia sees the present problem before UNHCR in two parts.

 In the first part,  however it happened, and for whatever  reason, there are some 350,000 people living precariously as  refugees in Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines, Hong  Kong and Vietnam. This number grows by over 800 per day.

 Those countries of first asylum cannot be expected to  sort out and apply durable settlement solutions alone nor can  they be expected to take on the total burden themselves.

 We must all be involved in a process of solemn  international obligations to assist those in distress t even beyond  the point of normal expectation.

 In the second part, there is the present and continuing  flow of new departures from Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea.  That  new flow is so great and so continuing as to overwhelm and defeat  whatever ordered arrangements can be made to find homes for those 

 already in the camps.

 In short, the faster people are moved,  the faster their  places are being taken.

 It is wise to remember always that the capacity of  countries in the region to absorb quickly so many people is  inhibited by barriers of language, of cultural traditions, of the  availability of an adequate economic structure, and of inadequacies  in the total social infrastructure. .

 Let me elaborate on the Australian position.

 3 .

 We are an immigrant-receiving country and in' our policy  there is no discrimination on grounds of race, colour, nationality,  decent, national or ethnic origin or sex.

 We have a program of admitting some 90,000 migrants this  year. Last year, 23 per cent of our intake came from Asia.

 There is a limit to Australia's capacity to absorb  migrants efficiently. We follow what we call a balanced intake  which admits families,  for reunion with persons already in  Australia, refugees, and persons whose skills can be used to  maintain economic growth.

 There is a very great.demand for entry to Australia each  year ftbti the fribnds and delations of ihosd Who Have alfefidy   migrated. The total demand for entry cannot be met.

 The intake of refugees thus affects Australia's capacity  to re-unite families of people already in Australia. Any refugee  resettlement program thus has to be tailored to meet not only  Australia's capacity to effectively integrate the refugees but also 

 to keep in mind the legitimate claims for entry for family re-union  and of others wishing to migrate to Australia.

 Balanced economic and social growth in Australia is  important to many other countries. Australia, as a more highly  developed country, provides internationally a broad range of  financial and material aid, tertiary training and other support  services.

 Since 1945, Australia has absorbed nearly 400,000  refugees. It has been a significant donor to UNHCR and ICEM funds.

 We are still taking over 10,000 refugees each year, 9,000  of these come from South East Asia. We treat all refugees arriving  after processing overseas as permanent residents of Australia.

 We have now settled over 15,000 refugees from South East  Asia, and by June 1979, on our current program, will have settled  21,500.

 The Australian view is that refugees being finally settled  have to be absorbed into the host society and not treated as some  unwanted, uncared for aliens. This is very necessary in maintaining  friendly, helpful community attitudes.

 We spend an average of $A1,800 per refugee in  movement to Australia and on assistance provided in the first five  months. In other words, the cost to Australia of an intake of  9,000 refugees is $A16 million. .

 The mechanisms we have established support these basic  principles.

 Our intake level is determined keeping in mind our assessed  capacity to successfully integrate those admitted for settlement.

 The Australian Government has a small but highly-experienced  team of eight officers selecting Indo-Chinese refugees on soundly-  based criteria and moving them to Australia with a minimum of delay.

 4 . "\

 On arrival,  all but close relatives joining families  in private housing are accommodated in a total of twelve  government hostels in five Australian States.

 They receive welfare assistance, including necessary  clothing and personal necessities, and are paid an allowance  while they attend English classes and courses in which they learn  about life in Australia. They are then assisted in finding a 

 job and private accommodation.

 This assistance is expensive but, we believe, very necessary.

 It would be unfair both to the arriving refugees and to  Australians if the number of the arrivals were to escalate beyond  levels at which our programs could continue to operate effectively.

 Nevertheless, we have built into our refugee mechanisms  a review procedure designed to enable us to maximise our refugee  intake.

 As a result of a recent review, which takes into account  the size of the problem and Australia's ability to assist, I am  pleased to announce that my Government will lift its 1978/79  refugee intake from 10,000 to 11,500 and commit itself to an 

 intake of 11,500 refugees in 1979/80. Of these in each year  10,500 will be Indo-Chinese.  This will bring to about 32,000  the number of Indo-Chinese refugees my country has accepted.

 It is fundamental to the UNHCR program that world response  to the refugee challenge should be well developed and organised. You have, Mr Chairman, in your excellent information note, high­ lighted the main areas on which we need to concentrate during this  meeting. I refer particularly to the items listed in Part V 

 of the note. As my Government sees it, seven matters stand out.

 .  Firstly, we must all be able to share the conviction that  what we are involved in is a genuine refugee situation. Countries need assurance that people proved not to be  genuine refugees will be accepted back by those countries 

 from whence they came.

 .  Second, the surge of outflow must be controllable in adequate  camps in countries of first refuge.

 .  Third,  the process of selecting for final settlement must  be consistent and orderly and geared to assessed economic  and social capacity; ways must be found of accelerating  the selection and resettlement process.

 .  Fourth, anyone breaking out of the orderly process must be  returned into the process,  so that the entire pattern of  organised movement is not broken.

 .  Fifth, the avenues of final settlement must be greatly  widened in more countries again so that order is not  threatened by impatient queue jumping.

 5 .

 .  Sixth, the flow of funds to maintain camps must be  increased so as to relieve the burdens on countries  of first refuge.

 .  And Seventh, ways must be found to secure the co-operation  of all countries immediately involved to alleviate the  circumstances pressing on individuals which give rise to  the outflow.

 Mr Chairman, as you are aware, we have been working  closely with you and your officers to find solutions to the Indo­ Chinese problem. Clearly, resettlement must be one such solution  and we believe that we have been able to play a leading role in  resettling refugees.  "

 Australia has now accepted an intake which represents  better than one refugee for every 800 of our population.

 If other countries can make a similar commitment,  although the problem may still not have gone away, many thousands  of homeless people will have found peace and friendship;  a new,  safe and secure life in a new land.

 I believe that each country here represented and many who  are absent have solemn responsibility to help solve the problems  of the Indo-Chinese refugees.  Amongst those I include refugee-  source countries.

 I spoke at the outset of the need for nations to continue  to display compassionate concern for refugees and displaced  persons.  I reiterate what I said then. But I must add in  conclusion that no nation, because of its geographical situation  alone, can agree to be a passive recipient of very large numbers  of refugees and displaced persons, numbers assuming potentially  the proportions of a transfer of population. No nation could agree 

 to others viewing it as the inevitable recipient of such movements.  Certainly the Australian nation could never agree to such a  proposal.

 I repeat that Australia stands by its longstanding  humanitarian tradition of receiving people in distressed  circumstances who seek to make a new life in Australia. Australia  is jealous of its reputation for accepting refugees and it will do  everything it can to further enhance its standing in this regard.

 I am confident that the goodwill that I know exists at  these consultations and the determination to be constructively  helpful, already so apparent, will enable this meeting to reach  positive and helpful conclusions.

