---
title: "Indo-Chinese boat people - Federal Government should establish a reception centre for them"
date: "1978-04-24"
creators:
  - "Cass, Moss"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213723285
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR06001696%22
---

 MC/7

 PRESS RELEASE - DR M.H. CASS, OPPOSITION SPOKESMAN ON IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 INDO-CHINESE BOAT PEOPLE

 As the Indo-Chinese boat people are in fact using Australia as a country of first 

 refuge, the Federal Government should as a matter of urgency establish a reception 

 centre for them.

 The boat people could then be housed there for as long as necessary while decisions 

 were made about their final settlement, whether in Australia or elsewhere.

 The Government is obviously completely failing to deal with the Indo-Chinese refugee 

 problem. While the Minister continues to support a restrictive intake of refugees, 

 more and more unauthorised people arrive each week in Darwin.

 Only last May in the House of Representatives, the Minister, Mr MacKellar made a 

 statement about his Government's refugee policy and the new arrangements to 

 enable refugee and analogous situations to be dealt with promptly, equitably and 

 effectively.

 This policy now stands in tatters as an increasing number of people from S.E. Asia 

 are driven to try to 1 1 jump the queue" by sailing to Australia without authority. 

 Perhaps much of the desperation felt by these people is due to the bureaucratic 

 delays in processing applicants with the limited staff the Federal Department was 

 able to make available for this task. Is this the new machinery in action?

 The Victorian Liberal Minister for Immigration, Mr Jona recently pointed out 

 that Victoria's school health services were now on the verge of collapse because 

 of the increased cost of screening refugees.

 Once again, contrary to its claim to be concerned for the plight of the refugees,  

 the Commonwealth Government has not allocated sufficient funds to provide for the 

 special needs of those who have landed in Australia. These refugees are forced 

 to rely on voluntary welfare agencies and the good-will of State Governments.

 How can the Federal Government claim to have a refugee policy at all when it 

 has failed to provide the necessary personnel, machinery or funds to adequately 

 manage the problems associated with the boat people.

 Canberra 

 24 April 1978

