---
title: ""A year of change and challenge""
date: "1978-05-09"
creators:
  - "Peacock, Andrew"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213723439
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10026179%22
---

 MINISTER FOR  

 FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 NEWS RELEASE

 No. M49 Date 9 May 1978 THE HON. ANDREW PEACOCK M.P.

 . .  .  Embargoed until delivery .  . Tuesday 9 May

 FOREIGN POLICY STATEMENT

 "A YEAR OF CHANGE A N D  CHAT.T.KNGR> '

 Summary

 In a major statement on foreign affairs (Attached)  in the House of Representatives on Tuesday, 9 May, the Minister  for Foreign Affairs, Mr Andrew Peacock, discussed the main  developments in international relations and Australia"s involve­ ment in world affairs in a year which he identified as one of 

 change and challenge.

 The Minister focussed on Australia's role in the  intense process of bilateral and multilateral consultations  and negotiations that had been taking place throughout the  world.

 He reviewed the Government1s contribution to inter­ national efforts to find, solutions for the two immediate issues  facing the world - sluggish growth in the economies of the developed  countries and the need to accommodate the interests of developing 

 countries. ..

 The Minister emphasised the necessity of a new and  imaginative approach and of more practical recognition of the  problems of inter-dependence. Changes must be made if the  world economic system was to be viable and effective in the 

 future.

 Third World countries were now better organised in  pressing for a new economic order and substantial improve­ ments in their own situation. They could no longer be satisfied  simply by a limited share in the expansion of the world economy. 

 Third World countries were seeking a role in international  affairs suited to their present strengths rather than their  former weakness.

 As a major trading nation and one situated in a  region of developing countries, Australia had a compelling  interest in ensuring that international economic relations  functioned more vigorously and equitably. The Minister said

 .. /2.

 2

 that while the North/South dialogue had dramatised the issues,  this division had now become too rigid.

 The Australian Government believed a fundamental  reappraisal was required by all sides. It was necessary to  find ways to utilise demand in developing countries to  encourage world economic growth. There was greater inter­ dependence in the world community and the developing countries:,  particularly the middle-income group, had a positive contribution 

 to make to a sustained world economic recovery.

 It had been apparent in recent discussions in Japan  that Japanese leaders shared the Australian Prime Minister's  view that growth in the economies of developing countries  could play an important part in the long-term growth of  developed economies.

 Third World

 The Minister discussed Australia's role in the  international consideration of what was increasingly becoming  known as the new international agenda. He emphasised the  significance of the Government's: new position on proposals 

 for a common fund to stabilise world commodity prices. Australia had now moved ahead of the great majority of  developed countries.

 The Minister stressed the importance of a thorough  understanding of the interests and demands of developing  countries. The Government had established a high level  committee to enquire into Australia's, relations with the. Third World and the implications of their demands for Australia.  This was furtha: evidence of the Government's intention to place  Australia1s relations with developing countries on a firm and 

 constructive basis.

 Aid

 Aid continued to be an important means for Australia  to contribute to regional and international development. The  Government had re-affirmed its pledge to work towards an aid  target of 0.7 per cent of the GNP= This year Australia had 

 increased its support for multilateral agencies by nearly 50  per cent.

 Energy·

 The Minister highlighted the significance of the  energy problem and the need for the world economy to adapt  from a high consumption of oil to greater use of renewable  forms of energy. Australia had been active in seeking to 

 involve the United Nations more directly in this question and  Australia1s attitude to membership of the International  Energy Agency was under review.

 .  ./3.

 3 -

 Australia's role as a potential major supplier  of uranium had encouraged it to play an active part in  international discussion of nuclear energy matters and  efforts to develop stringent safeguards policies. Mr Justice  Fox had been appointed Ambassador-at-Large and Australia had 

 joined in international efforts to strengthen the non-prolif­ eration regime.

 Disarmament

 The Government also believed the Special Session  of the United Nations on Disarmament, to be held in May and June  1978, could promote a new consensus on principles and priorities  for future arms control negotiations.

 Commonwealth

 ‘  The Minister said that the Commonwealth of Nations  had given a practical lead on a number of international issues.  Australia had proposed that a regional dimension should be  added to the Commonwealth1s activities and as a result a  Regional Heads of Government Meeting had been held in Sydney. This was one of the most important international initiatives  of the Government.

 The Minister discussed Australian security and  Australia's firm alignment with Western objectives.

 Australia attached great importance to strengthening  its relations with the developed democracies; in New Zealand,  North America, Europe and Japan. While present economic  problems heightened competition and pressures for protectionism, 

 the community of interest shared by these countries was a basic  element in their relations. The Minister considered that the  close association between democractic nations could withstand  present disagreements.

 United States

 The visit of Vice-President Mondale had re-emphasised  the links between Australia and the United States. The relation­ ship had acquired new dimensions under the present Government. The Minister said that confidence in US strength and determination  was vital not only within the United States itself but for 

 close friends like Australia.

 The Minister noted the importance of relations with  Japan and said that recent meetings with Japanese leaders had  demonstrated a new level of maturity and mutual confidence in  Australia/Japan relations. .

 /4

 4

 EEC

 Relations with the European Community had presented  some problems and required serious attention. The Government  was seeking to mitigate the effects of the European Community's  policies on our exports and to develop Australia's role as a 

 supplier of raw materials, minerals and energy to the  Community.

 Australia and New Zealand had become more conscious  of the need for a united approach to common trading problems.,   The visit of Mr Talboys, the New Zealand.Deputy Prime Minister  and Foreign Minister, produced agreement on closer consultation 

 at all levels.

 Although relations with the Soviet Union were  pragmatic and harmonious certain aspects of Soviet activity,  particularly in Africa and the Soviet military build-up were  a cause of concern.

 Regional Relations

 The Minister said that regional relationships,  together with relations with the Western democracies and  Japan were at the heart of Australian foreign policy. He  discussed relations with ASEAN and looked to further expansion  of relations with Indonesia following Australian acceptance  of East Timor as part of Indonesia.

 Australians also had to be more aware of developments  in the South Pacific and he welcomed the Senate report tabled  on 13 April.

 Relations with PNG were close and Australian  Ministers had a good working relationship with the PNG  Government. He had been active in efforts to resolve the major  outstanding bilateral issue - the maritime boundary and other 

 issues in the Torres Strait.

 The Minister discussed the development of relations  with China and India and said he would soon make an announcement  on the Australia-China Council.

 The Minister discussed Australian attitudes to areas  of international tension (the Middle East, Indo-China, Korea,  southern Africa and the Horn of Africa) and on human rights  and refugees.

 Conclusion

 In conclusion he emphasised the need for the Australian  community to understand the implications for Australia of the new  and important developments in world affairs. The Government  would continue to promote Australia's views and interests and  work for the establishment of a more equitable international 

 system and sound economic growth. These developments would not  happen quickly but would be of vital importance to Australia.

