---
title: "Federal Government called on to accept full responsibility for Indo-Chinese refugees bringing into Australia"
date: "1978-11-03"
creators:
  - "Cass, Moss"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213726152
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR06001687%22
---

 2Î²>

 PRESS RELEASE BY DR MOSS CASS, OPPOSITION SPOKESMAN  ON IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS - 3 NOVEMBER 1978

 Dr Moss Cass, Opposition Spokesman on Immigration and Ethnic Affairs 

 today called on the Federal Government to accept their full 

 responsibility for the Indo-Chinese refugees they are bringing into 

 Australia.

 During a three day visit to Adelaide to discuss the future policy 

 of the Australian Labor Party on immigration and ethnic affairs,

 Dr Cass met with local community leaders and attended a public 

 meeting to hear the views of members of various ethnic groups.

 He also visited Woodville High School where the majority of the 

 Indo-Chinese refugee students taken by South Australia attend school.

 The Federal Government is failing to adequately provide for the 

 needs of these students, many of whom arrive alone or with the 

 responsibility for younger brothers or sisters.

 No one adult takes parental-like responsibility for these children. 

 Their adjustment to our society is nothing short of traumatic yet 

 the Federal Government which is fully responsible for all Commonwealth 

 Hostels has provided only a single welfare officer who cannot speak 

 the languages of the refugees at Pennington.

 When these children start attending the local high school their 

 settlement problems have to be dealt with by the teachers. No matter 

 how dedicated and concerned, these teachers cannot and should not 

 be solely responsible for the social problems facing the Indo­

 Chinese refugee children.

 The Federal Government's policy of neglect is condemning these 

 children to being uneducated, unemployed dropouts.

 The Government has selected most of these refugees but has failed 

 to make any provision for them.

