---
title: "Community groups can assist within Government's 14,000 Indo-Chinese refugee intake"
date: "1979-10-15"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213732453
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004600%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.  t he H o n,  M.J.R, Ma cKe l l a r , M.P.

 144/79 COMMUNITY GROUPS CAN ASSIST WITHIN

 GOVERNMENT'S_j4,OOP INDO-CHINESE

 REFUGEE INTAKE

 1.5 October 1979

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, 

 Mr M.J.R. MacKellar,  said today that his attitude towards 

 acceptance of 80 Kampucheans had been misrepresented in 

 the Adelaide press and in comments attributed to spokesmen

 for the Roman Catholic Diocesan Pastoral Council.

 Mr MacKellar said that the Pastoral Council's 

 proposal was for 80 unnamed Kampucheans to be admitted to 

 Australia and supported by the Council outside the Government's 

 announced program of 14,000 Indo-Chinese refugees accepted in 

 the current financial year.

 "The Roman Catholic Diocesan Pastoral Council 

 unquestionably is motivated by commendable humanitarian concern 

 for the plight of Kampucheans. I have made it clear that all 

 necessary arrangements can be made quickly for the Council 

 to receive 80 Indo-Chinese refugees for resettlement through 

 facilities in Adelaide", Mr MacKellar said.

 "The Indo-Chinese refugee program was decided after 

 a careful assessment of the resources available for resettle­

 ment, the capacity of the Australian community to absorb 

 refugees and the funds needed for transportation, services and 

 facilities for resettlement.

 "The program has been planned to take account of 

 the post-arrival needs of refugees."

 Mr MacKellar emphasised that there was abundant 

 scope within the intake of 14,000 for groups and individuals 

 wishing to provide settlement assistance to do so.

 . . . /  2 .

 2

 Mr MacKellar said he did not wish to be involved in 

 decisions by the Roman Catholic Church on housing people in 

 particular monasteries.  "That is their business and their assist­

 ance is always welcome.  But they could find many needy people 

 to help among the numbers already being moved to Australia. "

 "The central issue is whether there should be an 

 organised,  integrated and defined refugee program or whether 

 community groups can ignore that main program thrust and make 

 their arrangements only on the basis of some separate local 

 assessment," Mr MacKellar said.

 Mr MacKellar said that in deciding refugee and migrant 

 intakes many factors had to be balanced.. "We currently have 

 thousands of nominations for Indo-Chinese refugees. Most 

 nominees have faced threats to their persons or relatives and many 

 are currently in situations of real hardship. Every effort is 

 being made to include these people within this year's intake of 

 14,000."

 .  "A significant number of Kampucheans including a group

 of 183 for whom I gave special approval earlier this year,  is 

 included in Australia's refugee program.

 "Further evidence of the Government's concern is. to be 

 found in our decision to grant substantial aid to the people of 

 Kampuchea."

 "I emphasise that the Government is pleased with the 

 community response to its initiative to have more refugees 

 resettled by community groups.  Much remains to be done and the 

 Pa'storal Council's offer can be accommodated within the existing 

 program for 1979/80," Mr MacKellar said.

