---
title: "Community Refugee Settlement Scheme"
date: "1979-12-03"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213733270
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004568%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.  he·  H o n . M.J.R. F Ia c Ke l l a r , M.P.

 .3 December 1979

 COMMUNITY REFUGEE SETTLEMENT SCHEME

 The first application to help settle refugees in 

 Australia under the Community Refugee Settlement Scheme has been 

 approved. Twenty families will be settled in Whyalla under the 

 auspices of St Theresa's Refugee Resettlement Committee. -

 This was announced today by the Minister for Immigration 

 and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, following a meeting 

 of a sub-committee of the Migration Settlement Council for 

 South Australia. .

 The introduction of the Community Refugee Settlement 

 Scheme was announced by Mr.MacKellar on 30 October 1979 following 

 the first meeting of the Australian Refugee Advisory Council.

 "Under this scheme", said Mr MacKellar, "numbers of refugees 

 will be moved directly into the Australian community where they 

 will be in the care of families, groups or organisations which had 

 undertaken to provide a range of support and assistance".

 "It is important for community involvement in the scheme 

 to be broadly-based and well prepared. The Whyalla application has 

 met all the requirements for participation in the scheme, which 

 include providing initial accommodation,  helping to find jobs, 

 facilitating access to language and orientation courses and 

 providing general social support. A wide range of organisations and 

 groups are involved with St Theresa's Refugee Resettlement Committee 

 in the Whyalla project. These include:

 .  Society of St Vincent de Paul 

 .  Spencer Gulf Refugee Resettlement Committee 

 ; Our Lady Help of Christians Parish - Whyalla West 

 .  Catholic Diocese of Port Pirie 

 .  Anglican Diocese of Willochra

 2/...

 2

 Uniting Church ,

 St Martin's Anglican Church 

 Apex

 Whyalla Chamber of Commerce 

 Soroptimists Club of Whyalla"

