---
title: "Island processing centre: a positive step"
date: "1979-05-11"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213729988
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004472%22
---

 From the Minister for immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 11 May 1979 72/79

 ISLAND PROCESSING CENTRE: A POSITIVE STEP

 "Indonesia is to be congratulated for its efforts 

 in seeking solutions to the problem of the refugees," the 

 Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. 

 MacKellar, said on leaving Jakarta last night.

 Mr. MacKellar was speaking at the conclusion of .

 a brief visit to Jakarta for talks with Indonesian Ministers 

 and officials, including General Panggabean, coordinating 

 Minister for Politics and Security, and Acting Foreign Minister, 

 Mr. Harun Zain, Minister for Manpower and Transmigration,

 General Yoga Sugama, Head of Bakin and Deputy Head Kopkamtib,  

 and Mr. Haran Sudero, Secretary General of the Ministry for 

 Social Welfare.

 Australia would be represented at the international 

 meeting in Jakarta on May 15-16 to discuss the possibility of 

 establishing an Island Processing Centre. This followed the 

 offer by the Indonesian Government to provide an Island site Y  

 for such a centre.

 "While it is too early to anticipate the results of 

 next weekls meeting Australia welcomes any initiatives that 

 contribute to durable solutions", Mr. MacKellar said.

 It is understood that the Island Processing Centre 

 would be additional to the existing first asylum camps in;.,

 ,  Indonesia and elsewhere in the region. It was hoped that the . /  

 Processing Centre would receive Indochinese r.efugees who 

 had already been accepted for permanent resettlement but were

 2.

 awaiting movements to the third countries.

 The Minister noted that the flood of refugees leaving 

 Indochina was creating massive problems for legional Governments.

 "The countries of Indochina have a heavy responsi­

 bility for the present situation and should be playing a 

 positive role in providing solutions". .

 He added that Governments were expected to safeguard 

 the rights of all their citizens regardless of ethnic origins.

 "Any problems in this area should not be resolved 

 by one Government attempting to shed its responsibilities as 

 a sovereign power onto other countries.

 "In this situation, it is important that the 

 international community continues the search for initiatives 

 that will help provide relief for those countries- who are 

 bearing the immediate burden of this tragic movement of 

 people," Mr. MacKellar said.

