---
title: "International refugee appeal"
date: "1979-02-13"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213727601
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004527%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 INTERNATIONAL REFUGEE APPEAL

 13 February 1979 '  27/79

 Trie League of Red Cross Societies has lodged an  international appeal designed to help the 50,000 Indo­ Chinese refugees now in camps in Malaysia, the Minister  for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar,  said today.

 Commending the appeal, Mr MacKellar said it was  specifically designed to help the Malaysian Red Crescent  Society to expand its services to refugees.

 1 1  Since 1975 the Malaysian Red Crescent Society has  been acting as operational partner of the Office of the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). In this  capacity, and in co-operation with the Malaysian Government, 

 it has been distributing relief in the nine camps which have  been opened in the States of Kuala Lumpur, Johore, Pahang and  Trengganu," Mr MacKellar said.

 "It will soon have the assistance of eight technical  delegates specialising in logistics, health, social work,  registration and tracing.

 "An Australian Red Cross doctor, in fact, has been  attached to the Malaysian Red Crescent Society since late  December and has been working in the refugee camps," Mr MacKellar said.

 The Red Cross Society in Australia wanted all refugees  in Australia to know that the Malaysian Red Crescent Society  was improving significantly its capacity to help refugees trace  relatives, to exchange correspondence with relatives and to 

 arrange the transmission of funds between the refugees and  their families.

 It also hoped donations would be forthcoming to ensure  that the expansion of services was continued, Mr MacKellar said

 Further details of the scheme were available from any  of the Red Cross Societies State Divisions in Australia, Mr MacKellar said.

