---
title: "ALP in disarray on migration policy"
date: "1979-08-08"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213731375
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004624%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs,  the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 8 August 1979 .  121/79

 ALP IN DISARRAY ON MIGRATION POLICY

 "The ALP wants the migrant vote but it does not want 

 migrants," the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, 

 the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, said today.

 He was commenting on recent statements by the Deputy 

 Leader of the Opposition, Mr Bowen,  and by the Opposition 

 Spokesman on Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Dr Cass.

 "Mr Bowen's statement makes it clear that the ALP has 

 not abandoned the anti-immigration attitudes which caused it to 

 slash immigration to a 30 year record low level in its last year 

 of office," Mr MacKellar said.

 "The statement by Dr Cass includes remarkable misquota­

 tions and complete omissions from a publication of my Department 

 on the NUMAS system," Mr MacKellar said.

 "The statement by Dr Cass also reflects a remarkable 

 combination of ignorance and hypocrisy. In his statement 

 Dr Cass demonstrates not only that he doesn't understand the NUMAS -  

 system but also that he is unaware that most of the features of 

 NUMAS which he criticises, were important elements of the 

 previous system of migrant selection, the Structured Selection 

 Assessment System introduced by the Labor Government in 1973."

 Dr Cass criticises NUMAS for giving weight to factors such 

 as occupational skills, literacy in the mother tongue, competence 

 in English, family ties within Australia and prospects of 

 successful settlement.  Three of these factors, occupational 

 skills, competence in English and prospects of successful settle­

 ment were first adopted as specific criteria for migrant selection 

 by the Labor Government in 1973. It should be noted that the Labor 

 Government did not, however, in its selection system give credit  for family ties within Australia.

 .  .../2 .

 2.

 Both Dr Cass and Mr Bowen have emphasised that the ALP 

 would give priority to family reunion. One need only look at the 

 record of the .Labor*' Government to judge the likelihood of that." "

 In October 1974, the then Labor Government abolished all family 

 reunion concessions except for spouses, dependent children and 

 aged, dependent parents.

 .  The Liberal/National Country Party Government has introduced 

 several measures to widen family reunion criteria. One of these 

 is the new Special Family Reunion category which provides for the 

 entry of family members in special circumstances, such as the last 

 relative remaining overseas. In addition NUMAS provides concessions 

 for all other relatives, making it easier for them to enter 

 Australia. Points are gained for the presence in Australia of a 

 relative. In addition where the relative in Australia is able to 

 assist in providing employment or in overcoming the other problems 

 of settlement the family member also derives additional points 

 under the factors "pre-arranged employment" and "economic viability". 

 The Labor Government's Structured Selection Assessment System 

 included none of these concessions.

 In his statement Dr Cass produces some statistics purporting 

 to show a preference in granting assisted passages to certain 

 groups. It is interesting that the table which he used has been 

 skillfully pruned to exclude examples which contradict his general .  

 theme that English speaking migrants from Europe are given 

 preferential treatment. What the complete figures illustrate is 

 simply the fact that it is Government policy to grant assisted 

 passages only to refugees and to workers with recognised skills 

 in demand in Australia. It is hardly surprising therefore that those 

 countries producing the most refugees and the most workers with 

 recognised skills in demand in Australia should also have the 

 highest proportions receiving assisted passages.

 "The ethnic community should look with great caution at 

 statements which appear to be pro-migration from a party which 

 slashed immigration when in office, particularly when the spokesman 

 for that Party is well known for his past dedication to zero 

 population growth in Australia," Mr MacKellar said.

