---
title: "$45,000 grant "boosts" refugee hosting scheme"
date: "1979-03-27"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213729247
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004500%22
---

 53/79

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKeilar, M.P.

 27 March 1979

 $45,000 GRANT "BOOSTS" REFUGEE HOSTING SCHEME - j

 The Indo-China Refugee Association of South  Australia is to get a Commonwealth grant worth about  $45*000 over three years,

 The grant will enable the Association to  employ a social worker to develop its hosting and  friendship scheme.

 Announcing the grant today, the Minister for  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Mr MacKeilar, praised  the voluntary efforts of XCRA members since the  Association was formed in 1975*

 "South Australia is now host to an estimated  800 refugees from Laos,  Vietnam and Kampuchea," Mr McKellar  said.

 "Given the obvious goodwill of the community  there,  the number can be expected to grow.

 "While community volunteers are essential in  making newcomers feel at home in their new community,   some tasks are beyond volunteers.

 "A social worker is needed to take on the  more difficult case-work and to co-ordinate the efforts  of volunteers even more effectively.

 "At the same time, the social worker will  encourage self help among the refugees themselves. Many have shown themselves ready to help themselves but  need professional guidance on ways and means." .

 Mr MacKeilar said the grant to ICRA was in  Line with the recommendations of the Galbally Report  which had seen non-government agencies as being more  effective than government agencies in the welfare 

 field.

 ICRA was the co-ordinating body for voluntary  agencies wishing to help Indo-Chinese refugees in South  Australia, Mr MacKeilar said.

