---
title: "1979-80 budget appropriations Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
date: "1979-08-21"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213731591
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004621%22
---

 124/79

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.

 the Ho n , M.J.R, MacKe l l a r , M.P. 21 August 1979

 1979-80 BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS 

 DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 In commenting on provisions in the budget for 

 expenditure on migrants and the migrant community the Minister, 

 for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr M.J.R. MacKellar said that 

 the increase of $11.7m in expenditure from $61.8 in 1978-79 to 

 $73.4 million in 1979-80 allowed for under the vote for the 

 Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, clearly indicates 

 the importance the Government attaches to the provision of 

 settlement services and educational facilities for the ethnic 

 communities. .

 The increase in expenditure is 197, in money terms - 

 representing a significant increase in real terms. .

 Just over 507, of this expenditure will be on the 

 provision of settlement services.

 Under this heading there have been increases of 307, 

 in the provision of translator and telephone interpreter services; 

 and increase of $6 million (347= on 1978-79) in the provision 

 of education for adult migrants and refugees - reflecting the '  

 emphasis the Government has put on implementing the Galbally 

 recommendations and on strengthening and refocussing the English 

 language education program. The expenditure on this item in 

 1979-80 will be four times that outlaid in 1974-75.

 This funding includes provision for broadening and 

 expanding the Home Tutor Scheme. "

 A further $1 million has been allocated to the development 

 of migrant resource centres to assist community settlement.

 2/..

 Î¯\

 Assistance for migrant travel to Australia has 

 been increased by $1 million or 16%. This increase largely 

 represents the Government's commitment to take a larger number 

 of refugees in 1979-80.

 In line with its commitment.to a policy of steady 

 population growth, the Government has increased expenditure on 

 publicity overseas in order to attract skilled migrants in demand 

 in Australia.  This vote also covers provision of information about 

 Australia so that migrants have accurate information when taking 

 their decision to migrate and on arrival in their new country.

 An increased allocation of funds is being given to 

 the provision of information for migrants and earlier arrivals 

 in Australia. In all,  expenditure on the information and 

 publicity vote will rise from $537,000 to $790,000.

 Mr MacKellar said that a statement would be made on the 

 implementation of the Galbally Report on Post-Arrival Services 

 and Programs for Migrants early in the sittings.

 More details of proposed expenditure are attached.

 - 2 -

 A

 3

 SUMMARY OF DIEA BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS 

 1979-80 :  $m

 .  1978/79

 Proqram Expenditure

 1979/80

 Appropriation

 %

 Chanqe

 Population Planning  & Research  770 938 + 22%

 New Migrants 12,345 13,993 +13%

 International *

 Control Movement  6,243 6,767

 CO

 +

 Settlement Services 29,607 37,735 + 27%

 Executive Services 12,812 13,986 '  + 9%

 61,777 73,418 19%

 4

 PROGRAMME NO. 1 POPULATION PLANNING AND RESEARCH

 Description: Monitoring, analysing and forecasting population changes with emphasis on implications for  Government policies, especially for migration  and ethnic affairs. Provision of support to  Departmental and inter-governmental bodies 

 (APIC and Commonwealth/State Conference) by  way of population analysis and data for  operational planning and management.

 1978/79 1979/80 %

 Ma~,or Items Expenditure Appropriation Change

 Salaries &  Overtime 

 745 809 10%

 Studies &  Research 

 25 129 416%

 TOTAL 770 938 2 2 c /o

 5

 Description;  The formulation and control of.annual migration intake to meet government objectives with  respect to population, manpower, social and  humanitarian aims.  The recruitment and selection 

 of persons overseas for permanent settlement  in Australia and facilitate their movement to  Australia.

 PROGRAMME 2 :  NEW MIGRANTS

 1978/79 1979/80 %

 Major Items Expenditure Appropriation Change

 Salaries Overtime  - Australia 3,087 

 3,352 9%

 Salaries Overtime  - Overseas  2,041 2,172 1%

 Assistance to Migrant  Travel 6,767 

 7,860 16%

 Information, Publicity 435 609 

 40%

 Other 1 5

 TOTAL 12.345 13.993 n%

 6

 PROGRAMME 3 :  INTERNATIONAL MOVEMENT CONTROL >

 Description:  (a) Administration of policy relating to entry and re-entry to, and. residence in, apd departure from  Australia for all purposes other than permanent  settlement. This includes

 '  .  short term visitors, tourists, students, business  .  extensions of stay and change of status  .  negotiation of bi-lateral visa agreements

 (b) Control of Non Residents:  Enforce the administration of policy with respect to non resident entry to Australia  by: .

 - detection, arrest, prosecution and deportation  prohibited immigrants - investigation of immigration malpractice and  development of improved procedures for secur,e control 

 of entry to Australia - administration of Aliens legislation, including  Aliens Register.

 Major Items

 1978/79 1979/80 %

 Expenditure Appropriation Change

 Salaries Overtime  - Australia  3,662 3,976 9%

 Salaries Overtime  - Overseas  1 ,420 1 ,511 6%

 Deportations 1,156 1 ,2?0 10%

 Information 5 10

 6,243 6,767 8%

 7

 Description:  Provision of services to migrants on arrival to facilitate successful and permanent settlement in  ,  Australia and integration into the Australian community. The programme has six major elements:

 (a) Post Arrival Services - Provision of services to migrants on  arrival in Australia including:-. personal welfare  . settlement and resource centres

 . financial assistance to private bodies serving migrants  . guardianship of migrant children  . repatriation of "failed" migrants

 (b) Adult Migrant Education - Administration of arrangements for  provision of facilities for adult migrants to learn English  and about Australia, its institutions and services.  Review  of policy and prograurane of adult migrant education, in con­

 sultation with other government bodies,  and development of  proposals for improvement.

 (c) Recognition of Overseas Qualifications - Evaluation of pro­ fessional , sub-professional, technical and general academic  qualifications gained overseas,  with equivalent Australian  qualifications and development of standards and procedures 

 for recognition in Australia of comparable overseas qualifi­ cations by Australian residents.

 (d) Translating and Interpreting Services - Provide migrant,  and  other community groups with translation and interpreting  services and develop standards for grading of these services.

 (e) Australian Citizenship - Administration of policy on granting  to aliens (permanent residents in Australia) of Australian  citizenship including:

 .  administration of procedures for assessment of  applications for citizenship . organization and/or conducting of citizenship ceremonies  . development of new policy proposals and procedures

 (f) Ethnic Affairs - Provision of advice on matters concerning  successful integration of migrants into Australian community,  with particular reference to health, welfare, housing,  employment, education, communications and law. Identification 

 of deficiencies in government services and facilities and  development, in consultation with other government and non­ government agencies, of policies/programmes to remedy. Liaison  with ethnic groups and media for exchange of information on 

 ethnic communities and government services to these communities

 PROGRAMME 4 :  SETTLEMENT SERVICES

 1978/79 : 1979/80 %

 Major Items Expenditure. Appropriation Change

 Salaries Overtime  - Australia 

 6,068 6,588 9%

 Translation and Telephone  Interpreter Services 908 1 ,180 30%

 .../2.

 cont. _ 8 _

 1978/79 1979/80 %

 Ma.ior Items Expenditure Appropriation Change

 Assistance for  Migrant Resource &  Information Centres

 157 986 628%

 Special Assistance to  Voluntary Agencies for  Refugees 539 650 21%

 Institute of Multi­ cultural Affairs 

 46 300 652%

 Adult Migrant &  Refugee Education 

 17,990 24,100 34%

 Grants to Organisations  for Migrant Welfare  Activities 948 1,504 59%

 Settlement Services  at Hostels " 

 570 820 44%

 Payments to States for  Interpreter Services  NIL 310 -

 Post Arrival services,  information 93 ,  260 280%

 Other 2,288 1,037

 29,607 37,735 27%

 9

 PROGRAMME 5:  EXECUTIVE SERVICES

 Description:  Advise Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs on policies and programmes and ensure efficient  functioning of Department by management of personnel,   financial,  and equipment resources.

 1978-79 1979-80 %

 Major Items Expenditure Appropriation Change

 Salaries Overtime  - Australia 7,780 8,440 8%

 Salaries Overtime  - Overseas 597 636 7%

 Other Administrative 4,435 4,910 11%

 12,812 13,986 9%

