---
title: "Minister welcomes British decision"
date: "1979-12-06"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213733344
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004562%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 180/79 6 December 1979

 MINISTER WELCOMES BRITISH DECISION

 "The Australian Government warmly welcomes the decision 

 by the British Government to provide an undertaking in relation 

 to the refugees who arrived in Darwin on Tuesday on the tanker 

 Entalina," the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,

 Mr. Michael MacKellar said^today.

 The Minister Was commenting on the terms of an announced 

 British decision that they would accept for ultimate settlement in 

 the United Kingdom any refugees not accepted for resettlement by 

 other Governments.

 "This decision reinforces in a most helpful way the growing 

 international co-operation between major maritime powers and 

 governments of resettlement", Mr. MacKellar said.

 It was likely that other countries would be asked by UNHCR 

 to resettle the refugees.

 "For our part, Australia would consider the resettlement 

 of refugees in the group who met Australian requirements," the 

 Minister said.

 The Australian Government was already in contact with the 

 representative of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 

 in Australia who would be handling overall arrangements for the 

 resettlement of the refugees.

 *******

