---
title: "Australian hosts for refugees"
date: "1979-01-15"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213727141
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004546%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs,  the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 AUSTRALIAN HOSTS FOR REFUGEES

 15 January 1979 9/79

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  the 

 Hon M.J.R. MacKellar,  today announced a new hosting 

 scheme that will link refugee families with host 

 families in Western Australia.

 Mr MacKellar said that th'e Government will give a three 

 year grant to Centrecare, the Catholic Family Welfare 

 Bureau's service arm in Perth, to launch the scheme in 

 conjunction with other church and community organisations.

 The grant,  worth above $40,000 over the three years, will 

 enable Centrecare to employ a social worker to organise 

 the new program.

 The hosting scheme will link a refugee family with an 

 Australian family which will then#be a host to the 

 newcomers and assist them;to settle. Mr MacKellar said 

 that many families had shown a willingness to befriend 

 refugee families and Centrecare had been chosen to 

 organise the scheme because it had experience in this 

 field. However, such an idea needed Government support 

 if it is to be a successful long-term proposition. A 

 skilled professional is needed to match families and 

 provide support and counselling.

 Mr MacKellar said that the Government was examining the 

 possibility of extending the scheme to other States with 

 substantial numbers of refugees,  Western Australia had 

 been the first State to come up with a firm proposal.

 . . . / 2

 2.

 This innovation in migrant and refugee settlement is part 

 of a series of Government initiatives in the provision of 

 post-arrival services. These initiatives follow the 

 Government's acceptance of the recommendations of the 

 Galbally review of these services.

 Mr MacKellar said the Government would provide an extra 

 $50m over the next three years to boost welfare services,  

 ethnic television and information services,  the 

 provision of interpreters and to provide additional 

 English language classes.

