---
title: "Migrant settlement council for New South Wales"
date: "1979-07-27"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213731184
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004630%22
---

 111/79

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, - the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P. 27 July 1979

 MIGRANT SETTLEMENT COUNCIL FOR NEW SOUTH WALES

 The last link has been made in the chain of migrant 

 settlement councils set up under the Galbally Report implementation 

 program. .

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,

 Mr MacKellar, announced today that the NSW Government had agreed 

 to be represented on an eight-member Migrant Settlement Council 

 for New South Wales.

 There would now be eight settlement councils -- one for 

 each State and Territory -- supervising development of initial 

 settlement programs for new arrivals,  he said,

 "The settlement councils are concerned with implementing 

 programs which identify and meet local needs," Mr MacKellar said.

 "It is important that the councils and individual members 

 have the support of the wider Australian community.

 .  "The calibre of people chosen to serve on the New South 

 Wales Council will attract and justify that support.

 "As i n ;other States, the council reflects the various 

 facets of community concern with migrant welfare:  government bodies, 

 non-government organisations and ethnic communities.

 Mr MacKellar said an important aspect of the work of the .  

 councils was to engage the voluntary sector which played such 

 an important role in Australian welfare services.

 :  As the Galbally Report had pointed out,  it was most

 important that the voluntary sector, including ethnic groups, should 

 establish links with incoming migrants as soon as possible.

 2/...

 - 2 -

 The membership of the New South Wales Council i s :

 Mr James Samios (chairman),  a lawyer and member of 

 the NSW Ethnic Communities Council;

 Father Nicholas Mansour,  parish priest and vice-chairman 

 of the NSW Ethnic Broadcasting Advisory Committee;

 Ms Antonietta Watson,  teacher of English to migrants, 

 active for many years in migrant and refugee welfare 

 work through church and ethnic organisations;  >

 Mr Edward Bacon,  chairman of the migrants and refugees 

 committee of the Society of St Vincent de Paul;

 Mr George Austen, regional director, Commonwealth 

 Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs;

 Mr Roy Gray, Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering 

 Services Ltd; '  .

 Mrs Nadia Lozzi-Cuthbertson, executive officer,  NSW 

 Ethnic Affairs Commission who, until her return from long 

 service leave will be represented by Mr Denis Johnston;

 Mr Phillip Arblaster, deputy superintendent, NSW Adult 

 Migrant Education Service. ,

