---
title: "Opposition leader's statement confused and misinformed"
date: "1979-09-11"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213731946
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004612%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P. ,

 11 September 1979 133/79

 OPPOSITION LEADER'S STATEMENT CONFUSED AND MISINFORMED

 "The ignorance of the Labor Opposition on immigration 

 matters is revealed in the confused and misinformed statement issued 

 by Mr Hayden on 10 September," the Minister for Immigration and 

 Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. MiJ.R. MacKellar, said today.

 In what is understood to have been a prepared statement,

 Mr Hayden said that last year only 44,000 immigrants plus 13,000 

 refugees arrived in Australia, against a proposed net intake of 

 70,000 plus 14,000 refugees. In that garbled two line statement,

 Mr Hayden

 - suggested that last year's refugee program was additional

 to, not included in, the total immigration program of

 70,000 net: in fact the 70,000 program included refugees;

 - suggested that the actual migrant intake was 44,000 when in

 fact it was 68,749;

 - confused gross and net intakes.

 "While the ethnic communities might dismiss these errors 

 as ineptitude, they should be more apprehensive about the absence 

 of any positive statement in Mr Hayden's text. In 1972, the ALP 

 deceived the ethnic communities with promises, only to slash the 

 migrant intake to a 30 year record low and dismember the Department 

 of Immigration," Mr MacKellar said.

 post-arrival services for migrants, Mr Hayden uses the vaguest 

 terms. None of Mr Hayden's empty rhetoric can conceal the hard 

 fact that the current three-year program involves an increased 

 expenditure of $50 million on services to migrants. Nor can it 

 conceal the fact that spending on English language classes for 

 adult migrants has risen from $8.01 million in 1975-76, the last year 

 of ALP Government, to $24.1 million in 1979-80 and that ethnic broad­

 casting expenditure has gone from $280,000 to $6 million over the 

 same period."

 II In his comment on the Government's comprehensive program of

