---
title: "Home tutor scheme co-ordinator in Parramatta"
date: "1979-12-13"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213733433
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004558%22
---

 From the Department of Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 184/79 13 December 1979

 HOME TUTOR SCHEME. .CO-ORDINATOR IN PARRAMATTA

 The Department of Immigration and. Ethnic Affairs has 

 provided funds for the appointment.of a regional co-ordinator in 

 Parramatta for the Home Tutor Scheme.

 The co-ordinator,  Mrs Eve Purvis took up duty early this 

 month in the Migrant Resources Centre, .George Street,  Parramatta 

 next to the new Commonwealth Bank Building.

 The appointment of Mrs Purvis followed discussions with 

 the NSW Ministry of Education.  Mrs Purvis is an officer of the 

 NSW Aduit Migrant Education Service and has been employed with 

 funds provided by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.  

 She will be assisted by a part-time instructor who will brief tutors 

 on how to conduct tutoring sessions.

 The Home Tutor Scheme is part of the Adult Migrant and 

 Refugee Education Program which is co-ordinated and funded 

 nationally by the Department. ._

 The Program provides opportunities for adults from non- 

 English speaking backgrounds to learn English, to obtain information 

 about life in Australia which will assist them to settle, and to 

 make use of the Government and other services which are available 

 to the community generally.

 The appointment of Mrs Purvis follows the Commonwealth 

 Government's acceptance last year of the Galbally Report on Post­

 Arrival Programs and Services for Migrants.  One of the 

 recommendations in the report was that the -Home Tutor Scheme 

 be extended. .

 The Scheme makes use of volunteers who usually meet 

 students in their homes for one or two hours each week to teach

 them English. Tutors encourage their students to move out into

 2 /...

 2

 the community using English to meet their needs depending on 

 their circumstances.  .  Most tutoring is done on a one-to-one 

 basis.

 The Department receives advice from the NSW Home Tutor 

 Scheme Co-ordinating Committee on the detailed arrangements for 

 the Scheme in NSW. The Committee,  chaired by an officer of the 

 Department,  had recommended the appointment of a co-ordinator 

 -  in Parramatta.

 #  .  A function was held in the lower Parramatta Town Hall 

 today to mark the appointment of the new co-ordinator.

 Tutors,  students and others willing to assist in the 

 promotion of the Scheme in the Parramatta area were invited.

 People interested in becoming tutors or students,  

 or who are able to refer Mrs Purvis to anyone needing assistance 

 should telephone 635 6155 or 633 3115.

