---
title: "Joint Communique from the conference of Ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs - Perth - 20 April 1979"
date: "1979-04-20"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213729630
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004487%22
---

 63/79 20 April 1979

 — : 

 r* .

 JOINT COMMUNIQUE FROM THE CONFERENCE OF MINISTERS FOR  IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS - PERTH - 20 APRIL 1979

 Commonwealth and State Ministers for Immigration and 

 Ethnic Affairs today expressed support for an active approach to 

 immigration in Australia.  While in no way detracting from the 

 need for training and retraining within Australia,  the Ministers 

 noted that despite the present levels of unemployment in Australia 

 key labour needs remained unmet from within Australia.  State 

 Ministers pointed to the importance of ensuring that the special 

 needs of particular States,  especially for skilled employees,  should 

 be taken into account in immigration intakes and migrant selection. 

 It was agreed that there should be at least annual consultations 

 between Commonwealth and State officers concerning intakes to 

 each State.

 The Ministers discussed the migration intake for the 

 current financial year and the intake objectives for the 1978/81 

 triennium. The Ministers noted the changing composition of 

 Australia's intake and,  within the context of Australia's non- 

 discriminatory immigration policy,  urged that more efforts should 

 be made to attract people from Australia's traditional source 

 countries which had provided migrants who had settled well in 

 Australia and played a major role in Australia's development.

 The Conference was attended by the New Zealand Minister of 

 Labour and Immigration,  the Hon. J.B, Bolger,  and immigration 

 experience in New Zealand was discussed.

 Ministers considered Australia's contribution to 

 resolving the Indo-Chinese refugee situation. They stressed the 

 need to maintain an orderly movement of refugees selected overseas 

 by Australian immigration officers and noted the problems of 

 coastal surveillance. Both Commonwealth and State Ministers 

 agreed that it was undesirable for refugees to attempt the 

 hazardous journey to Australia arid arrive on Australia's shores

 H ...

 ·** .  X

 without prior authority to enter. A continuation of this unauthorised 

 travel could only jeopardise the Australian refugee resettlement 

 program. Ministers recognised that the resettlement of Australia's 

 Indo-Chinese refugee intake was a task calling for a concerted 

 effort on the part of all levels of Government and the community in 

 general.

 The Australian Ministers warmly welcomed the New Zealand 

 Government's decision to accept another 900 Indo-Chinese refugees 

 this year.  Problems associated with prohibited immigrants in 

 Australia were raised during discussion.  Ministers considered 

 that firm action should be taken to control the numbers of people 

 remaining in Australia in breach of their conditions of entry.

 Other matters covered included:

 .  Commonwealth and State Governments were co-operating closely 

 with community groups in providing a range of facilities 

 and services to ease refugee settlement in Australia with 

 minimum disruption to the rest of the community.

 .  On the Galbally Report the Ministers noted progress

 made in implementing the 57 major recommendations aimed at 

 establishing newcomers and ethnic communities on equal 

 footing with other Australian residents.

 .  They acknowledged that States and the Commonwealth had to 

 look to long-term implications of cost-sharing arrangements.

 The spirit of the Galbally Report went beyond the role 

 of Government, whether State or Federal and required new attitudes 

 and approaches at every level of the community.

 Conference Delegates

 Commonwealth The Hon.M.J.R. MacKellar Minister for Immigration 

 and Ethnic Affairs. 

 (Chairman).

 New Zealand The Hon. J.B. Bolger Minister of Labour and 

 Immigration.

 N.S.W. The Hon. R.F.  Jackson Minister for Youth and 

 Community Services.

 3/..,

 ,y,  «*

 i 4

 / > V

 Victoria The Hon. W, Jona

 Queensland The H on. N. Lee

 South Australia The H on. C.J .  Sumner

 Western Australia The Hon.R.J.01  Connor

 Northern Territory

 Tasmania

 The Hon. N. Dondas

 Mr A. Shirley

 Minister of Immigration 

 and Ethnic Affairs and 

 Assistant Minister of Health. 

 Minister of Industry and 

 Administrative Services. 

 Minister Designate Assisting 

 the Premier in Ethnic Affairs 

 (Representing the Hon.

 J.D. Corcoran,  Premier,  

 Treasurer and Minister of 

 Ethnic Affairs)

 Minister for Labour and 

 Industry, Consumer Affairs,  

 Immigration, Fisheries and 

 Wildlife and Conservation 

 and the Environment.  ·

 Minister for Youth, Sport,

 Recreation and Ethnic  Affairs.

 Deputy Under-Secretary,  

 Premier's Department 

 (representing the Hon.

 D.A. Lowe,  Premier of 

 Tasmania and the Hon. B.K. 

 Miller, Attorney-General and 

 Minister for Consumer and 

 Ethnic Affairs).

