---
title: "The budget- good deal for migrants"
date: "1980-08-20"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213836861
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09000812%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs. THE HON IAN MACPHEE,  MP

 >/80/tO 3  . 20 August 1980

 THE BUDGET - GOOD DEAL FOR MIGRANTS

 The 1980-81 Budget underlined the high priority the Commonwealth  Government was giving to migrants and their welfare,  the  Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Ian Macphee,  said today.  %

 Commenting on the Treasurer's speech,  Mr Macphee said  increased appropriations would enable Australia to retain its  leadership in the field of post-arrival services to migrants  and to build further on the many initiatives and innovations  of the past few years.

 Expenditure by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic · Affairs would increase by $16.5 million from $72.6 million  in 1979-80 to $90.3 million -- an increase of 22.3 per cent  in money terms and a substantial increase in real terms.

 Mr Macphee said key areas of increased expenditure included:

 .  assisted passage migration -- up by 74 per cent to  contribute to the travel costs of about 30,000 new  arrivals, including Indo-Chinese and Eastern  .  European refugees;

 initial settlement -- up 23.7 per cent to continue  the majpr initiatives of the Galbally implementation  program, including the establishment of 22 migrant  resource centres;

 adult migrant education -- up 23.5 per cent,  allowing  continued growth in the on-arrival program which this  year would benefit 15,000 adults from non-English  speaking backgrounds, compared with 11,500 in w j l u u  j_ j_ t V V juil

 1979/80 and 3,000 in 1977/78.

 An increase in the immigration program (95,000 for 1980/81)  was being matched with an accelerated program of additional  services within Australia.

 . . . 1 2

 2

 r\

 "The Budget appropriations reflect the package of balanced  policies the Government has developed for immigration and  ethnic affairs," Mr Macphee said.

 "We have taken account of the interests of all sections of the  community and are building on a strong bank of community  goodwill and co-operation," he said. -

 "We have acknowledged our humanitarian commitments to family  reunion and to helping with the international refugee problem."

 "We are complementing our active training and retraining  programs with the recruitment of skilled workers to help  overcome particular manpower shortages which would otherwise  persist. We are also recruiting small businessmen with the  knowhow and capital to create jobs here in Australia."

 "We are cutting down the backlog of needs accumulated  over thirty years of post-war immigration and we are making  sure that new arrivals get the start they deserve."

 Mr Macphee said this combination of active concerns was well  ,  illustrated by the growth of the adult migrant education  program. He gave details of the program in a separate  statement (attached).

 For further enquiries please contact:

 Don Lawler, Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Canberra 48 2726, or .

 Rob Palfreyman, Minister's Office, Canberra 73 3446.

