---
title: "Meeting of Labor Ministers and Shadow Ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
date: "1980-09-01"
creators:
  - "Cass, Moss"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213837122
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR06003653%22
---

 PRESS RELEASE

 l . v % 0

 FROM DR MOSS CASS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 MEETING OF LABOR MINISTERS AND SHADOW MINISTERS FOR  IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 "We in the ALP want the Ethnic Communities to be in no 

 doubt at all as to our intentions regarding multicultural  broadcasting through both TV and Radio",  said Dr Cass,  the Chairman of the Conference of the Labor Ministers  and Shadow Ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs  at the conclusion of the Conference. "

 Labor is committed to the provision of professional ethnic  programmes on radio and TV by^a national, fully 

 publicly-funded broadcasting system responsible to the  Parliament and the community.

 "We also want to let the community know that in fact  the ALP would be broadening the scope for broadcasting 

 the whole Australian Community by adding the dimension  of community broadcasting to the existing professional  broadcasting structure." ‘J

 "We also believe that we need to provide radio and TV 

 channels additional to those now available in order .-to  enable adequate programming time for the whole community,  

 including the Ethnic Communities," said Dr Cass. · .

 "What the ALP would do is this: We would adopt a dual

 approach to multicultural broadcasting. At one end of  the spectrum, professional broadcasting would be provided  by the ABC or some other more appropriate part of the 

 system. We first want to see what the Committee of  Review of the ABC will have to say about the  restructuring of the Commission before we make a final 

 decision on its role in the area of multicultural  broadcasting",  said Dr Cass.

 "At the other end of the spectrum - in addition to 

 professional broadcasting - we would establish an open 

 broadcasting authority which will be responsible for  the provision of facilities and the development and

 2.

 assistance of public broadcasting for the whole community, including public broadcasting for  the Ethnic and Aboriginal communities. "

 "Let me make this quite clear", said Dr Cass.  "We would 

 provide traditional professional publicly-funded multicultural 

 TV and radio programmes,  as well as provide access to TV  and radio programmes; to cater for this additional TV and  radio chamnels would be provided".

 On the question of pensions for older immigrants, the  Meeting severely criticised the lack of progress by the  present Federal Government after four years of negotiations.

 "Many people now are feeling discriminated against and are  suffering from genuine hardships", Dr Cass said.

 The Meeting has resolved to vigorously pursue the 

 finalisation of reciprocal pension agreements with  countries from which we receive immigrants.

 Representations of immigrant women addressed the Meeting  on the question of immigrant women and their needs. The  Meeting was asked to think of women when formulating 

 policies and immigrant women in particular, when formulating 

 policies that concern them. ,

 A number of other issues ranging from Adult Immigrant English  education to the complex problems of Dual Nationality, as  well as the matter of recognition of overseas professional 

 trade qualifications, were also discussed.

 For Information ring: 727121/726668 A,H.884131

 1 September 1980

