---
title: "Migrant settlement councils congratulated"
date: "1980-05-28"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213737081
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09000765%22
---

 A

 54/80

 From the Department of Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 .  28 May 1980

 Migrant Settlement Councils  Congratulated .

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,

 Mr Ian Macphee today congratulated the chairmen of Australia's 

 eight Migrant Settlement Councils on the success of the 

 Community Refugee Settlement Scheme.

 He was speaking at the second annual conference of 

 Migrant Settlement Council chairmen.  Migrant Settlement Councils 

 are responsible for oversighting and advising the Minister for 

 Immigration and Ethnic Affairs on the initial settlement of 

 migrants, including refugees.

 The Community Refugee Settlement Scheme was announced 

 by the previous Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,

 Mr Michael MacKeLlar late last year. It was designed to move 

 groups of refugees directly into the community.

 "Migrant Settlement Councils have contributed a great 

 deal to the promotion and development of the Community Refugee 

 Settlement Scheme," said Mr Macphee. "The membership of the 

 Councils, which are made up of people from Commonwealth and State 

 Government Departments,  ethnic and community groups and voluntary 

 agencies,  ideally suits them for this role."

 The Minister said that applications involving nearly 

 700 refugees had already been accepted. These refugees were 

 being settled in thirty separate localities throughout Australia.

 The Minister and Chairman also discussed a range of 

 other matters concerned with migrant and refugee settlement.

 . . ./2

 2

 Of particular interest was proposals to establish in the 

 coming months, community based migrant settlement centres 

 to cater for the needs of migrants who move directly into 

 the community.

