---
title: "$42,700 grants for migrants projects"
date: "1980-05-30"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213737099
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09000766%22
---

 55/80

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.

 t h e  H o n . I an  M a c p h e e , H P . 30' May 1980

 $42 700 GRANTS FOR MIGRANT PROJECTS

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Mr Ian 

 Macphee,  today announced project grants, totalling $42 700 to 

 12 ethnic groups,  voluntary organisations and trade unions.

 Mr Macphee said that these grants were a further step 

 in the implementation of recommendations of the Galbally 

 Report and would help organisations to introduce or expand 

 migrant welfare activities.

 '  "The total so far committed under the Migrant Project 

 Subsidy Scheme now stands at over $130 000 out of a total of 

 $150 000 available this fiscal year," Mr Macphee said.

 .  Other applications were still under consideration and 

 would be announced shortly, he said.

 The organisations to receive the grants are:

 NSW

 Russian Club $1 800 '

 ,  Establishment of a new welfare office, to 

 be initially staffed by a welfare officer from .

 the Australian Council of Churches.

 Australian Arab Women's Federation ;  $4 700

 Assist in the production of a newsletter 

 to meet the needs of isolated women.  .

 Marrickville Legal Centre 

 Extension of services to migrant clients.

 $4 200

 2! ...

 2

 * > .

 Luso-Australian Socio-Cultural Association 

 Assist the Association to conduct orientation 

 and information sessions within Sydney's 

 Portuguese community.

 Building Workers' Industrial Union of Australia - 

 New South Wales Branch

 To conduct a pilot project to link up all existing 

 migrant services within the Union. ·

 Catholic Dutch Migrant Association 

 Assistance to provide welfare services and to 

 further develop the senior citizens project.

 Association of Lao Refugees g  

 Establishment of an information centre in 

 an area of high concentration of Lao refugees. .

 - South East Asian Community Assistance _

 Assistance with the establishment of a welfare 

 office in Cabramatta.

 WESTERN AUSTRALIA

 Macedonian Community of WA 

 For preparation and dissemination of 

 information on legal aid, unions,  work ,

 qualifications and other welfare-related 

 _  material.

 Swiss Club of WA

 Production of a newsletter to convey information 

 to the widely scattered Swiss population in WA.

 AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY .

 Ethnic Communities Council '

 Production and printing of a publication on 

 the history and activities of ethnic 

 communities in the ACT.

 $5 000

 $5 000

 $1 300

 $4 000

 $4 500

 $5 000

 $ 700

 $1 500

 3/...

 - 3 -

 FEDERAL

 Federation of Ethnic Communities Council '  $5 000

 Assistance towards the costs of a national 

 conference of the Federation and other 

 meetings of the Executive· as necessary.

 Contact: Rob Palfreyman, Minister's Office 062 733446.

