---
title: "Refugee Council meets in Canberra"
date: "1980-11-06"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213737461
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09000856%22
---

 FROM AUSTRALIAN REFUGEE ADVISORY  COUNCIL

 6 November 1980

 REFUGEE COUNCIL MEETS IN CANBERRA

 The Australian Refugee Advisory Council (ARAC) met in Canberra yester­

 day to discuss projects designed to assist refugees obtain 

 recognition of their professional qualifications and technical 

 skills and other proposals for the further development of the 

 refugee loans scheme.

 ARAC is an advisory body which -was established last year to advise 

 the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Ian Macphee, 

 on refugee matters. The Council normally meets three to four times 

 a year.

 The problem of qualifications assessment and recognition and 

 effective employment in the workforce is greater for refugees than 

 for other migrants and is a matter of considerable concern. Because 

 of the circumstances of their departure from their homeland and the 

 difficulty in obtaining documentary evidence of qualifications from 

 the authorities in those countries, refugees have a particular 

 problem in obtaining recognition after their arrival in Australia.

 "It is extremely important nevertheless that rapid integration of 

 the refugees into the Australian community should occur and that 

 every assistance be given to them to help in this process", the 

 Council concluded.

 Decisions taken included?

 .  Establishment of a working party comprising ARAC members and

 officials to investigate ways and means of developing 

 arrangements so that refugees with professional or trade 

 qualifications and experience will be assisted to obtain 

 recognition so that they can work in their professions or 

 trades in Australia. .

 i

 .  A proposal to seek additional funding for the existing revolving |

 loan scheme which makes funds available to refugees to assist ) - t 

 them in obtaining initial accommodation after their arrival in (

 Australia.

 Media Contacts; Anna Marsden-Stewart,  Department of Immigration

 and Ethnic Affairs 002 64 2726 or Rob Palfreyman, 

 Minister's Office 062 73 3446.

