---
title: "Prime Minister at Greek club Sydney plus questions and answers"
date: "1980-10-13"
creators:
  - "Fraser, Malcolm"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213853885
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10029178%22
---

 PRESS OFFICE TRANSCRIPT MONDAY 13 OCTOBER 1980

 PRIME MINISTER AT GREEK CLUB SYDNEY  PLUS QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

 The next few days are going to be important and there are only  two things that I would like to say.  I think Australia has  changed enormously from the Australia of 30 or 40 years ago. And now as a result of many thousands of people who have come here 

 from Greece and from Italy and from many other countries around  the world, we have a much better nation that it used once to be. We were a somewhat narrow, I think inward looking Anglo Saxon Celtic  community by and large up to the Second World War. There were many  who had come to us from other lands but their numbers were small 

 compared with those who had come from Britain or the British Isles.  But in the years since the war many people have come here from  Greece, from Italy and nearly every country in Europe - from Eastern  Europe - refugees from the Soviet Union and they have helped us to 

 build a much better country and not only in material things, not  only a wealthier country but everyone'has brought with them part of  their history, part of their culture,  part of their traditions.  I think or I suspect up to the 1930s, which some of you might  remember,  and I can just remember as a child, people would have 

 said - well to be a good Australian you've got to cut your links  with the past and in cutting the links with the past - be Australian  and that's it. But I think that is quite the wrong way of looking  at it. I believe that people who maintain an affection and a regard  and a love for the land of their birth or the land of their fathers 

 is totally consistent with being good and patriotic Australians.   Indeed I believe people are better Australians for the very fact  that they still maintain an affection and a love for the land of  their origin.  Over the last five years as a result of the Galbally  Report we introduced the post arrival programme. I'm glad we have  done it but I wish we had done it 20 years ago when it first should  have been done. But as a result there are better services available.  There is better support for resource centres and for the welfare 

 committees of different ethnic communities themselves and also the  beginnings of a broader based education in Australian schools.  In my day it was English History or Australian History - a bit of  it. But it is important for young Australians to learn not just  about that part of our history but to learn something about the  origins of all Australians. And so we need a much greater change 

 in the school systems and curriculums than we have had. As a result  of the Galbally Report that has started but it is only at the moment  a start. In my last policy speech I said we were going to support  ethnic community schools because with all the different people that  have come here it is not possible for all the languages and all the  history I suppose to be taught in the normal school system and there  are a number of communities that maintain their own schools for that  very reason, so that their children will know and understand their 

 language and their history and their culture. And now we are going  to support those schools and again I think that is a useful advance.  In relation to this election I think the central issues really are  economic ones. I think you know the policies that we have adopted  over five years. They have sometimes been difficult - policies of  restraint. But we believe that governments have got to live within 

 their means, just as I am sure that you understand and know that  you and your families have to live within your means. If suddenly  your supermarket bill doubled over the course of a year of your  expenditure doubles in maintaining your own household with basically  the same income - well as a family you get into difficulties and it

 .  .  .  2

 2

 takes a fair while to pay off those debts. And it is very much  the same as a nation. Now anything that I,  as a politician,   promise to do - I haven't got a cargo cult tree up in the sky,  which enables me to drag down the resources to do it. I have to 

 take those resources from you first and from all other tax paying  Australians. So anyone who promises to do something has to take  the resources from Australians first,  because the productive wealth  of this country and the taxes that come from it, come from all  Australians and politicians have nothing of their own.  Therefore 

 they have nothing to promise except what they first want to take '   away from all Australian citizens. Our ...political opponents are  promising a somewhat miraculous world.  They are promising to be  able to increase expenditure, to lower taxation, to keep inflation  down, to keep control of interest rates. And these things just ·   do not match. The only way you can keep taxation" down is to keep  expenditure down. And if you are.not going to keep expenditure  down taxation has go to or you have to go to a printing press. And 

 they are just the simple truths which are at the heart of the matter.   And it is because those simple truths have been breached that I  believe, and I have said, that our opponents would move inflation  to 20 per cent. They moved it from 5 per cent to llh per cent last 

 time, on some measures to over 20 per cent. Now starting at 10  per cent because it is a more inflationary world,  I have only  suggested that they double it. If they multiplied it by 3 or 4 times  last time I can't see why they shouldn't double it this time because 

 they are just as good at spending money as they were. So I think  I have been rather modest in suggesting that figure of 20 per cent.  -  But it would be tragic for Australian families - the $3 a week tax  cut is translated then into a supermarket bill which from $45 would  go up to $54. And that makes $3 a week pretty thin. . .  Over the last 

 few days there have been arguments about additional taxes and Mr.  Hayden has changed his mind once or twice. I have about ten statement  from him saying he is committed to capital gains taxes and wealth  taxes. Then there was the statement that he would do it but not just  yet. Then there was a statement on the ABC that he would do it  within three years - a very firm categoric one.  And I suppose the 

 names are well named - capital gains and wealth taxes because it  makes people think that only the wealthy would pay the tax. But  when he was explaining, and I don't think Mr. Wran could have read  this - when Mr. Hayden was explaining how a capital gains tax would work he took the example of a house and said you buy a house for a 

 certain figure. You sell if for a higher figure some years later  and you pay tax on the difference. Now a house if the family home  and all the rest. And I have that quotation - it's in a statement he made quite recently,  quite firmly and quite categorically. And  the wealth tax - Mr. Hayden's Deputy,  Mr. Bowen said he wants to  raise $1,500 million on the wealth tax. The only way he can do that 

 is by taxing the house, the belongings,  the savings, the building  society deposits of every Australian family.  And some of the  measures of that taxation would destroy the livelihood. One of the  great things in this country is that people have been able to come 

 from other lands and by their great hard work and people from Greece  and from Italy and from many other lands around the world have  shown this is so. They have been able to work and advance and get  on and make something for themselves and for their families. And  many have built up quite large businesses. Some have built up 

 great businesses. But they have been able to do it because they have  been able to, in our society, have the incentive, and the encourageme  to build for themselves, but as I would believe basically for their  families and for their children. Because I think that is the  motivating force really in all of us. We don't just work for

 .  .  .3

 3

 ourselves. We work for something better than that and for  something larger than that. And all these taxes on homes and  family wealth and family assets. Wealth is a silly term because  it makes you think that it is only going to apply to people living  in millionaire row or something. But there are not enough of them  to collect all that. much. So I would really just ask you to think  of all these things when you come to October 18. Because I believe  and I'm a violent partisan about Australia. I can understand you 

 loving Greece and other people loving other countries of Europe  because they are the lands of your origins. But Australia is the  only country that I have really known. I have visited other places.  And I do believe Australia is the best country in the world. I 

 certainly believe Australia is the best country in the world in which  to bring up children. And it is our task, yours and mine, because  Government is not just the business of Prime Ministers with colleagues  as we have here and Jack Birney, who has.done so much for this  electorate.  It is the task of Government and all Australians working 

 together for a common objective and a common purpose trying to make  this a better place than it once was. And when we leave the stage  when I and my colleagues leave the stage and you hand over to your  children,  I would believe and hope, with our common objective to 

 leave this a better country than when we started. And that is  building for the future.  That is our objective.  I know some of  the things that we have done over the last five years have been  difficult. They have been tough and I have never pretended it would 

 be anything else. But we were taking over something which was like  a company in bankruptcy or in liquidation and we had to pull it up  by its bootstraps, working with Australians, to rebuild again, the  profitability of Australian enterprise and the jobs for Australian  men and women who want to work, so that people could make profits, 

 so that people can look after themselves;  so that we can make this  an attractive place for more people to come from your former home  lands and from many other countries around the world. I believe we  have made great progress. But I think it's a bit like a builder  perhaps who has been digging the trenches for the foundations and  you build the foundations - you put the foundations in place and 

 then you lay.the concrete slabs for the floor. And up to this point  I think that is the work that has been going on. Over the next  few years we can build the edifice on top of strong foundations so  long as we are prepared and able to carry on with the policies that  we have. So that is what I hope we will be able to do and that is  what I believe we will be able to do after October 18. And if I 

 could say in spite of all these polls that people get so bemused  about, I have had one overriding conviction that we would and will  win on October 18 and that we will win very adequately for one · very particular reason, because I have enormous confidence in the 

 common sense and the understanding of Australian men and women no  matter where they originally came from and no matter how long they  have been in this country,  the common sense of Australians no matter  where they come from, and in their capacity to judge what is best 

 for their families and for this country.  And so I would like to  thank you very much for the opportunity to say a few words. I did  think I was only coming for a beer and the beer is very good.  But  thank you for allowing me to interrupt your evening here for a few  moments.  .

 .  .  .4

 4

 Ques t i o n

 Prime Minister may I ask concerning your reaction to the proposal  mentioned in the platform of the Labor Party in the policy speech  to remove the Department of Immigration and place it under the  Department of Foreign Affairs. Could you let us know what your 

 reaction is to that?

 Prime Minister

 I think that would be a very great pity.  We have established the  Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs for two very specific  reasons. We wanted the Department to give greater attention to  what happens to people after they get to Australia. In years past 

 it had been a department involved in bringing people to this country  but with not enough attention paid to them after they had come here.  And the whole Galbally Report was based around establishing  appropriate and better devised post arrival services. But we also 

 believe that the Department responsible for that should be the  -Department responsible for maintaining links between Australia and  Greeks in Australia and Greeks in Greece, because people want to go  to one Department that can look after their concerns within Australia 

 I think it's much the best if they can also go to that Department  if they want to say - well look I've got a relative,  I've got a  brother or a father or mother or whatever who would like to come  here. And if all this can be done in one framework within one  Department, I believe that moving the immigration side to the  Department of Foreign Affairs is the first step to ending any  migration programmes that virtually happened in the early part of 

 the 1970s. What we have done over recent years is to extend the  total numbers.  The net figure is now 95,000. And as economic  strength emerges even more strongly in Australia we would hope ·  to  push that up a bit higher still. So we want to keep one Department  of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.

 Question

 Prime Minister when we win the election I hope that we have a  slight majority. You've got the mandate o.f the people and I know  what the Liberal Party believes and we'd like to see some steps  taken against (inaud) the unions (inaud).  I know it might be a  very difficult task and I realise that (inaud) I wouldn't say a  very you know what I mean - a very successful (inaud).  When you 

 live in a democratic society the law for certain part of that  society should apply to everyone and not to a few people (inaud).

 Prime Minister

 Well I agree with that completely and there are two things here.  What you can do with consulatation with better relationships within  an industry - within a firm. And I think there is room for much  greater improvement in that area. But you also need a sensible 

 framework of industrial law, because many unions are enormously  powerful.  Some have annual incomes of $8 or $10 million a year. But we have made a number of changes to the law designed to make  trade unions more responsive to their members.  For the first time 

 for example trade unions are now - this has only been enforced  very recently - trade unions are required to give an annual financial  account of their members.  And I think members of the AMSWU for  example will be surprised to learn that the annual income of their 

 union is between that $8 and $10 million.  And they'll wonder where

 5

 Prime Minister (continued)

 it's all going and how it's being spent. And they'll probably  agitating for reduced union dues.  But the whole area is bedevilled  because some parts of it is within the State jurisdiction and some  parts of it is within ours.  We've taken to ourselves much stronger  powers in relation to Commonwealth public servants,  where we have  greatest power. You will have,  in this city a year or so ago - 

 the problems with Telecom, the problems with the Redfern Mail  Exchange.  I believe the changes to the law have been instrumental  in preventing the problems recurring. But in relation to State  employment and the State jurisdiction,  Commonwealth power is virtually  minimal and I believe that in this state there has been a sellout 

 to the union movement over a significant period and I take your  message very clearly and we'll be seeking to do more. We are going  to establish the circumstances where members of the union can  petition for a secret ballot as to whether they join in a strike or 

 not and I hope many of them take advantage of that. This isn't  somebody ordering them to have a secret ballot but giving them the  option to petition for a secret ballot. And that's an extension  of the establishment of secret ballots for the election officers  which has been in force for about 3 or 4 years. One of the things 

 that concerns me greatly is that the wages policy of the ACTU is one which was in fact brought up by Mr. Hawke and it not only(inaud) higher, wages, which I think would get back to the sort of 40 per  cent award wage increase of 74-75, but it also involves a 35 hour  week and I don't think there would be many people here who only  work a 35 hour week. .  And if Mr. Hawke had a chance with a different 

 position I don't believe I don't believe he would change the wages policies that he has in fact enshrined within the ACTU. He would only be trying to implement those policies from a different position.  And this would enormously add to costs in Australia and it would 

 add to unemployment.  But you're quite right in drawing attention  to a very difficult area and we are determined to do what we can  within the limits of Commonwealth constitutional power and Mr. Wran  has indicated that he would be happy for us to have more power but  he's never done anything to help us to achieve it. .

 Question

 Prime Minister, members of this Club and their families have for  many years been involved in the teaching of groups in after hours  schools and you're probably not aware that there are some 50,000  such students around Australia.  The Institute for Multicultural  Affairs recommended support to the extent of some $30 per pupil 

 towards costs and fees and books.  What is the order of support  (inaud)?

 Prime Minister

 We are going to apply - we have accepted that Institute of  Multicultural Affairs recommendation. That was in my policy  speech and we have said that it will be for a two year period, a  trial period and we really want to see how it works over that  period.  There is not the slightest doubt that'that support will  be maintained and continued.  We believe there is a very significant  role for those after hours schools. There is one condition we put  on it and one only that the schools should have an open admissions  policy. And I think that you would all agree with that. We accept 

 that recommendation in its entirety.

 .  .  .  5

 6

 Question

 You've been the leader of this country for five years.  You've  never debated once with any political other leader or the ACT  at any time. Why are you frightened?

 Prime Minister

 Oh my friend I'm not frightened of anything and I'm not frightened  of street walks either.  I can only say that there have been many  times in the federal parliament when I have debated with Mr. Hayden and with many other members of the Australian Labor Party.  The facts are there and the facts are plain.

 Question

 Reverting back to unions - secret ballots, both in the UK and here  from time to time during election periods - in policy speeches  there has been the - if not the promise, the promise of endeavour  to bring in secret ballots. I think you all believe,  both there  and here and possibly in other countries of the world too, the  rank and file will not always agree if they have a secret ballot  with the union leaders dictated policy. What I'm interested in  right now is - could you please explain to me the difficulties of 

 implementing that policy.

 Prime Minister

 We have implemented what we promised to do in the past and that  was to introduce secret ballots for the election of union leaders  and that is in force and has been for three or four years. In this  last policy speech we're taking that a step further by giving  unionists in a particular work place would like to ask for a 

 secret ballot to determine whether they want to take part in a  strike that might be ordered by their own union.

 Question

 Can it be enforced? 

 Prime Minister

 Well that part of it can - I think yes.  Because there has been a  provision in the Arbitration Act for a long time which allows the  Commission to order a secret ballot and there were provisions in  the Queensland Act for people under Queensland awards. But the 

 history of secret ballots when they have been ordered by the  Commission is not a particularly happy one. Quite often the ballot  has in fact supported the strike. Our belief is that if it is a ballot that the men themselves want to have, have petitioned for,  

 then the result might indeed be quite different. Let's take the  Amalgamated Metal Workers for example - probably cover most of the  metal trades. There are 6,000 metal shops, firms, factories right  around Australia. If you were going to have a compulsory secret 

 ballot before people can strike in relation to that,  the amount of  organisation that you would have to undertake would be very  considerable. AWU, which is basically a rural thing - if there was  a question of something in relation to shearing sheds - to be able 

 to organise a compulsory secret ballot for every shearing shed in  the country would be a massive task and it would take a fair while  to get the votes in. But if you've got people in a meatworks or if .  .  .  .7

 7

 you've.got people in a particular work place,  in a motor factory  or whatever and they themselves petition for a secret ballot,   saying that we just don't want to be part of this dispute because  it's a stupid one and it's only going to cost us, then it is 

 advancing the concept o f .secret ballots a step further and in a  way that I hope would be used and in a way that I hope would be  helpful. But there are difficulties and substantial ones in  making compulsory across the board in relation to all strikes. 

 They are just plain practical difficulties of organisation as much  as anything else.

 Question .

 Prime Minister due to your Government on’  24 October we're going  to have ethnic television introduced in Sydney and Melbourne. It  is your Government's intention to extend the service to other  capital cities?

 Prime Minister

 We are going to look to see what happens in Melbourne and Sydney  and obviously if the service is successful we should be making '   then an examination to see whether it should be extended. You  might be interested in some decisions we have made about ethnic 

 television because we got into a bit of trouble with the Senate  in relation to it and the original Bill did not go through. We  had earlier discussed whether the ABC should look after ethnic  television and the Senate Committee that we should examine this  again. But we made a decision that the ABC will not be given the  responsibility for ethnic television, that it will be a separate  body. Because the ABC has always had a chance to do this if it  had wanted to. Ethnic television would be no good if it was stuck  away in another department of the ABC, like the Rural Department  and that's not our concept of it. And I think much of the arguments  about ethnic television have been because people have misconceived 

 the motives, the objectives and the philosophy surrounding it.  And the opponents of ethnic television so often argued that you  must not have something separate that is going to be divisive  because the Greek programmes will be for Greeks and the Italian 

 for Italians, and the Dutch for Dutch. But that is not our concept  of ethnic television. Our concept of ethnic television is that  the best programmes and hopefully as many as possible will appeal  to all Australians wherever they came from. But in the process of 

 that we will help to get a better understanding of the history and  cultures of all the countries which now go to make up the Australia  of which we are all a part. So in that concept it's a unifying  factor, not something that cuts up into bits and pieces. And that's  why we believe it needs to be a body with that special charm. Whatever we finally decide about the body to manage ethnic television 

 the implementation committee will have a continuing and significant  role in relation to it. And it won't be done by the ABC. But we  want to see how it goes in Melbourne and Sydney and then we will  looking at decisions in relation to other capitals.

 .  .  .  8

 8

 Q u e s t i o n

 Prime Minister after the 18th over the three years do you intend  to continue your unified foreign policy or do you think that you'll  be going the way of the Labor Party triumvirate of Hayden, Hawke  and (inaud)?

 Prime Minister ,

 Well how do you mean a unified foreign policy?

 Question

 Well I'm specifically referring to their attitude on the Middle  East which you know is a very important issue - subject.

 Prime Minister .  ·

 Well I don't believe we would be substantially altering our policy  in relation to the Middle East. It's a very difficult part of the  world. There are very many issues involved in it. It's a very  sensitive part. There are many different factors - problems between  Palestine and Israel and also the problems of disruption coming out  of the war between Iran and Iraq. It is an unstable and sensitive  part of the world.  We will be maintaining a very active foreign  policy in close co-operation with our major allies. That doesn't  mean to say we support them at all figures - we don't. We support 

 them if we believe them to be right. But we will argue with them  quietly and politely and not in public if we believe them to be  wrong. We work actively through the Commonwealth.  But I don't  believe that there would be a major shift in relation to the areas 

 that you are talking about.

 Question (inaudible)

 Prime Minister

 The marginal adjusted family income test and also the allowances  are both being adjusted for the next academic year and not only  that but the secondary allowances to try and encourage more people  to stay on in secondary school are also being adjusted for next  year to bring more people within the ambit of both students. And 

 that's already been done.  It's part of the decisions we made in  the Budget - it has been legislated for.

 Question

 Prime Minister,  if I could ask you a few questions close to the  Greek community.  One is the question of Cyprus which has been  lingering unsolved for the last six years. I am wondering where  (inaud) the difference will end,  including Australia's abstension  at the last United Nation's resolution. Perhaps, will your  Government take an initiative similar to the one that you successfully  did in the cause of Zimbabwe through the Commonwealth Conference. And secondly,  the matter of the social security conspiracy.  Will 

 this go on forever, or will it be resolved very soon and outside  the court system, or will the 1,300 people who were initially  deprived of their pensions ever come before the courts?

 .  .  .9 .

 9

 Prime Minister

 The problems of Cyprus are enormously difficult. We have supported  United Nations' initiatives and we will continue to do so.  I  think it is difficult to see an initiative that could come through  the Commonwealth itself, but if that did emerge, well then Australia 

 would certainly work to get a resolution of the problem. I had  discussed the problems of Cyprus at the Commonwealth Heads of  Government Meeting in Gleneagles in London 2h, 3 years ago, with  Archbishop Makarios. That was at a time when we were hoping that 

 he would be able to visit Australia. But we know that his death  intervened, and that was not possible. We are prepared to search  for a solution within the framework of the Commonwealth, but it is  no use me suggesting that the problems or the solutions can be  easily found. I think it is a very difficult question to get to 

 something which is acceptable to all parties. I have been concerned  at the length of time that that social security case has gone on. You might have noted that in more recent times we have established  the right of appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal outside 

 the social security system. So that anyone who believes they have beei  aggrieved or wronged within the Department of Social Security or  within that appeals system, has a right of a totally independent  appeal. And I think that that is as. it should be. In relation to 

 the social security case, I would certainly be prepared, after  October 18, to discuss the matter with the Attorney-General to see  if there are any initiatives that the Commonwealth'ought to take. The whole matter has gone on an inordinately long time. It has been 

 hanging over people's heads for a very long while. But I don't  think that I can say more than that at the moment. After the election  I would be very happy to discuss the matter with the Attorney-General  to see .if there are avenues that the Government should pursue.

 — 000 —

