---
title: "Australia and the Third World"
date: "1980-05-01"
creators:
  - "Peacock, Andrew"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213736691
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10028791%22
---

 Date THE HON. ANDREW PEACOCK M.P.

 1 May 1980 EMBARGOED UNTIL 

 10 A.M. 2 MAY 1980

 AUSTRALIA AND THE THIRD WORLD

 The following is the text of an opening statement  by the Minister for Foreign Affairs,  Mr Andrew Peacock, to the  ANU Conference on Australia and the Third World,

 "Mr Chairman,  Distinguished Guests,  Ladies and Gentlemen,

 I regard the subject of this Conference as an  extremely important one and I am very grateful to the Australian  National University - and to you Mr Vice-Chancellor in  particular - for taking the initiative to bring it about.

 It is a form of enterprise we have come to expect  of this University, In a week's time a conference on the  Koran will begin here7 in July there will be an international  conference on the development of strategic thinking in the 

 1970s and 1980s; and in September the ANU's Chancellor, Sir John Crawford, will be directing a major conference on the  concept of a Pacific Community, These are conferences I know  about - there are probably others.

 It is time that the continuing contribution of the  ANU to the fostering of informed discussion on international  issues - to the creation of an attentive and knowledgeable  constituency on foreign policy questions - be properly 

 recognised and appreciated. It constitutes an important public  service,  particularly in a country in which the serious  consideration of international affairs and foreign policy is  not over-abundant and in which,  only too often, the discussion  which does take place seems designed to demonstrate the truth 

 of the proposition that,

 "The best lack all conviction, while the worst  are full of passionate intensity".

 This Conference is to examine Third World questions  both in the broad and as they relate to Australia, taking the  Report on Australia1s Relations with the Third World - the  Harries Report - as its starting point , When I first proposed 

 the enquiry that led to the Report some three years ago, the  so-called North-South dialogue was at its height. The  Conference on International Economic Cooperation (CIEC),  in  which the developed Western countries and the Third World 

 discussed their differences, was still proceeding in Paris. That Conference has generally been regarded as something of  a failure. I saw somewhere recently a description of the  North-South dialogue as resembling two stuck gramophone

 1.

 2.

 records playing in separate rooms = As one who participated in  an unbroken all-day-all-night negotiating session at the end of  the Conference I think I know what is meant by that description.  Yet despite its very limited success in achieving particular 

 agreements, I would agree with the conclusion of the Harries  Report that CIEC was important in that it took much of the  immediate heat out of the confrontation and contributed to  the less polemical atmosphere which has subsequently prevailed.

 In the intervening three years the North-South  dialogue has receded somewhat from the forefront of international  attention and there has been some inclination in developed  countries to relegate what happened in the mid-Seventies to an  episode, a passing phase which'was the product of a special, and  probably unrepeatable, set of circumstances. There is a tendency 

 to see the North-South complex of issues as a kind of side-show,  important only when, as in the hey-day of detente, the East-West  conflict is muted. In the last year, with the SALT II controversy  and then the worsening of super-power relations following the 

 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the centrality of the East-West  conflict has been fully restored and there is a tendency to  play down Third World questions.

 .  I am certain that this is a superficial and

 dangerously mistaken way of seeing things. The East-West  conflict and the North-South conflict are not separate and  distinct; they are intimately and inextricably related. If  the Afghanistan crisis - a crisis centred on a Third World 

 country but involving the strategic balance between the super­ powers - demonstrates anything, it demonstrates that. The same  is true of the issue posed by the holding of American hostages  in Iran. And the same is true of the situation in Indo China,  where one super-power is subsidj sing the invasion of one Third  World country by another to the extent of some $3 million a day.

 For anyone who has followed Third World affairs  closely, the critical situations which now confront the world  in Afghanistan and Iran appear not as strange and unexpected  aberrations but as developments which were inherent in the  intersecting patterns of Third World trends and great power  relations. During the: pext four or five years - when the  strategic balance is likely to tilt further in favour of the  Soviet Union before it starts moving back the other way as  the effect of new Western programs becomes evident - we are  likely to see more examples of the involvement of Third World  countries in the affairs of the super-powers. These episodes  are likely both to be very serious in themselves and to pose  extreme danger of a spill-back effect, which may engulf the ,   central European theatre. If Western countries base their  policies during this period on the erroneous premise that 

 detente is divisible and that Europe can be safely insulated  from the Third World, it will be an even more dangerous time  than-it need be.

 3 Î¿

 If seeing the East-West and the North-South conflict  as discrete and separate is one major intellectual error,  another is seeing the economic and political dimensions of  the West's relations with the Third World as unrelated. This  is an error to which economists are particularly prone; many  of them believe that the economic dimensions of the relationship  can be approached "on their merits'1 1  - which means in the limited 

 terms of economic rationality,  without taking account of political  factors. They sometimes justify such an approach by arguing'  that the Third World is only capable of rhetoric - that it  does not have real political power. If I may engage in delibe­

 rate understatement,  in the face of current evidence, particularly  that of the Iranian crisis,  I suggest that it is time that they  reviewed their basic working assumptions - and in so doing they  might well reconsider their dismissal of what is so easily  subsumed under the heading of "rhetoric". .

 .  As the countries of the Third World are pressing for another round of global negotiations on economic questions and  as there is talk of a summit conference on the findings of the  Brandt Commission, it is important that we appreciate that the 

 sources and forms of power are more various than the "realist"  always allows for. As 1 believe the Harries Report conclusively  demonstrates,  relations between the West and the Third World  must be considered in their totality, with a full awareness of  the interplay between the economic and the political, and  between Third World issues and global strategic ones.

 Events over the last two years - during the time the  Report was being written and since - have clearly demonstrated  the relevance of Third World issues to Australia. We have  taken over 30,000 refugees in that time in response to the  vast and tragic flow of people from Indo-China. Our oil  prices have increased significantly in response to the OPEC 

 increases of last year. As a member of the Commonwealth, .   about 90 per cent of whose membership is Third World,  we have  been required to play a part - a very successful part as it '   transpired - in resolving the problem of Zimbabwe. We have  played a positive role in advancing the Common Fund on 

 commodities,  a role which has reflected both our concern to  avoid a worsening conflict between developing and developed  countries and our interest as a major commodity exporter in  stabilising commodity prices. The crises in relation to  Iran and Afghanistan have made it necessary for us to take a  wide-ranging series of political and economic measures,   basically because they have important implications for our 

 strategic environment. In a more long-term framework, the  idea of a Pacific Community - a community which, if it comes  into being,  will include both developed and Third World  countries - has made notable progress during this period and  the Australian Government has indicated its interest in  exploring the concept by agreeing to sponsor the ANU1s  international non-governmental seminar on the subject.

 The Harries Report argues that Australia had good  cause to take the Third World seriously. It argues for  distinguishing between Third World demands which are reasonable  and practicable and those which are not - and for working to  accommodate the former. It argues that Australia’s policies 

 should reflect in proper balance both what we have in common  with other Western countries and what is unique in our situation.  It argues that in dealing with the Third World we should strive  to behave in a way consistent with the statements and values  we profess. It argues that»  in relation to our own region, we 

 should be less defensive,  more outwardlooking and active in  identifying and seizing opportunities,

 These seem to me to be wise and sensible prescriptions.  They do not offer practical solutions to all concrete problems.  But they do something which is more important i they reflect  the accumulated experience and practice of Australia's relations  with a wide range of countries over a long period, and distills 

 and projects them in a clearer and more coherent way than has  previously been done. They thus indeed reinforce a coherent  foreign policy strategy for Australia, If recent events point  to anything they point to the importance of such an underlying 

 strategy - an informing purpose - in the foreign policies of  countries,  and to the difficulties which accrue when it is  absent.

 4.

 The Report on Australia's Relations with the Third  World is, it is well, to remember,  a report to a government. It is not, and was not meant to be, an academic treatise, a  pro-Third World polemic or the equivalent of a UN study. Its  primary concern had to be with Australian interests,  broadly 

 interpreted, and its perspectives had to be Australian  perspectives, In these terms I believe it is a most valuable  report and one which will leave its imprint on Australian . policy during the rest of the century.,

 I

 But,  in the event, the way in which it has been  received by other governments and international organisations  suggests that to some extent it has succeeded in transcending  its original purpose and has succeeded in meeting a felt need  in the international community. It is not often that an  Australian report has been in demand at the OECD and in the 

 foreign offices of other governments - in demand not because  of its Australian content but because of its contribution to  analysing a major international phenomenon. It is not often  that someone of the stature of Willi Brandt has gone to the  trouble of writing to say how useful the Report has been to  his work as Chairman of a distinguished international 

 Commission.

 Mr Chairman, you have assembled an unusually interesting  mixture of speakers for this Conference, including leading  Australian academics,  members of the Committee which produced  the Report and three very distinguished overseas visitors. I  would like to extend a particular welcome to the latter,  who 

 are drawn from three different Third World regions. I am sure  that they will make an important contribution to your deliber­ ations; I hope that they will also find the exchange of views  valuable from their point of view. I wish the Conference every 

 success over the next two days."

