---
title: "Skilled migration on the increase"
date: "1980-11-16"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213737545
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09000858%22
---

 Î¿

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.

 THE. HON. IAN MACPHEE

 / 80/(50

 EMBARGO: 4PM SUNDAY 16 NOVEMBER 1980

 SKILLED MIGRATION ON THE INCREASE

 16 November,1980

 There has been a sharp increase in the numbers of skilled  tradesmen migrating to Australia, the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Ian Macphee said today.

 "In the September quarter this year the number of skilled  metal and electrical' tradesmen arriving in Australia increased by  46.5% on the number arriving in the same period last year," Mr  Macphee said.

 " The total number of skilled tradesmen who arrived in the  September quarter rose by 407» on the number last year."

 Mr Macphee said that these increases were the beginning of a  substantial increase in migration of skilled tradesmen reflecting  the improvement in the Australian economy and Australia's  attraction to people in many parts of the world.

 "There has been an increase in interest in migrating to  Australia in most countries in the past six months."

 "A large proportion of this increase is from workers  with skills in demand in Australia."

 Mr Macphee said that the numbers of nominations by  employers to bring skilled workers to Australia had also increased  in the September quarter. The increase was a massive 647> over  the number lodged in the same quarter last year. The employer  nomination scheme operates to fill positions in the workforce '   which cannot be filled from the local labour market.

 The Minister said that the increases demonstrated that  Australia remained an attractive country for new settlers and  that there were significant numbers of skilled tradesmen and  others in occupations in demand in Australia ready and willing 

 to migrate. ’

 "The Commonwealth Government is continuing to give first  priority to finding jobs for people already in Australia," Mr Macphee said.

 "Training and retraining programs are being conducted on  a large scale but they do not provide a short term solution to  labour demand in all instances." .

 "Immigration complements other manpower programs,  opening  up new employment opportunities especially for semi-skilled  and unskilled workers."

 - 2 -

 Mr Macphee said that the current migrant arrival statistics  suggested that there would be a total intake of migrants of over  100,000 in the current financial year.

 "This will be the first time for seven years that, the  migrant intake figure will top the 100,000 mark," Mr Macphee  said.

 "What is particularly pleasing is that the increase  in the migration intake,  including the intake of refugees and  the substantial family reunion component,  is occurring at a  time when overall unemployment levels for both Australian born  and overseas born are decreasing."

 Media contacts:  Anna Marsden-Stewart,  Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Canberra,  062 64 2726 or  Rob Palfreyman, Minister's Office, Canberra, 062 73 3446.

