---
title: "Review of Refugee Programs"
date: "1981-12-03"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213771491
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08009997%22
---

 From the .Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.  The Hon. Ian Macphee, MP

 EMBARGO: 7.30pm, Thursday 3 December 1981

 REVIEW OF REFUGEE PROGRAMS

 The Government is reviewing Australia's refugee programs.

 This was announced by the Minister for Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs, Mr Macphee in an address in Melbourne  this evening to the Refugee Consultation held by the  Australian Council of Population and Ethnic Affairs . â–   (ACPEA) .  .  .

 Mr Macphee said the review was closely examining the -nature of current outflows and would be formulating . appropriate responses. The Government was developing -

 new arrangements to exclude any non-refugees from refugee  programs and to discourage expectations that people who  left their country for whatever reason had an automatic  right of resettlement in third countries like Australia.

 "There will always be some people in any mass human  displacement who take advantage of the situation by  inserting themselves in the refugee movement", Mr Macphee  said. .

 "There is increasingly a questioning of whether those  leaving now are fleeing actual persecution or, in fact,  are leaving primarily to seek a better life."

 "Australia accepts the definition of a refugee contained  in the 1951 Geneva Convention and 1967 Protocol on refugees  but it is clear that the nature of the outlow from such  troubled regions as Indo-China is changing. The proportion  now leaving to seek a better life is increasing relative to 

 the numbers fleeing genuine persecution."

 Mr Macphee said that present international resettlement commit­ ments for Indo-Chinese were sufficient to account for those  now in countries of first asylum. The fact that the Government  was undertaking this Review should not be interpreted as any 

 hardening of the Government's approach to refugee resettlement.

 V 2 -

 · '  'â–  ' Î›  â–   : 

 The Indo-Chinese community in Australia had no cause for concern about their future here or that of fellow  countrymen,  who in the future, might have legitimate claims  on resettlement in Australia. The aim was simply to ensure  that Australia's compassionate response to refugee 

 situations would not be devalued.

 "Many compassionate situations arise out of discrimination  not persecution and the most serious of those will be accepted  into Australia under the Special Humanitarian Program which  I announced in Parliament on 18 November 1981" Mr Macphee -

 said.

 "The Government's continuing commitment to refugee and special  humanitarian situations is demonstrated by its decision to  maintain its world wide resettlement program at about the same  level as last year with an overall intake of some 22,500 

 persons", Mr Macphee said.

 "The Government will no longer announce individual targets  for particular refugee outflows. This will enable us to have  maximum flexibility in responding to different or changing  situations," he said.

 Mr Macphee paid tribute to the Indo-Chinese and Eastern European  refugees already resettled by Australia. He said:  they had settled  easily and contributed' greatly to Australia's economic and  cultural development.

 He also reported the outcome of an evaluation of the Community  Refugee Settlement Scheme carried out by independent consultants and  said that it had clearly supported the Scheme's continuing operation  which to date had. produced more than 4,500 offers from members  of the Australian community. He said that the scheme had been 

 successful because of the initiative of both the refugees and their  Australian sponsors and the result had been a unifying and enriching  social experience for all involved. .

 The consultation was attended by 200 people interested in  refugee resettlement at Trinity:  College in the University of  Melbourne'...  The consultation finishes tomorrow.

 * * * * * *

 3 December 1981

 Media Contacts:  Alberto Corboz, Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, (062) 64 2726, Anne Simson,  Minister's Office, (062) 73 3446

