---
title: "Award of Nansen medal"
date: "1981-09-18"
creators:
  - "Street, Anthony"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213770321
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08009725b%22
---

 Date 18/09/81 . THE HON. TONY STREET, M.P. No. 100

 AWARD OF NANSEN MEDAL

 The Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Hon. Tony Street MP,  '  and the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,

 .  the Hon.. Ian Macphee MP, today welcomed the news that an .

 Australian, Major-General Paul Cullen, has been honoured by . .

 the award of the Nansen Medal. The Nansen Medal is an .  .

 > ·  international award given in recognition of "outstanding .

 . . . .  services to the cause of refugees". .

 .  Major-General Cullen has been involved in.work for refugees 

 since 1936. In 1967 he became the first Chairman of the , .  voluntary aid. organisation AUSTCARE (Australians Care for 

 Refugees), and is now its President. Major-General Cullen 

 , ,  will be presented with the Nansen Medal at a ceremony next month in Geneva, during the annual meeting of the Executive  .  Committee of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees.

 .  The medal is named after the famous Norwegian explorer .  .

 .  Fridtjof Nansen, a pioneer of international humanitarian aid, .

 e who became the first League of Nations High Commissioner for .

 Refugees in 1921. The award, which was instituted by the 

 .  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is decided by .

 .  the Nansen Medal Committee.  Previous recipients include Queen

 Juliana, Mrs Eleanor Roosevelt and President Giscard d'Estaing.  The only other Australian to have received the award was Sir  Tasman Heyes,  a former Secretary of the Department of Immigration  in 1962. .  '  .

 ^ In offering their congratulations to Major-General Cullen,

 the Ministers said that the award was a fitting tribute to a

 ,  man who had worked with dedication in the service of refugees and displaced persons.  .  .

 2

 The Ministers said that AUSTCARE had developed into a â– 

 we11-respected and widely-supported non-Government agency ·  

 for the help of refugees and displaced people in many . · .  

 countries. Through its award of the Nanseh Medal, the. 

 Committee had not only recognised Major-General Cullen's .  

 personal achievements, but had also done a great honour  to the Australian community, which over many years has given 

 unfailing support at every level to the efforts of government 

 and voluntary agencies engaged in refugee relief.

