---
title: "Three Vietnamese allowed to land"
date: "1981-01-02"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213738100
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08009898%22
---

 THE HON IAN MACPHEE,  M.P.

 THREE VIETNAMESE ALLOWED TO LAND

 /781

 "The three Vietnamese who came to Australia on the Italian-  owned bulk carrier Simonetta after stowing away in Ho Chi Minh  City will be allowed to land", the Minister for Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs,  Mr Ian Macphee, announced today.

 "The three a re:  Vo Thi L e ,  25, female'- ;  Pham Quang Tuan, 24,  m ale;  and Nguyen Van Cuong, 16, male.

 "They arrived in Geelong on 27 December and are seeking refugee  status. They were interviewed by a representative of the  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on 30 December who  is now in contact with the Italian and other governments about 

 their eventual permanent resettlement. This will take account  of the location of relatives in different parts of the world.

 "The decision to land the three Vietnamese today was taken for  humanitarian reasons as it is now clear that arrangements for  their resettlement will not be completed for some time.

 "Accordingly they have been issued with temporary entry  permits which will allow them to stay in Australia pending  decisions about their future. Only one of the three has  a relative in Australia but another has relatives in the USA.

 "They will be accommodated in a Migrant Centre under  arrangements agreed with the Office of the United Nations  High Commissioner for Refugees."

 Mr Macphee said that many offers to assist in the resettlement in  Australia for the three Vietnamese had been received by his  Department.

 "I do appreciate the generous spirit which has motivated these  offers but I believe that refugees still in camps in South  East Asia and those who have recently arrived in Migrant Centres  in Australia under regular arrangements are more in need of 

 special assistance from the community. People wishing to help  might consider offering their assistance to those refugees  rather than this particular group," Mr Macphee said.

 Canberra  2 January 1981

