---
title: "Health care card arrangements"
date: "1981-07-30"
creators:
  - "Chaney, Fred"
source: "Minister for Social Security"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213769566
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08011838%22
---

 The Minis teir for Social Security, Senator Fred Chaney, said today that  offices of the Department of Social Security throughout Australia are to  begin accepting applications from Monday (3 August) for Health Care Cards. The cards will entitle people below specific income limits and migrants 

 and refugees in their first 6 months in Australia to free medical care  where doctors bulk bill, to free accommodation and treatment in shared  wards of public hospitals and to free outpatient services. About one million  people will ultimately be covered by the new Health Care card system. This 

 is in addition to the existing Pensioner Health Benefits System, which will  continue. People currently receiving unemployment and special benefits will not have  to apply. They will automatically be sent Health Care cards by the Department  Others entitled because of their incomes will need to apply as will migrants 

 and refugees who are already in Australia.

 Senator Chaney said .that the Department of Social Security would begin â–  processing applications for the Health Care cards from· ne'xt Monday so that  people who needed them could receive them by 1 September, when the new  health scheme begins.

 Senator Chaney said his Department had been geared up to administer the  Health Care card system and extra staff were being recruited. Application  forms would be available from Monday at all the 165 Department of Social .   Security offices and from post offices and health funds.

 Senator Chaney said detailed information was now available on the  eligibility limits for Health Care cards in a Commonwealth Health Department  pamphlet which was available at Social Security offices. They would soon '   be available at post offices, health funds and doctors surgeries. On Monday 

 special "Hotline" telephone services were due to begin operating to answer  enquiries from the public about the Health card arrangements.

 The telephone numbers for the "Hotlines" will be announced tomorrow in a  joint statement by myself and my colleague the Minister for Health, the  Hon. M J R MacKellar. Radio advertising of the "Hotline" numbers will  begin next week.

 Senator Chaney said he had been informed that an Administrative and  Clerical Officers Association Section Committee was advertising amongst  the staff of Social Security offices in Victoria a stop-work meeting for  Friday morning to consider banning or obstructing the card arrangements.

 "I am working on the assumption that the staff of the Department of  Social Security care about the needy people who will benefit from the  Health card system and that the staff in Victoria will assert themselves,  over the militants and reject this attempt at social sabotage," Senator  Chaney said. m

 .·.2/ .

 2

 There had been discussions with the ACOA about the numbers of extra staff  needed in the Department to administer the Health card system and the  Department had been given permission to take on up to 660 extra staff  on a short-term basis. A review would be undertaken in the light of 

 experience in actually administering the system to determine the number of  permanent staff needed. The agreement on the extra 660 staff and  subsequent review had apparently been accepted as reasonable by staff  associations generally but the section committee of the ACOA in Victoria 

 now seemed intent on using the advent of the Health card system for its  own purposes.

 Senator Chaney said the public could be assured that, one way or another,  needy people in Victoria would get their health care entitlements.

 30 JULY 1981

