---
title: "Message by The Prime Minister to the rally of the Federation of Polish Organisation in Victoria"
date: "1981-12-18"
creators:
  - "Fraser, Malcolm"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213771764
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR01000760%22
---

 V5o

 P R IM E  M IN IS T E R

 FOR MEDIA SATURDAY, 19 DECEMBER 3,9 81

 MESSAGE BY THE PRIME MINISTER TO THE RALLY OF  THE FEDERATION OF POLISH ORGANISATIONS IN VICTORIA

 You are meeting here today to express your justifiable  indignation over the recent developments in Poland.  May I  express at the outset my deep sympathy and understanding for  all of you who have relatives or friends in Poland.  All  Australians must share your grief at the suffering which the 

 Polish nation is enduring now.  Australia has been fortunate  to have had the contribution made to our society by Polish  immigrants - you have made us a richer culture and a more  diverse nation. Your distress and anxiety about what is happening 

 can only be sharpened by the lack of communication between  Poland and the outside world and the absence of any complete  picture of events.

 The Australian Government condemns not only the original  imposition of martial law in Poland, but also the violence with  which it is increasingly being imposed. President Mitterand  expressed the reactions of all free nations when he said; 

 "Whether it be the result of the external pressure or internal  oppression, the loss of public, collective and individual  liberties is always to be condemned and must for that reason  be clearly, vigorously and constantly denounced." I join in 

 that" denunciation.

 We condemn the curtailment of new-found freedoms enjoyed for  such a short time. We are shocked to learn that this crack-down  on freedoms is being accompanied by use of such force as is  now leading to deaths, injury on a wide scale and failings and 

 internments of tens of thousands of pepole.

 We hear reports of brutal confrontation against innocent  and unarmed people.  We hear of factory workers being beaten  and shot. We are not sure of the whereabouts of Lech Walesa  and the Polish authorities keep silence on this question of  vital importance to Poland's well-being. ‘

 The present violation of human rights in Poland is taking place  on a major scale. It is not surprising that people in freedom-  loving countries, including Australia, are raising their voices  in protest.

 .  .  ./2

 2

 We believe that this sort of violence can only breed an  intensification of confrontation and further violence.

 The events of the past week have proved that Archbishop Glempr  the primate of Poland, spoke truly when he said that the  authorities in Poland are not authorities of dialogue.

 There must be no outside interference or coercion whatsoever.

 This means not only the threat of direct intervention, but also the application of other kinds of pressure. The Government would condemn the creation of any impression of outside interference.

 Only if they are left alone will the Poles enjoy a free and  peaceful society. But the Polish authorities must not now take  a direction which puts that objective beyond reach.

 The Government is watching developments carefully and is paying  close attention to what it can do to help the Polish people. We are acutely conscious of Poland's economic difficulties and  the hardships and shortages being faced by the Polish people.

 Similarly, how we can help refugees from Poland is a matter of  the utmost concern. We are discussing what may be possible with  other Western Governments, especially Canada and the United  States.

 May I repeat the Government's deepest concern about the situation  in Poland, and condemnation of the activities of the  authorities. ·

 Responsible governments everywhere are looking to the Polish  authorities to exercise restraint and responsibility so that  the future of a free and stable Poland is assured.

 I understand your concerns and I share them.  I will be  watching the situation closely. We should all pray for peace  in Poland and for the well-being of yPh£ relatives and friends.

 — 0 O 0 — ~

