---
title: "Interim Report on Latest boat arrival in Darwin"
date: "1981-10-07"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213770570
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08009976%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.  Hon Ian Macphee, MP

 l/toji f /

 INTERIM REPORT ON LATEST BOAT ARRIVAL IN DARWIN

 "Because of the high level of media interest following the  arrival in Darwin on Monday 5 October of Vessel VT 838 and my  brief announcement yesterday that investigations are being made  into the backgrounds of the persons on the vessel, I advise that 

 two persons from the vessel have been taken into custody", the  Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Ian Macphee,  said today.

 Mr Macphee added: "Investigations are continuing and I expect that they will have made sufficient progress for me to hold a  media conference before the end of the week.

 In fairness to all of the persons on board and in the public  interest generally I will not make any further comment prior  to my proposed media conference.

 I wish to stress however that the investigations are quite  separate from my review of refugee policy. Some speculation has  suggested that the arrival of this vessel is in some way linked  with that policy. I wish to make it clear that the refugee 

 policy review was initiated by me in June when I visited refugee  camps, long before anyone contemplated that this vessel would  arrive in Australia.

 I might add however that I have previously foreshadowed that I  would be prepared to take action against the unauthorised arrival  of vessels at Australian ports.but would not victimise innocent  passengers including, of course, children. In accordance with 

 that policy Parliament last year passed the Immigration  (Unauthorised Arrivals) Bill 1980. I indicated then that it would  only be proclaimed if it was thought there would be a strong  reason in the public interest to do so.

 .. . / 2 .

 2 .

 ί/ 

 η

 In view of information .obtained about vessel VT 838 prior to  its entering Australia territorial water that Bill was proclaimed  as an Act on 30 September 1981. Whether action is taken under  that Act will depend on the outcome of the investigations to  which I have referred."

 * * * * * * * * *

 Melbourne  7 October 1981

