---
title: "Healthy response to community refugee settlement scheme"
date: "1981-06-07"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213768886
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08009943%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs. The Hon I M Macphee, MP

 ’/ 8 ^ k p Î¯ ( Î¦

 HEALTHY RESPONSE TO COMMUNITY:  REFUGEE SETTLEMENT SCHEME

 "Response to the Community Refugee Settlement Scheme has risen  to a remarkable level, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs," Mr Macphee said today, on his departure overseas to  visit various refugee camps in Malaysia and Thailand.

 It now seemed likely that the notional total of 2,000 places  for refugees allocated to the Scheme in 1980/81 would be  filled by early June, largely because of a substantial increase  in interest in April-Mav, Mr Macphee said.

 "For this reason the Government has decided to increase this  allocation to a level which will enable the expanded number  of offers to be taken up in this program year", Mr Macphee  said. .

 "The intake of Indo Chinese refugees in 1980/81 will be  raised by 1,000 to 15,000 to provide for increases in both  Government and CRSS segments of the program."

 "I hope that this will provide, community groups with an  incentive to continue to expand their intake."

 "Under the arrangements for the Scheme, refugees are selected  overseas in camps for placement with sponsoring groups and  individuals whose offers to resettle refugees are approved  by Migrant Settlement Councils in the State or Territory 

 concerned."

 "The offers involve provision of assistance with employment  and accommodation as well as with other forms of community  support."

 . . ./2.

 2.

 A-'V

 Mr Macphee said that the interest in the CRSS reflected the  humanity, gopdwill and generosity of support groups in  localities as widespread as Geraldton, Townsville, Alice  Springs, Devonport, Adelaide, Wangaratta, Sydney and Canberra.

 "This response is most encouraging. But that is not to say  that there is not room for further expansion", Mr Macphee said.

 "It is particularly interesting to note the recent high  interest from groups in metropolitan Sydney and Melbourne;  compared, for example, with places offered to refugees in  New South Wales country centres."

 "There has been growing response from regional centres in_  .  Tasmania and Queensland relative to thatv. in Hobart and Brisbane

 "Overall, on a population basis the greatest response has  been from South Australia."

 "Apart from the enormous value of this support to refugees  I hear frequently from participating groups of the satisfaction  they have derived from involvement with the refugees."

 "The refugee problem continues to pose challenges to  countries and people of goodwill and compassion. Australians  have a proud record, and are well-placed to continue to  provide sanctuary and new lives of hope and security to 

 refugees", Mr Macphee said.

 * * *

 Canberra  7 June 1981

 Media Contacts: Anna Marsden-Stuart (Department) 6.4-1111 Anne Simson (Minister's Office) 73-3211

