---
title: "Minister announces ACPEA members"
date: "1981-05-13"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213768490
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08009932%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  land Ethnic Affairs.  the Hon.  Ian Macphee

 MINISTER ANNOUNCES ACPEA MEMBERS

 js.S-S/ 3·Î¿'

 Members of the newly-formed Australian Council on Population and Ethnic  Affairs were announced today by the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Ian Macphee.

 Members of the new Council have been drawn from a diverse range  of community interests, including ethnic groups,  service organisations,  trade unions, industry and commerce.

 Several members are academics.in disciplines closely related  to the social and economic aspects of population growth and  the settlement of migrants and refugees.

 "I am pleased to have available to me the advice of a group  of distinguished members of the community with such a wide range  of experience and expertise" Mr Macphee said. Mr Macphee will  chair all meetings of the Council, the first of which will be held  on May 29. .

 The establishment of the new Council represents a significant  change in the approach to consultation with the community on . immigration and.ethnic affairs. The new Council will carry out  work previously done by three separate bodies - the Australian 

 Population and Immigration Council, the Australian Refugee  Advisory Council and the Australian Ethnic Affairs Council.

 "I intend to continue to consult closely with the public and  with community organisations on a first-hand basis," Mr Macphee  said. .  .

 "This approach.has been most valuable in the current review of  NUMAS, Australia's migrant selection system, and Australia's  immigration policies. That review is now well advanced, and the  first task of the new Council will be to examine and.  advise 

 on matters arising from that review."

 "The immigration policies and procedures flowing from this . review will play "a vital part in determining the size and  composition of Australia's population for many years," Mr  Macphee said. He added that settlement policies (such as migrant 

 and refugee education, interpreting services etc) would also  be considered by the Council following completion of the  NUMAS Review.

 .  .  .  /2

 -2-

 _,Mr Macphee said that he would expect the work of the Council  to draw upon not only the work and experience of its members and  the Department but also upon that of other bodies which are  active in the settlement of migrants and refugees and also  upon the research of the Australian Institute of Multicultural  Affairs. '

 Mr Macphee also said that another important and urgent task of  the Council would be to advise him on a fundamental review of  Australia's citizenship laws.

 * * *

 Canberra  13 May 1981

 Media Contacts: Anna Marsden-Stuart (Department) Anne Simson (Minister's Office) 64-1111 73-3211

 * List of the Council members and terms of reference attached

 AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL ON POPULATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 Terms of Reference

 Advise the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs on  policy matters within his responsibility, and in particular  on:  ,

 (a) Australian and world population and immigration .   trends and their policy and other implications.

 (b) The size and composition of the migrant intake.

 (c) Migration and entry policies and procedures;  including entry criteria to meet special circumstances

 (d) Migration law and its application; including the  residence control system.

 (e) The provision of information and counselling for .  migrants before and after arrival in Australia.

 (f) Policies and programs relating to the entry and  settlement of refugees.

 (g) Citizenship laws,  policies and practices.

 (h) Procedures for review of administrative decisions within the portfolio.  .

 (i) Post-arrival policies and programs for migrants. .

 2

 Mr B Loton Chief General Manager,

 Broken.Hill Pty Ltd., Director  Australian Iron and Steel,  Victoria ,

 Sir Bruce MacKinley.OBE Company Director, . 

 Formerly President, Confederation of WA Industry,  Western Australia .

 Mr I H Naqvi ' Senior Scientific Advisor, 

 Tasmanian Hydro-Electric Commission,  Member of NAATI,  Treasurer, Indian Cultural Society  of Australia (Tasmania),

 Tasmania

 Professor G M Neutze Director, 

 Research School of Social Sciences,  Australian National University, . Australian Capital Territory

 Mr G Polites CMG MBE Director-General,  National Employers Industrial Council,  Confederation of Australian Industry,  Victoria

 Mr A Vella Assistant Secretary,

 Victorian Trades Hall Council,  Victoria

 Ms C Zampatti .  ' Director, 

 -  Carla Zampatti .Pty Ltd. , ' New South Wales -  .  -

 Professor J Zubrzycki CBE Professor of Sociology, ‘ 

 Australian National University,  Australian Capital Territory

 Ms Susan Ivany . Executive Director, 

 Australasian Union of Jewish Students

 AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL ON POPULATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 Terms of Reference

 Advise the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs on  policy matters within his responsibility, and in particular  on:

 (a) Australian and world population and immigration  trends and their policy and other implications.

 (b) The size and composition of the migrant intake.

 (c) Migration and entry policies and procedures;  including entry criteria to meet special circumstances.

 (d) Migration law and its application;  including the  residence control system.

 (e) The provision of information and counselling for  migrants before and after arrival in Australia.

 (f) Policies and programs relating to the entry and  settlement of refugees.

 (g) Citizenship laws, policies and practices.

 (h) Procedures for review of administrative decisions  within the portfolio.

 (i) Post-arrival policies and programs for migrants.

