---
title: "Refugees Picked up by HMAS Torrens"
date: "1981-06-22"
creators:
  - "Killen, James"
source: "Minister for Defence"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213769069
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08009201%22
---

 D E F E N C E  press release .  :  .  "Wiwr·'· â–   'â–  â– · â–   â–   â– DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE CANBERRA MONDAY. JUNE 22, 1981 NO.. C ./81/\ q C|

 REFUGEES PICKED UP BY HMAS MELBOURNE

 The aircraft carrier HMAS Melbourne is heading for 

 Singapore with 99 Indo-Chinese refugees on board, rescued in 

 the South China Sea about 200 nautical miles due east of Ho 

 Chi Minh City late yesterday. ;

 The refugees, 33 men, 37 women and 29 young jchildren, 

 were all suffering from malnutrition and sea sickness when they 

 were rescued by HMAS Melbourne, which was on passage from Hong 

 Kong to Singapore.

 The rescue, carried out in pitch darkness, followed 

 an earlier sighting by a patrolling aircraft piloted by 

 Sub-Lieutenant Dave Marshall.

 It was the second sighting of a refugee boat 

 within several hours.

 Earlier a Grumman Tracker aircraft from HMAS 

 Melbourne sighted a small boat with about 30 refugees on 

 board. Contact was immediately made with the Liberian 

 freighter MV Karaka which headed into the area and picked 

 up the refugees before continuing on to Hong Kong.

 Following the sighting of the second boat the destroyer 

 escort HMAS Torrens,  commanded by Commander Mike Rayment, was 

 sent to investigate and reported the boat had about 90 

 refugees on board.

 o 0 . / 2

 . >

 HMAS Melbourne, commanded by Commodore Mike Hudson, 

 followed and made a rendezvous with HMAS Torrens, ·

 Boats from HMAS Melbourne arid HMAS Torrens then .  

 began the transfer of the refugees to HMAS Melbourne under the 

 supervision of Lieutenant Commander Lyn Smith.

 The refugees, in a weak and emaciated condition, 

 said they had left Vung Tau on June 16 .

 They were given medical examinations and treatment 

 on board HMAS Melbourne. Family units were reunited and they 

 were given food and warm clothing.

 The 15 metre vessel on which they had been travelling 

 was examined by a boarding party from HMAS Torrens and found to 

 have little food on board. The engine was unserviceable and 

 the craft unseaworthy.

 As the vessel was posing a hazard to navigation it 

 was destroyed by a demolition team from HMAS Torrens.

 HMAS Melbourne and HMAS Torrens are due in Singapore 

 next Friday (June 26),

 - 2 ,  -

 * *  * *  * *  * #  * *  ** ** ·  ** ** ** * *  **

