---
title: "Medibank etc."
date: "1981-04-30"
creators:
  - "Young, Mick"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213768237
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08011652%22
---

 PRESS RELEASE FROM MR MICK YOUNG, M P , SHADOW MINISTER FOR 

 IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 When Medibank was introduced the Labor Government was accused of 

 bringing about a change in the insurance system without a parallel 

 restructuring of the health care system.

 Mr MacKellar's statement last night concentrated on one system alone:  

 the direct transfer of money from our pockets to the private 

 insurance companies.

 i -

 Following last night's announcement it becomes clear that the 

 people are asked to subsidise Government deficits and the 

 real-estate investment of the private insurance companies.

 One group that partially escapes the "Health Saga Part 5" is 

 migrants and refugees in their first six months in Australia.

 For reasons unknown immigrants are called "disadvantaged" 

 people by the Minister. I never knew that someone who is an 

 immigrant by definition he is "disadvantaged". Although these 

 people do have specific difficulties those difficulties associated 

 with settlement e.g. language problems, housing, employment, etc. 

 will not subside nor will it be resolved in six months.

 Mr MacKellar said that all migrants will have a disadvantaged status 

 for six months. Does that mean that the "entrepreneurs" who are 

 admitted to Australia after the payment of a minimum of $200,000 

 are eligible. Does that mean that a sick, homeless, jobless refugee 

 after 6 months will be left on the streets?

 Canberra 

 30 .April 1981

