---
title: "ASEAN-Australia forum: joint press release"
date: "1981-04-15"
creators:
  - "Street, Anthony"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213767562
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08009657%22
---

 No. D ate T H E  H O N . T O N Y  S T R E E T , M.P.

 M40 15 April 1981 MS

 ASEAN-AUSTRALIA FORUM :  

 JOINT PRESS RELEASE

 Following is the text of the joint 

 press release issued at the conclusion of the 

 Sixth ASEAN-Australia Forum in Canberra on 14

 and 15 April:

 JOINT PRESS RELEASE 

 b

 Î›

 The Sixth Meeting of the ASEAN-Australia Forum*was  held in Canberra on 14 and 15 April 1981 to review developments  in ASEAN-Australia relations and to explore areas where ASEAN-  Australia relations could be further intensified.

 2. The ASEAN Delegations were led by Mr Atmono Suryo,   Director-General,  ASEAN-Indonesia; Mr Mohd. Yusof Hitam,  Director-General,  ASEAN-Malaysia; Mr Sime Hidalgo,  Director-  General, ASEAN-Philippines; Mr Low Choon Ming, Singapore High  Commissioner to Australia; and Mr Vudhi Chuchom, Director- 

 General, ASEAN-Thailand. The Australian Delegation was led  by Mr A.R. Parsons, Deputy Secretary, Department of Foreign  Affairs. Mr Narciso G« Reyes, Secretary-General of the ASEAN  Secretariat, also attended the meeting.

 3. ,  Mr Mohd. Yusof Hitam, Leader of the Malaysian  Delegation, was the Spokesman of the ASEAN Delegations.

 4. The Hon. Tony Street, M.P, Minister for Foreign Affairs,  officially opened the meeting and welcomed the ASEAN Delegations  on behalf of the Australian Government.

 5. In his opening address, the Foreign Minister reviewed  ASEAN-Australia relations, in particular progress under the  ASEAN-Australia Economic Co-operation Program (AAECP). He  drew attention to the need for continuing efforts to broaden the 

 relationship. He noted that the impact on the region of events  in Indo-China and elsewhere formed an important backdrop to the  meeting. He noted that ASEAN and Australia shared a common  concern about the threat to regional stability posed by the  continued Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea. He also drew 

 attention to the problems created by Indo-Chinese refugees,  out­ lining Australia's efforts as a major resettlement country and  expressing appreciation of the humanitarian approach of the ASEAN  countries which had provided first refuge to the refugees.

 6. The Forum considered and adopted the Second Report of  the ASEAN-Australia Consultative Meeting (AACM),  which had met on  three occasions since the Fifth Forum Meeting in April 1980. It  welcomed the agreement in principle to establish under the AACM

 a third Special Working Group - on Energy Cooperation. It agreed  that the AACM had played a constructive role in providing continuity  between Forum meetings and accordingly commended the AACM for its  valuable contribution in facilitating the conduct of ASEAN-Australia 

 relations.

 7. The Forum welcomed the progress that had been achieved  in the Projects under the ASEAN-Australia Economic Co-operation  Program (AAECP). Several of these projects related to the  important food and agricultural sector, namely the ASEAN Food  Handling Project, the ASEAN Protein Project and the ASEAN Food  Waste Materials Project, and were developing in a complementary  way. The Forum agreed in principle to a three-year extension to

 the Protein Project. It noted that this Project had made a  valuable and practical contribution to the development of low-  cost ,  protein-rich foods. It also welcomed the proposal for  a Food Technology and Research Project to which ASEAN attached 

 a high priority. This project aimed at improving the quality  of life in ASEAN countries through improved processing,  packaging and distribution.

 8. The Forum welcomed the significant progress made in  the ASEAN-Australia Joint Research Project,  the objective of  which is to establish a sound basis for the development of a  long-term economic relationship between ASEAN and Australia.

 9. The Forum expressed satisfaction at the progress made  in the ASEAN Education Project,  the ASEAN Consumer Protection  Project and the ASEAN Population Project.

 10. The Forum agreed on the value and importance of energy  cooperation between Australia and ASEAN. It was agreed that  detailed technical examination of project proposals would be  carried out as soon as possible.

 11. The Forum looked forward to the development of project  proposals for the conduct of pre-feasibility and feasibility  studies in connection with possible ASEAN regional projects in  industry, minerals and energy. The Australian delegation re­ 

 affirmed the undertaking given by the Australian Prime Minister  in Kuala Lumpur in 1977 that,  within the skills and resources  available,  Australia was willing to contribute to aspects of  ASEAN regional industrial projects. .  ..

 12. The Forum agreed that Australia would organise a  meeting between delegation heads of the ASEAN Committee on  Industry, Minerals and Energy and leading Australian industrialists  in Australia in 1982 to examine possibilities for joint venture  projects on a regional basis.

 13. The Forum noted the continued increase in two-way  trade between ASEAN and Australia in 1980. The reduction in  ASEAN's trade imbalance with Australia was also noted.

 14. ASEAN felt that in certain areas further action could  be taken to improve their access to the Australian market.  In  this regard constructive discussions were held on the Australian  System of Tariff Preferences,  trade promotion and other measures 

 of assistance to ASEAN.

 15. The Forum acknowledged that in introducing developing  country preferences on most items of textiles, clothing and  footwear the Australian Government had responded to ASEAN's  requests for liberalisation of trade in these items. However,

 S-

 - 3 -

 it was too early to assess the impact of the decision on ASEAN's  exports to Australia.

 16. The Forum recognised the contribution made by the Trade and Investment Promotion Program under the AAECP and  agreed on the desirability of holding a Third ASEAN Trade Fair  in Australia. '

 17. The Forum welcomed the establishment of the ASEAN-  Australia Business Council and agreed that co-operation between  the ASEAN and Australian private sectors is an important  complement to co-operation at the Government level.

 18. The Forum noted the importance of the development of  non-governmental links between Australia and ASEAN countries. It noted the Australian Foreign Minister's reference to such 

 links in his opening address and welcomed the prospect of them  being strengthened. In this context the Forum welcomed the  continuing links between the Australian Parliament and the ASEAN  Inter-Parliamentary Organisation.

 19. The ASEAN Delegations expressed sincere and warm  appreciation to the Government and people of Australia for the  hospitality accorded them and the excellent arrangements made  for the meeting. :

 20. The meeting was held in a spirit of friendship and  cordiality.

