---
title: "Third Mercy Mission in a week for HMAS Melbourne"
date: "1981-06-24"
creators:
  - "Killen, James"
source: "Minister for Defence"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213769094
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08009204%22
---

 DEFENCE press release DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE CANBERRA

 WEDNESDAY, 24 JUNE, 1981 NO: .-/8]/f^g

 THIRD MERCY MISSION IN WEEK FOR HMAS MELBOURNE j l -  '

 The Royal Australian Navy flagship,HMAS Melbourne,  

 already involved in two rescue missions earlier this Week 

 while on passage between Hong Kong and Singapore, wasjcalled 

 upon yesterday for a further mercy mission involving a 

 Korean merchant seaman.

 The seaman, a crew member of the motor ship Asia 

 Rose bound for Japan, suffered severe head injuries, fractures 

 and lacerations when he fell from a mast.  A request for 

 assistance from the Asia Rose to the Singapore Rescue 

 Co-ordination Centre was passed to HMAS Melbourne early 

 yesterday afternoon when she was about 40 nautical miles due 

 north of the merchant ship in the South China Sea.

 Two hours later the flagship made a rendezvous with 

 the Asia Rose and the critically injured seaman was transferred 

 for urgent medical attention.

 After almost 24 hours of intensive care aboard HMAS 

 Melbourne the injured seaman was flown by Wessex helicopter 

 to Singapore, some 72 miles south west, for hospitalisation.

 Earlier this week HMAS Melbourne, in company with 

 HMAS Torrens,  rescued 99 Vie tnamese refugees 200 miles off 

 the coast of Vietnam. They are still on board the flagsip

 .  .  .  / 2

 and are expected to be landed when the ship arrives in 

 Singapore on Friday (June 26).

 On the same day that these refugees were rescued, 

 a Tracker aircraft on a surveillance flight from HMAS Melbourne 

 sighted another refugee boat carrying approximately 30 

 Vietnamese. A Liberian freighter en route to Hong Kong 

 which was in the vicinity was guided to a rendezvous and 

 rescue.

 * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

 Further Inquiries; Mr Noel Tanswell 65 2999 (Office Hours)

 48 0476 (After Hours)

