---
title: "Numas Review"
date: "1981-04-07"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213767404
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08009922%22
---

 From the Department of Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 25/81 7 April 1981

 .  NUMAS REVIEW

 "I hope the people of the Australian Capital Territory will  participate fully in the review of Australia's migrant selection  system (NUMAS)", the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Ian Macphee, said today.

 "I am seeking the views of the people of the ACT on Australia's  immigration policies, particularly the migrant selection system".

 This evening Mr Macphee will be attending a community forum in  Canberra at which he will be seeking the advice of various  sections of the community on immigration policy and procedures.

 The forum will be· attended by representatives of the various  ethnic communities, union and employer organisations, government  and community agencies and various other organisations and  interest groups. ·

 "It is most.important that whatever immigration policies and  procedures are applied in the future, they continue to have the  confidence and support of the Australian community", Mr Macphee said.

 At tonight's forum, representatives of each of the major opinion  groups will have the opportunity of expressing their views. There will also be" opportunity for other participants to contribute  to the discussion.

 Mr Macphee said that the review of policy follows a government  commitment in 1978 when it announced the current immigration  policies and NUMAS. At that.time the government undertook to  monitor and review the operation of the new approach. In his  pre-election policy speech last year, the Prime Minister announced 

 that the review would take place. ·

 "The public forums will be supplemented by written submissions  from members of the public and several technical studies of the  NUMAS system now under way. ·

 "I am grateful to the distinguished members of the ACT community  who have agreed to play leading roles in tonight's forum", Mr Macphee said.

 2

 They are: .  .

 Professor Charles Price,  Chairman of the Migrant Settlement  Council of the ACT who will chair the torum.

 Dr Heinrich Stefanik, President of the Ethnic Communities Comac.il  of the ACT who will be speaking from the ethnic viewpoint.

 Mr Bill Preece, Organiser of the Australian Workers Union who  will present the union viewpoint.

 Mr John Dallas, Director of the Confederation of ACT Industry  who will be presenting '  the view of employers.  ,

 Dr Larry Saha, Senior Lecturer, Department of Sociology at ANU who will be speaking from the welfare/se f c  tlement .

 perspective.  .  .  .

 Mr Macphee said that in conducting the review, no assumption  would go unquestioned. Every aspect of immigration policy  would be open to review.  He had not prejudged the issue in  any way and the review could produce radical changes or  perhaps only minor refinements of the present system.

 The Minister said he will also welcome written submissions  from individuals and interested organisations. Submission  fdr.*n5 and guidelines for making submissions are available from  the Department of Immigration and Ethnic .Affairs,  Canberra.   Submissions should be lodged no later than 30 April to 

 "NUMAS REVIEW, P .  0. Box 2 5 , BELCONNEN,  ACT"'. .

 NOTE FOR EDITORS:

 You are reminded of the invitation to attend:

 . .  background briefing by Mr Ian Lindenmayer at .  .  6.4p p.m. at the Migrant Resource Centre, Griffin Centre, Bunda Street,  Canberra City.

 . .  drinks with Mr Macphee at the end of the media

 briefing. .  .  .  .  .

 . the f oruin at 7·^5 P ·  m .  at the Rehearsal Room, (1st Floor), Griffin Centre, Bunda Street,  Canberra City.

 For any further information, please contact Mr Geoff Adcock  (Tel. 64 2773) or Mr Robert Haynes (Te. 64 2392).

 

