---
title: "Chogrm Communique"
date: "1982-10-18"
creators:
  - "Street, Anthony"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213894819
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09001635%22
---

 DEPARTMENT OF  FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 /fw fc

 NEWS RELEASE

 18 October 1982

 31 -

 F o l l o w i n g  i s  t e x t  o f  C o m m u n i q u e  i s s u e d  b y  

 t h e  C o m m o n w e a l t h  H e a d s  o f  G o v e r n m e n t  R e g i o n a l  M e e t i n g  ( I I I )  

 i n  S u v a  o n  1 8  O c t o b e r :

 C o m m o n w e a l t h  H e a d s  o f  G o v e r n m e n t  R e g i o n a l  M e e t i n g *  S u v a   O c t o b e r  1 9 8 2 .  ,

 £ l D § l _ C o m m u n i _ g u e

 1 .  C o m m o n w e a l t h  H e a d s  o f  G o v e r n m e n t  f r o m  t h e  A s i a - P a c i f i c  

 r e g i o n  m e t  i n  S u v a  f r o m  1 4  t o  1 8  O c t o b e r  1 9 8 2 .  S e v e n t e e n  

 c o u n t r i e s  a t t e n d e d  t h e  m e e t i n g *  n a m e l y *  A u s t r a l i a *  B a n g l a d e s h *  

 F i j i *  I n d i a *  K i r i b a t i *  M a l a y s i a *  M a l d i v e s *  N a u r u *  N e w  Z e a l a n d *  

 P a p u a  N e w  G u i n e a *  S i n g a p o r e *  S o l o m o n  I s l a n d s *  S r i  L a n k a *

 T o n g a *  T u v a l u *  W e s t e r n  S a m o a *  a n d  V a n u a t u .  F o u r t e e n  w e r e  

 r e p r e s e n t e d  b y  t h e i r  P r e s i d e n t s  o r  P r i m e  M i n i s t e r s .  T h e

 P r i m e  M i n i s t e r  o f  F i j i *  R a t u  S i r  K a m i s e s e  M a r a *  w a s  i n  t h e  c h a i r .

 2 .  H e a d s  o f  G o v e r n m e n t  w a r m l y  w e l c o m e d  t o  t h e  m e e t i n g  t h e  

 R e p u b l i c  o f  M a l d i v e s *  w h i c h  h a d  b e c o m e  a  S p e c i a l  M e m b e r  o f  t h e  

 C o m m o n w e a l t h  e a r l i e r  i n  t h e  y e a r .

 P o l i t i c a l  T r e n d s  .

 D 2 4

 C H O G R M  C O M M U N I Q U E

 3 .  H e a d s  o f  G o v e r n m e n t  e x p r e s s e d  c o n c e r n  t h a t  t h e  d e t e r i o r a t i o n  

 i n  t h e  o v e r a l l  i n t e r n a t i o n a l  s i t u a t i o n  h a d  c o n t i n u e d  s i n c e  t h e i r  

 m e e t i n g  i n  1 9 8 0 *  a n d  t h a t  t h i s  h a d  l e d  t o  a  d e e p e n i n g  s e n s e  o f  

 i n s e c u r i t y  a m o n g  p e o p l e  t h r o u g h o u t  t h e  w o r l d .  T h e y  n o t e d  t h a t  

 c u r r e n t  i n t e r n a t i o n a l  e c o n o m i c  d i f f i c u l t i e s  h a d  c l e a r l y  

 e x a c e r b a t e d  p o l i t i c a l  i s s u e s *  n o t  o n l y  i n  r e g a r d  t o  E a s t - W e s t  

 p r o b l e m s *  b u t  i n  r e l a t i o n  t o  N o r t h / S o u t h  p r o b l e m s  a s  w e l l .

 4 .  A g a i n s t  t h i s  b a c k g r o u n d *  t h e y  d r e w  s p e c i a l  a t t e n t i o n  t o  t h e  

 r e l e v a n c e  o f  t h e  r e c e n t  r e p o r t  t o  t h e  G e n e r a l  A s s e m b l y  b y  t h e  

 S e c r e t a r y - G e n e r a l  o f  t h e  U n i t e d  N a t i o n s .  T h e y  c o m m e n d e d  h i s  

 a p p e a l  f o r  a  s u s t a i n e d  e f f o r t  t o  r e i n v e s t  t h e  U n i t e d  N a t i o n s *  

 a n d  p a r t i c u l a r l y  t h e  S e c u r i t y  C o u n c i l *  w i t h  t h e  n e c e s s a r y  m e a n s

 .  a n d ' a u t h o r i t y  t o  e n a b l e  i t  t o  f u l f i l  t h e  t a s k  o f  m a i n t a i n i n g  

 i n t e r n a t i o n a l  p e a c e  a n d  s e c u r i t y  e n t r u s t e d  t o  i t  b y  i t s  C h a r t e r .  

 T h e y  s t r o n g l y  u r g e d  s t a t e s  t o  g i v e  t h o r o u g h  c o n s i d e r a t i o n  a t  

 t h e  c u r r e n t  A s s e m b l y  s e s s i o n  t o  t h e  S e c r e t a r y - G e n e r a l ' s  

 r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s .  .

 . .  . 2 .

 2 -

 5. AS AT THEIR PREVIOUS MEETINGS, HEADS OF GOVERNMENT REAFFIRMED   THE INADMISSABILITY OF THE USE OF FORCE IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS   AND OF INTERFERENCE IN THE INTERNAL AFFAIRS OF STATES, AND   STRESSED THE NEED TO RESOLVE DIFFERENCES BY PEACEFUL MEANS BASED  

 ON RESPECT FOR SOVEREIGNTY, INDEPENDENCE, TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY   AND EQUALITY. THEY RECOGNISED THAT ADHERENCE TO THESE PRECEPTS   AND PROGRESS TOWARDS DISARMAMENT WERE ESSENTIAL AND COMPLEMENTARY   ASPECTS TO THE ACHIEVEMENT OF INTERNATIONAL SECURITY. THEY WERE   THEREFORE GREATLY DISTURBED BY THE FAILURE OF THE INTERNATIONAL  

 COMMUNITY TO REACH ANY AGREEMENT ON THE COMPREHENSIVE PROGRAMME   FOR DISARAMENT CONSIDERED AT THE RECENT UNITED NATIONS SPECIAL   SESSION DEVOTED TO DISARMAMENT. THEY EXPRESSED THE HOPE THAT THE   WORLD CAMPAIGN, WHICH HAD BEEN LAUNCHED AT THE SPECIAL SESSION WOULD   HELP TO CREATE A CLIMATE OF WORLD PUBLIC OPINION THAT WOULD BRING   EFFECTIVE PRESSURE TO BEAR ON GOVERNMENTS TO TACKLE DIFFICULT D I S ­ ARMAMENT ISSUES WITH GREATER DETERMINATION.

 6. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT WERE GRAVELY CONCERNED THAT THE CONFLICTS   IN  THE MIDDLE EAST REMAIN UNRESOLVED AND CONTINUE TO THREATEN WORLD   PEACE AND SECURITY. THEY STRESSED THE URGENT NEED TO RECOGNISE THE   LEGITIMATE AND INALIENABLE RIGHTS OF THE PALESTINIAN PEOPLE, INCLUDING THEIR RIGHT TO A HOMELAND, AND TO SEEK A JUST SETTLEMENT   OF THE PROBLEM ON THE BASIS OF THE RELEVANT UNITED NATIONS  

 RESOLUTIONS. THEY CONDEMNED ISRAEL FOR ITS INVASION OF LEBANON AND EXPRESSED THEIR REVULSION AT THE RESULTANT DEATH AND DEVASTATION   PARTICULARLY IN BEIRUT. THEY WERE DEEPLY CONCERNED AT THE GRAVE   CONSEQUENCES THAT THESE RECENT EVENTS COULD HAVE FOR THE PROSPECTS   FOR ANY FUTURE SETTLEMENT. RECOGNISING THAT THE UNTOLD HUMAN  

 MISERY COULD NOT BE UNDONE THEY NEVERTHELESS URGED THE GOVERNMENTS   CONCERNED TO REDOUBLE THEIR EFFORTS TO FIND AN URGENT SOLUTION TO   THE PROBLEM, TO ENABLE THE LEBANON AND ALL PEOPLES IN THE AREA TO   LIVE IN  PEACE.

 7. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT REAFFIRMED THEIR TOTAL AND UNEQUIVOCAL   CONDEMNATION OF APARTHEID PERPETUATED BY THE WHITE MINORITY REGIME   IN  SOUTH AFRICA. THEY CONDEMNED THE INCREASINGLY FREQUENT MILITARY   INCURSIONS BY SOUTH AFRICA INTO THE NEIGHBOURING STATES OF ANGOLA,   MOZAMBIQUE AND ZIMBABWE I N  AN ATTEMPT TO SUBVERT THE PROCESS OF   LIBERATION I N  SOUTHERN AFRICA. THEY EXPRESSED DEEP CONCERN AT SOUTH   AFRICA'S DELAYING TACTICS OVER THE NEGOTIATIONS FOR NAMIBIA'S

 / 3

 INDEPENDENCE ON THE BASIS OF SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION 4 3 5 .

 THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION (UNDERLINED)

 8. IN REAFFIRMING THEIR COMMITMENT TO THE GOAL OF ESTABLISHING A   ZONE OF PEACE IN THE INDIAN OCEAN, HEADS OF GOVERNMENT NOTED WITH   ALARM THE INCREASING BUILD-UP OF THE GREAT POWER MILITARY PRESENCE   IN THE AREA WHICH WAS TAKING PLACE AGAINST THE EXPRESSED WISHES OF   THE LITTORAL AND HINTERLAND STATES. THEY ENDORSED THE VIEW   EXPRESSED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT THE PROJECTED UNITED NATIONS  

 CONFERENCE ON THE INDIAN OCEAN WAS A NECESSARY STEP TOWARDS IMPLEM­ ENTING THE 1971 UNITED NATIONS DECLARATION. THEY CALLED UPON THE   GREAT POWERS TO TAKE IMMEDIATE ACTION TO REDUCE TENSION IN THE   INDIAN OCEAN AREA AND URGED ALL CONCERNED TO WORK TOWARDS THE   CONVENING OF THE CONFERENCE , AS AGREED IN COLOMBO, SR I LANKA,   WITHOUT FURTHER DELAY.

 9. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT EXPRESSED GRAVE CONCERN AT THE SITUATION I N   AND AROUND AFGHANISTAN AND ITS IMPLICATIONS BOTH FOR THE REGION'S   PEACE AND STABILITY AND FOR INTERNATIONAL SECURITY. THEY REITERATED   THEIR URGENT CALL FOR A POLITICAL SETTLEMENT ON THE BASIS OF THE  

 WITHDRAWAL OF FOREIGN TROOPS AND FULL RESPECT FOR THE INDEPENDENCE,   SOVEREIGNTY AND NON-ALIGNED STATUS OF AFGHANISTAN AND STRICT   OBSERVANCE OF THE PRINCIPLES OF NON-INTERVENTION AND NON-INTERFER­ ENCE. THEY WERE DISTURBED THAT NONE OF THE INTERNATIONAL  

 I NIT IA TI VES  DESIGNED TO ASSIST THE AFFECTED PARTIES TO FIND A   MUTUALLY ACCEPTABLE SOLUTION HAD PROVED SUCCESSFUL. THEY AFFIRMED   THE RIGHT OF THE AFGHAN REFUGEES TO RETURN TO THEIR HOMES IN SAFETY   AND HONOUR. THEY URGED ALL CONCERNED TO WORK TOWARDS A NEGOTIATED   SETTLEMENT WHICH WOULD LEAVE THE AFGHAN PEOPLE FREE TO DETERMINE   THEIR OWN FUTURE.

 10. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT EXPRESSED GRAVE CONCERN AT THE PERSISTENCE   OF FOREIGN MILITARY INTERVENTION AND INTERFERENCE I N  KAMPUCHEA   WHICH HAS AGGRAVATED TENSION AND INSTABILITY I N  SOUTH EAST ASIA. THEY REITERATED THEIR CONCERN THAT IF THE SITUATION REMAINS  

 UNRESOLVED, IT WOULD ONLY INVITE GREATER INVOLVEMENT BY MAJOR   POWERS I N  THE AFFAIRS OF THE REGION. THEY REAFFIRMED THE NEED FOR   ALL STATES TO STRICTLY ADHERE TO THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF NON­ INTERFERENCE IN ,THE INTERNAL AFFAIRS OF OTHER STATES, RESPECT FOR   THE SOVEREIGNTY AND TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY OF STATES AND NON-RECOURSE   TO THE USE OR THREAT OF FORCE I N  SETTLING DISPUTES. THEY STRESSED  

 THAT IT WAS IMPERATIVE FOR A COMPREHENSIVE POLITICAL SOLUTION TO BE FOUND TO THE KAMPUCHEAN QUESTION ON THE BASIS OF THE TOTAL WITH­ DRAWAL OF ALL FOREIGN FORCES FROM KAMPUCHEA, AND THE RESTORATION OF   THE INDEPENDENCE, SOVEREIGNTY, AND NEUTRALITY OF KAMPUCHEA SO AS   TO ENABLE THE PEOPLE TO DETERMINE THEIR FUTURE FREE OF OUTSIDE   INTERFERENCE. IN THIS REGARD HEADS OF GOVERNMENT NOTED DEVELOPMENTS

 ON KAMPUCHEA SINCE THEIR LAST DISCUSSION INCLUDING THE FORMATION   OF THE COALITION GOVERNMENT OF DEMOCRATIC KAMPUCHEA AND THE   ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE GOVERNMENT OF VIETNAM OF A PARTIAL WITHDRAWAL   OF ITS FORCES FROM KAMPUCHEA AND IT S  CONSULTATIONS WITH OTHER  

 COUNTRIES OF THE REGION. THEY HOPED THAT THE PROSPECT OF A   POLITICAL SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM WOULD BE ENHANCED.

 11. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT NOTED WITH APPROVAL THE EFFORTS TO ESTABLISH   A ZONE OF PEACE, FREEDOM AND NEUTRALITY CZOPFAN) IN SOUTH EAST ASIA,   AND THEY CALLED UPON ALL STATES TO FULLY SUPPORT THOSE EFFORTS. THEY EXPRESSED CONCERN THAT THE UNRESOLVED KAMPUCHEAN QUESTION  

 CONTINUES TO POSE A SERIOUS OBSTACLE TO THE REALISATION OF ZOPFAN.   THEY THEREFORE URGED THAT EFFORTS TOWARDS A COMPREHENSIVE POLITICAL   SOLUTION OF THE KAMPUCHEAN QUESTION BE INTENSIFIED SO AS TO ACHIEVE.   LASTING PEACE I N  THE REGION.

 12. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT AGREED THAT THE SOUTH PACIFIC WAS AN   AREA OF GREAT ECONOMIC AND STRATEGIC IMPORTANCE AND ENDORSED THE   CONCERN EXPRESSED FOR THE SECURITY OF THE AREA. THEY AGREED THAT   ANY INTRUSION OF GREAT POWER RIVALRY I N  THE SOUTH PACIFIC WOULD  

 INTRODUCE A NEW AND UNDESIRABLE ELEMENT OF INSTABILITY.

 13. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT WERE CONCERNED AT THE PERSISTENCE OF THE   PROBLEM OF REFUGEES/ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS FROM INDO-CHINA. THEY   EXPRESSED THEIR APPRECIATION TO THE COUNTRIES PROVIDING TRANSIT AND   FINAL SETTLEMENT. THEY REITERATED THE VIEW THAT THE PROBLEM

 SHOULD BE TACKLED AT ITS SOURCE AND URGED THE COUNTRIES PRIMARILY   RESPONSIBLE FOR THE SITUATION TO CREATE AN ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH THE   PEOPLES OF INDO-CHINA COULD LIVE IN PEACE AND HARMONY. THEY HOPED   THAT, PENDING A POLITICAL SOLUTION TO THE CONFLICTS IN INDO-CHINA   WHICH WERE THE ROOT CAUSE OF THE PROBLEM, THE COUNTRIES CONCERNED   WOULD CONTINUE TO CO-OPERATE BY PREVENTING FURTHER ILLEGAL DEPARTURES   AND BY WORKING WITH UNHCR AND RESETTLEMENT COUNTRIES TO IMPLEMENT   THE PROGRAMME OF ORDERLY DEPARTURES.

 14. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT STRONGLY REAFFIRMED THE CONVICTION EXPRESSED   IN THE MELBOURNE COMMUNIQUE THE PREVIOUS YEAR, THAT THE PEOPLES OF   THE SOUTH PACIFIC SHOULD BE GIVEN THE OPPORTUNITY TO EXERCISE THEIR   RIGHT OF SELF-DETERMINATION AND INDEPENDENCE I N  ACCORDANCE WITH  

 PRINCIPLES LAID DOWN IN THE UNITED NATIONS CHARTER. THEY NOTED WITH   SATISFACTION THE ASSURANCES WHICH THE PRESIDENT OF FRANCE HAD GIVEN EARLIER IN THE YEAR TO THE SPECIAL SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM MISSION   LED BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF F I J I .  HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ACKNOWLEDGED   THE EFFORTS OF THE KANAK PEOPLE OF NEW CALEDONIA TOWARDS THE ATTAIN­

 MENT OF SELF-DETERMINATION AND INDEPENDENCE BY PEACEFUL MEANS. THEY WELCOMED THE FRENCH GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMME FOR REFORMS IN THE   TERRITORY AND EXPRESSED THE HOPE THAT THESE REFORMS WOULD ASSIST   THE KANAKS I N  THEIR EFFORTS TOWARDS A SMOOTH AND SPEEDY TRANSITION

 TO INDEPENDENCE.

 15. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT TOOK, NOTE OF THE DESIRE OF THE SOUTH   PACIFIC ISLAND STATES TO ESTABLISH THEIR REGION AS A NUCLEAR WEAPON-   FREE ZONE, RECALLING THE RESOLUTION ALREADY ADOPTED ON THE SUBJECT   BY THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY IN 1975. THEY AGREED THAT   THE CONTINUATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPON TESTING IN THE REGION WAS A  

 MATTER FOR DEEP CONCERN. THEY FULLY SUPPORTED THE SOUTH PACIFIC   FORUM'S STRONG CONDEMNATION OF FRANCE'S CONTINUED TEST PROGRAMME AS   WELL AS ITS FAILURE TO PROVIDE INFORMATION ON THE EFFECTS OF PAST   TESTS ON THE HUMAN AND NATURAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE PACIFIC. THEY   ALSO EXPRESSED ANXIETY OVER THE POSSIBILITY OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC  

 BECOMING AN INTERNATIONAL DUMPING GROUND FOR NUCLEAR WASTE AND   CALLED ON ALL STATES TO DESIST FROM THE STORAGE OR DUMPING OF   NUCLEAR WASTES I N  THE PACIFIC.

 16. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT WELCOMED THE ADOPTION I N  APRIL 198 2  OF THE   NEW COMPREHENSIVE CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF THE SEA, WHICH HAD BEEN   THE FRUIT OF NINE YEARS OF PAINSTAKING NEGOTIATIONS AND WHICH WAS   OF SPECIAL SIGNIFICANCE TO THE COUNTRIES OF THE REGION. AT THE SAME   TIME THEY DEEPLY DEPLORED THE DECLARED DECISION BY THE UNITED STATES  

 NOT TO BECOME A PARTY TO THE CONVENTION. OBSERVING THAT A NUMBER OF   OTHER DEVELOPED STATES HAD ABSTAINED IN THE VOTE ON ITS ADOPTION, THEY RECOGNISED THAT THE LACK OF ACTIVE SUPPORT FROM THESE STATES   COULD SERIOUSLY UNDERMINE THE EFFECTIVENESS OF AN INSTRUMENT THAT   WAS DESIGNED TO ESTABLISH AN INTERNATIONAL REGIME FOR THE EQUITABLE   AND ORDERLY MANAGEMENT OF THE RESOURCES OF THE SEA TO THE BENEFIT OF DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES ALIKE. THEY THEREFORE   STRONGLY URGED ALL STATES TO SIGN THE CONVENTION AT THE FORTHCOMING   SIGNING CONFERENCE IN 198 2  AND TO PROCEED TO THE RATIFICATION  

 PROCESS WITHOUT UNNCESSARY DELAY.

 INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ISSUES

 WORLD ECONOMIC SITUATION (UNDERLINED)

 17. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT EXPRESSED GRAVE CONCERN AT THE CONTINUING   DETERIORATION OF THE WORLD ECONOMY AND IN INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC CO­ OPERATION. INFLATION WAS CONTINUING AT HIGH LEVELS. LIVING   STANDARDS WERE DECLINING IN MANY COUNTRIES AND UNEMPLOYMENT, ALREADY HIGH, WAS STILL INCREASING, PARTICULARLY AMONG THE YOUNG. THE DEEPENING ECONOMIC C R I S I S  HAD DANGEROUS CONSEQUENCES FOR THE  

 SOCIAL AND POLITICAL FABRIC OF SOCIETIES. ITS IMPACT NAS SEVEREST ON DEVELOPING COUNTRIES, PARTICULARLY THE LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES.   INCREASING NUMBERS OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES WERE EXPERIENCING   DECLINING PER CAPITA INCOMES. BALANCE OF PAYMENTS DEFICITS AND DEBT   SERVICING BURDENS HAD BECOME DANGEROUSLY HIGH FOR MANY COUNTRIES,   AND THIS HAD BEEN EXACERBATED BY HIGH INTEREST RATES AND REDUCED

 DEMAND IN EXPORT MARKETS. THE SITUATION I N  LOW INCOME COUNTRIES   WAS PARTICULARLY ACUTE. AGAINST THE BACKGROUND OF THEIR LIMITED   ACCESS TO CAPITAL MARKETS, DETERIORATING EXTERNAL PAYMENTS WERE   IMPOSING SEVERE CONTRACTION ON GROWTH RATES THAT WERE ALREADY AT  

 CRITICAL LEVELS. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT WARNED THAT THE SITUATION   WAS BECOMING POLITICALLY EXPLOSIVE I N  MANY DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.   PROBLEMS OF RECOVERY AND DEVELOPMENT, THEY STRESSED, NOW REQUIRED   IMMEDIATE ACTION IN THE FORM OF APPROPRIATE POLICIES AND MEASURES.

 18. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT WELCOMED THE RECENT REDUCTIONS IN INFLATION   AND INTEREST RATES I N  THE MAJOR INDUSTRIALISED COUNTRIES. THEY   UNDERLINED, HOWEVER, THE URGENT NEED FOR POLICIES TO BRING ABOUT   N.ON-INFLATIONARY ECONOMIC GROWTH. THEY REGARDED CONTINUED  

 PROGRESS I N  LOWERING INTEREST RATES AS CRUCIAL. THEY AGREED THAT   VIGOROUS JOINT AND CO-ORDINATED REMEDIAL INTERNATIONAL ACTION COULD   NOT BE FURTHER POSTPONED. BOLD DECISIONS WERE REQUIRED AND IT WAS   EXTREMELY IMPORTANT THAT THE OPPORTUNITIES PRESENTED BY FORTHCOMING  

 MEETINGS -  THE GATT CONTRACTING PARTIES AT MINISTERIAL LEVEL IN   NOVEMBER 1982 , THE IMF INTERIM COMMITTEE IN APRIL 198 3  AND UNCTAD VI   IN JUNE 1 983  -  WERE NOT MISSED.

 19. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT NOTED WITH CONCERN THE CONTINUING STALEMATE   I N  LAUNCHING GLOBAL NEGOTIATIONS. WHILE DIFFERENCES HAD NARROWED,   THE IMPASSE HAD CONTINUED. THEY EXPRESSED THE HOPE THAT THE POLIT­ ICAL RESOLVE EVIDENT AT THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING   I N  MELBOURNE AND THE SUMMITS OF CANCUN AND VERSAILLES WOULD BE  

 BROUGHT TO BEAR TO CLEAR THE WAY FOR AN EARLY START TO THE   NEGOTIATIONS. THEY EMPHASISED THE NEED FOR A SPECIAL EFFORT AT THE   CURRENT SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY TO RESOLVE   OUTSTANDING DIFFICULTIES. THEY REITERATED THE NEED FOR PARALLEL,   CONCURRENT AND IMMEDIATE ACTION IN CRITICAL AREAS SUCH AS TRADE,   ENERGY, FOOD AND FINANCE.

 20. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT WELCOMED THE DECISION OF THE RECENT   MEETING OF COMMONWEALTH FINANCE MINISTERS TO REQUEST THE COMMON­ WEALTH SECRETARIAT TO UNDERTAKE AN OVERALL EXAMINATION OF THE   INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND PAYMENTS SYSTEM AND I N  PARTICULAR THE ROLE   OF THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS WITHOUT PREJUDICE TO   ACTION ON IMMEDIATE MEASURES. I N  VIEW OF THE VAST CHANGES THAT HAD   TAKEN PLACE SINCE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BRETTON WOODS  

 INSTITUTIONS AND OF THE EVIDENT MALFUNCTIONING OF THE INTERNATIONAL   ECONOMIC SYSTEM, THEY AGREED THAT THE TIME WAS MOST OPPORTUNE FOR   SUCH AN EXAMINATION. THEY LOOKED FORWARD TO ITS RESULTS WITH GREAT   INTEREST. THEY EXPRESSED THE HOPE THAT THE STUDY WOULD HELP TO   FOCUS ATTENTION ON A COMPREHENSIVE EXAMINATION OF THE WORLD'S TRADE  

 AND PAYMENTS SYSTEM.

 21. WITHOUT PREJUDICE TO GLOBAL NEGOTIATIONS, BUT MINDFUL OF THE

 EMERGENCY FACING THE WORLD ECONOMY, HEADS' OF GOVERNMENT NOTED WITH   APPRECIATION THE NEW ZEALAND PROPOSAL FOR A REVIEW OF THE BRETTON   WOODS SYSTEM. ACKNOWLEDGING THE NEED FOR AN APPROPRIATE REVIEW   AND FOR REFORM OF THE WORLD'S TRADING AND PAYMENTS ARRANGEMENTS  

 ON LINES RESPONSIVE TO CONTEMPORARY NEEDS AND REALITIES, THEY AGREED   THAT THEIR GOVERNMENTS WOULD GIVE PARTICULAR ATTENTION TO IT IN THE   LIGHT OF THE STUDY COMMONWEALTH FINANCE MINISTERS HAD COMMISSIONED   FROM THE COMMONWEALTH SECRETARIAT.

 22. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT CONSIDERED THE REPORT ON PROTECTIONISM BY   A GROUP OF EXPERTS HEADED BY SI R ALEC CAIRNCROSS. THEY AGREED THAT   IT MADE A UNIQUELY IMPORTANT CONTRIBUTION TO THE CONSIDERATION OF   PROTECTIONISM AS I T  AFFECTS DEVELOPING COUNTRIES. ACCORDINGLY   THEY DECIDED THAT THE SECRETARY-GENERAL SHOULD MAKE AVAILABLE A COPY OF THE REPORT TO THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF GATT FOR   CIRCULATION AT THE FORTHCOMING GATT MINISTERIAL MEETING. I T   WOULD BE DESIRABLE FOR COMMONWEALTH MINISTERS ATTENDING THE GATT   MEETING TO ENDEAVOUR TO SEE THAT THE OUTCOME OF THAT MEETING   REFLECTS AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE REPORT   BY THE GROUP OF EXPERTS.

 23. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT AGREED THAT TWO CENTRAL ISSUES ON THE   INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC AGENDA WERE CREEPING PROTECTIONISM AND   GROWING DISORDER IN THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL SYSTEM. WHILE   NOT SEEKING TO POSTPONE CONSIDERATION OF OTHER IMPORTANT I SSU ES , THEY BELIEVED THESE TWO WERE CRUCIAL TO BOTH DEVELOPMENT AND  

 RECOVERY AND REQUIRED IMMEDIATE ATTENTION AND ACTION.

 FINANCIAL ISSUES (UNDERLINED)

 24. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT RECOGNISED THAT THERE HAD BEEN FUNDAMENTAL   POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CHANGES SINCE THE FRAMEWORK FOR INTERNATIONAL   ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION HAD BEEN ESTABLISHED AT BRETTON WOODS AND   HAVANA. WITHIN THE LAST DECADE, HIGH AND DIFFERENTIAL RATES OF   INFLATION HAD DISTURBED EXCHANGE RATES, ECONOMIC ACTIVITY HAD   SLOWED AND BALANCE OF PAYMENTS DEFICITS AND SURPLUSES HAD EMERGED OF A PERSISTENT RATHER THAN CYCLICAL CHARACTER. WHILE RECOGNISING   THAT SOUND DOMESTIC POLICIES TO FOSTER ADJUSTMENTS WERE AMONG THE   ESSENTIAL PREREQUISITES TO WORLD ECONOMIC RECOVERY AND DEVELOPMENT,   THEY STRESSED THAT FEATURES OF THE PRESENT TRADE AND PAYMENTS   SYSTEMS WERE NOT CONDUCIVE TO AN ORDERLY ADJUSTMENT PROCESS.

 25. THEY WERE CONCERNED OVER THE MOUNTING DEBT PROBLEMS OF MANY   DEVELOPING COUNTRIES AND THEIR GROWING RELIANCE ON SUCH SHORTER-TERM   COMMERCIAL BORROWING AS CANNOT BE SUSTAINED. AGREEING THAT THE IM F,   THE IBRD AND ITS ASSOCIATED BODIES SHOULD CONTINUE TO PLAY A KEY  

 ROLE, THEY CONSIDERED THAT A REVIEW OF THESE INSTITUTIONS WAS   DESIRABLE TO ENABLE THEM TO ADAPT MORE ADEQUATELY TO PRESENT-

 DAY CONDITIONS. THEY SAW THE NEED FOR GREATER RESOURCES TO '   FACILITATE LONGER-TERM FINANCE FOR ADJUSTMENT, AND A MORE REALISTIC   APPLICATION OF CONDITIONALITY. THEY STRESSED THE IMPORTANCE OF   REACHING AGREEMENT AT THE APRIL MEETING OF THE INTERIM COMMITTEE   FOR A VERY SUBSTANTIAL INCREASE IN QUOTAS UNDER THE EIGHTH GENERAL   QUOTA REVIEW.

 26. IN VIEW OF THE DESPERATE SITUATION FACING MOST LOW INCOME AND   LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES, HEADS OF GOVERNMENT VOICED DISAPPOINTMENT   THAT AID FLOWS WERE AGAIN DECLINING IN REAL TERMS. THEY CALLED ON   ALL DONORS TO MAKE SPECIAL EFFORTS TO INCREASE ODA TO MEET  

 INTERNATIONALLY AGREED TARGETS AND TO PROVIDE THE NECESSARY SUPPORT   FOR FACILITATING ADJUSTMENTS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.

 27. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT RECOGNISED THE SUBSTANTIAL CONTRIBUTION   THAT IDA HAD MADE I N  TRANSFERRING CONCESSIONAL RESOURCES TO LOW-   INCOME COUNTRIES. THEY WELCOMED THE RECENT EFFORTS BY MANY DONORS   TO ENSURE THAT IDA FLOWS WERE NOT DISRUPTED BY THE DECISION OF THE   UNITED STATES TO STRETCH OUT ITS IDA VI REPLENISHMENT. THEY CALLED FOR EARLY AGREEMENT ON A REPLENISHMENT LEVEL FOR IDA V I I  WHICH   WOULD ENSURE AN INCREASE I N  REAL TERMS IN KEEPING WITH PAST TRENDS   AND THE URGENCY OF SATISFYING PRESENT NEEDS FOR CONCESSIONAL FINANCE.

 28. NOTING THAT THE GROWTH RATE I N  WORLD BANK LENDING REMAINED   SIGNIFICANTLY BELOW THE TARGET OF 5 PER CENT IN REAL TERMS, HEADS   OF GOVERNMENT CALLED FOR SPECIAL EFFORTS TO EXPAND THE BANK'S   OPERATIONS. THEY NOTED ITS EFFORTS TO INCREASE CO-FINANCING, BUT   STRESSED THAT THE BANK'S DEVELOPMENT ROLE MUST BE PRESERVED AND   THAT THIS REQUIRED CONTINUED EXPANSION OF ITS OWN RESOURCES AND .  

 LENDING.

 INTERNATIONAL TRADE (UNDERLINED)

 29. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT CONSIDERED THAT PROTECTIONISM POSED A   THREAT TO THE MULTILATERAL TRADING SYSTEM, IMPAIRED THE ABILITY OF   DEFICIT COUNTRIES TO SERVICE AND REPAY LOANS THROUGH! INCREASED   EXPORT EARNINGS, AND HAMPERED THE DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS OF DEVELOPING   COUNTRIES. NOTING THAT THE AUSTRALIAN PROPOSALS INITIALLY FOR A   STANDSTILL AND SUBSEQUENTLY FOR A PHASED-IN WINDBACK OF ALL FORMS   OF PROTECTION HAVING A TRADE DISTORTING EFFECT COULD HELP   SIGNIFICANTLY IN REVATILISING THE WORLD ECONOMY, THEY WERE OF THE   VIEW THAT DEVELOPING COUNTRIES I N  PARTICULAR WOULD BENEFIT FROM ANY  

 RELAXATION OF TRADE DISTORTING MEASURES AND THAT SUCH RELAXATION   WOULD ASSIST WORLD ECONOMIC RECOVERY TO THE BENEFIT OF ALL.

 30. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT REAFFIRMED THEIR COMMITMENT TO AN OPEN   INTERNATIONAL TRADING SYSTEM AND VIEWED WITH ALARM THE GROWING   DISREGARD FOR BASIC PRINCIPLES AND RULES SUCH AS NON-DISCRIMINATION,

 TRANSPARENCY AND PREDICTABILITY. THEY FULLY SUPPORTED THE NEED TO   REINFORCE THESE RULES.

 31. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT AGREED THAT THE GATT MINISTERIAL MEETING   MUST BRING ABOUT A COMPLETE STANDSTILL ON PROTECTION AND MUST   ESTABLISH ARRANGEMENTS TO FACILITATE THE REDUCTION OF PROTECTIONIST   BARRIERS. THEY EMPHASISED THE IMPORTANCE OF AN EFFECTIVE NON-   DISCIMINATORY SAFEGUARDS SYSTEM UNDER WHICH NEW PROTECTIONIST   MEASURES WOULD BE DISCOURAGED AND ORDERLY MARKETING ARRANGEMENTS   SUCH AS THE MULTI-FIBRE ARRANGEMENT AND VOLUNTARY EXPORT RESTRAINTS   WOULD EVENTUALLY BE PHASED OUT. RECOGNISING THAT LITTLE PROGRESS HAD   SO FAR BEEN MADE I N  DISMANTLING AGRICULTURAL PROTECTIONISM, THEY   URGED THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN APPROACH TO OVERCOME THE OBSTACLES POSED   BY THE CLOSE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AGRICULTURAL PROTECTIONISM AND   DOMESTIC AGRICULTURAL POLICIES. THEY AGREED I N  THIS CONTEXT THAT AN   EARLY START SHOULD BE MADE IN REDUCING EXPORT SUBSIDIES ADOPTED BY  

 DEVELOPED COUNTRIES TO SUPPORT THEIR AGRICULTURE. THEY STRESSED THE IMPORTANCE OF IMPROVING THE DISPUTES SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES UNDER   THE GATT AND OF ALL COUNTRIES ADHERING TO THE DECISIONS AND   DIS CIPL INES  INVOLVED.

 COMMODITY PROBLEMS (UNDERLINED)

 32. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT EXPRESSED GREAT CONCERN AT THE SHARP   DECLINE IN COMMODITY PRICES IN RECENT YEARS AND THE DISASTROUS EFFECT   THIS WAS HAVING ON THE TERMS OF TRADE OF MANY DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.   CURRENT TRENDS DEMONSTRATED THE VITAL IMPORTANCE OF COMMODITY PRICE   AND EXPORT EARNINGS STABILISATION ARRANGEMENTS AND THE NEED TO  

 REDOUBLE EFFORTS TO SECURE THEIR ESTABLISHMENT. THEY AGREED THAT   EARLY RELIEF COULD BE GIVEN BY MORE ADEQUATE PROVISION FOR MEETING EXPORT SHORTFALLS THROUGH THE LIBERALISATION OF ACCESS TO THE   IMF COMPENSATORY FINANCING FACILITY. THE SITUATION ALSO CALLED FOR   INNOVATIVE APPROACHES INCLUDING INCREASED EMPHASIS ON CO-OPERATION   AMONG PRODUCING COUNTRIES TO PROTECT THEMSELVES AGAINST THE VAGARIES   OF INTERNATIONAL COMMODITY MARKETS.

 ENERGY (UNDERLINED)

 33. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT WERE OF THE VIEW THAT THE PRESENT SOFTNESS   OF THE OIL MARKET SHOULD NOT LULL THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY INTO   INACTION ON THE ENERGY FRONT. THEY STRESSED THAT IMMEDIATE   CONSIDERATION SHOULD BE GIVEN TO DEVISING SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS TO MEET THE ENERGY NEEDS OF LOW INCOME AND LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES   FACING DIFFICULT BALANCE OF PAYMENT PROBLEMS AND TO FACILITATING   INCREASED AVAILABILITY OF INTERNATIONAL FINANCING FOR DEVELOPMENT OF   THEIR INDIGENOUS ENERGY RESOURCES INCLUDING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE   ENERGY AFFILIATE OF THE WORLD BANK. THEY WELCOMED THE CONCESSIONAL   ARRANGEMENT FOR THE PURCHASE OF OIL INTRODUCED BY SEVERAL OIL

 EXPORTING COUNTRIES SUCH AS MEXICO, VENEZUELA, AND TRINIDAD AND   TOBAGO FOR CENTRAL AMERICAN AND CARIBBEAN COUNTRIES AND NIGERIA FOR   AFRICAN COUNTRIES, AND URGED WIDER APPLICATION OF SIMILAR MEASURES   ENCOMPASSING OTHER GEOGRAPHICAL ZONES.

 FOOD PROBLEMS (UNDERLINED)

 34. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT EXPRESSED DEEP CONCERN OVER THE CRITICAL AND   WORSENING FOOD SITUATION FACED BY MANY DEVELOPING COUNTRIES,   PARTICULARLY THE LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES. THERE WAS AN URGENT NEED FOR A DEPENDABLE SYSTEM OF WORLD FOOD SECURITY. THEY CALLED   FOR EARLY ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INTERNATIONAL GRAINS ARRANGEMENT   WHICH SHOULD RECOGNISE THE SPECIAL NEEDS OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES. THEY URGED THAT EFFECTIVE STEPS BE TAKEN TO MEET THE FOOD AID TARGET   AGREED IN THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY FOR THE THIRD   UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT DECADE. THEY STRESSED THE IMPORTANCE   OF PROVIDING ADEQUATE FINANClALAND TECHNICAL RESOURCES TO ENHANCE   FOOD PRODUCTION.

 REGIONAL ECONOMIC AND FUNCTIONAL CO-OPERATION

 35. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT RECOGNISED THAT PROGRAMMES OF PRACTICAL   CO-OPERATION DESIGNED TO ASSIST THE PROCESS OF DEVELOPMENT WERE AN   IMPORTANT PRODUCT OF THEIR DELIBERATIONS AND THEY NOTED WITH   SATISFACTION THE PROGRESS ACHIEVED IN THIS REGARD BY THE  

 CONSULTATIVE/WORKING GROUPS SET UP AT EARLIER MEETINGS. THEY AGREED   THAT THE WORK OF THE GROUPS SHOULD BE CONTINUED WITH GREATER EMPHASIS   ON A PRACTICAL, ACTION-ORIENTED APPROACH. THEY FURTHER AGREED THAT   ONE OF THE MAJOR OBJECTIVES OF THE PROGRAMMES OF FUNCTIONAL   CO-OPERATION WAS TO ASSIST THE SMALL ISLAND COUNTRIES OF THE REGION TO OVERCOME THEIR SPECIAL PROBLEMS OF DEVELOPMENT.

 36. WHILE CALLING FOR AN EXPANSION OF CFTC SUPPORT FOR ALL   DEVELOPING COUNTRIES OF THE REGION, THEY WELCOMED THE ENHANCED   PROGRAMMES OF ASSISTANCE TO THE SMALL ISLAND COUNTRIES UNDERTAKEN BY   THE CFTC THROUGH REGIONAL AND FUNCTIONAL PROGRAMMES AND IN  

 COLLABORATION WITH CHOGRM GROUPS. THEY EXPRESSED PARTICULAR   APPRECIATION FOR THE ASSISTANCE PROVIDED BY THE CFTC IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PACIFIC REGIONAL ADVISORY SERVICE WHICH   HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED WITHIN THE SOUTH PACIFIC BUREAU FOR ECONOMIC   CO-OPERATION, AND FOR THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE PLEDGED BY THE   AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FOR THE SECRETARIAT TO FACILITATE CHOGRM STATES   TO HAVE PERMANENT REPRESENTATION AT THE UNITED NATIONS.

 TRADE (UNDERLINED)

 37. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT EMPHASISED THE IMPORTANCE OF CONTINUING TO   PURSUE EFFORTS TO FACILITATE THE LIBERALISATION OF TRADE WITHIN . . . / I I

 THE REGION AND TO BRING COLLECTIVE PRESSURE TO BEAR ON BARRIERS IN   THE MAJOR INDUSTRIALISED COUNTRIES TO EXPORTS FROM THE LESS DEVELOPED   COUNTRIES OF THE REGION. THEY RECOGNISED THE IMPORTANCE OF THE GSP   AS AN INSTRUMENT FOR PROMOTING FURTHER TRADE LIBERALISATION WITHIN   THE REGION AND URGED THE DEVELOPED COUNTRIES IN THE REGION TO ACCORD   CAREFUL AND SYMPATHETIC CONSIDERATION TO PROPOSALS AIMED AT ACHIEVING   AN EXPANSION OF PRODUCT COVERAGE AND A DEEPENING OF PRFERENCES FOR   THE EXPORTS OF DEVELOPING MEMBER COUNTRIES. THEY NOTED THE VIEW OF   DEVELOPING COUNTRIES THAT THE MORE ADVANCED COUNTRIES WITHIN THE   REGION COULD PLAY A DYNAMIC ROLE I N  INCREASING REGIONAL TRADE BY   REDUCING THEIR IMPORT BARRIERS. I N  THIS CONTEXT THEY WELCOMED THE   I N I T I A T I V E  OF AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND IN ESTABLISHING THE SPARTECA   AGREEMENT WHICH PROVIDES FOR DUTY FREE, UNRESTRICTED ACCESS FOR THE   FORUM ISLAND COUNTRIES. THEY DIRECTED THE CHOGRM TRADE GROUP TO   CONSIDER THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE VARIOUS STUDIES IT HAD   COMMISSIONED WITH A VIEW TO THEIR PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION.

 38. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT RECOGNSIED THAT CONSIDERABLE SCOPE EXISTED   FOR ASIAN AND PACIFIC COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES TO INCREASE THEIR   EXPORTS TO DESTINATIONS BOTH WITHIN AND OUTSIDE THE REGION. THEY   NOTED HOWEVER, THAT INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITIES FOR TRADE NEEDED TO  

 BE DEVELOPED OR STRENGTHENED., OPPORTUNITIES FOR TRADE HAD TO BE   IDENTIFIED AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE WAS REQUIRED IF  THEY WERE TO BE   EXPLOITED. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT NOTED THE FACILITIES AVAILABLE   WITHIN THE EXPORT MARKET DEVELOPMENT D I V I S I O N  OF THE SECRETARIAT TO   TAKE UP AN EXTENSIVE RANGE OF PROJECTS TO DEVELOP AND EXPAND THE   TRADE OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE REGION AND THE CONSIDERABLE WORK THAT   HAD ALREADY BEEN DONE IN THE REGION BY THE D I V I S I O N .  THEY ENDORSED   THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE TRADE GROUP THAT THE SECRETARIAT SHOULD   INCREASE THE LEVEL OF ITS ACTIVITY IN EXPORT DEVELOPMENT IN THE   ASIAN AND PACIFIC REGION AND AGREED THAT ADDITIONAL FUNDS SHOULD

 BE PROVIDED TO MAKE THIS POSSIBLE.

 39. IN ENDORSING ITS REPORT HEADS OF GOVERNMENT REQUESTED THE   TRADE GROUP TO CONTINUE ITS WORK WITHIN ITS PRESENT MANDATE AND TO   TAKE DUE REGARD OF, INTER ALIA, THE DECISIONS OF THE GATT MINISTERIAL   MEETING I N  DETERMINING I T  PRIORITIES FOR FUTURE WORK.

 ENERGY (UNDERLINED)

 AO. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ENDORSED THE REPORT OF THE CONSULTATIVE   GROUP ON ENERGY. THEY NOTED WITH SATISFACTION THAT THE GROUP WAS   NOW ENTERING A NEW PHASE OF ACTIVITIES I N  WHICH A CONCRETE PROGRAMME   OF DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS WILL BE UNDERTAKEN. THEY WELCOMED THE   RECENT I N IT IA TI VE S  TAKEN IN IDENTIFYING PROJECTS AND SITES FOR THE   ESTABLISHMENT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS AND. ENERGY CONSERVATION   TECHNOLOGIES FOR PURPOSES OF DEMONSTRATION, EVALUATION AND TRAINING. THEY ALSO WELCOMED THE WILLINGNESS OF AUSTRALIA AND INDIA TO SUPPORT

 . . , / 1 2

 THE INSTALLATION OF SOME OF THESE STYSTEMS AS PART OF THE PROGRAMME.   THEY ALSO NOTED WITH SATISFACTION THAT THE GROUP’ S ACTIVITIES I N  THE   SOUTH PACIFIC WILL IN FUTURE COMPLEMENT AND SUPPLEMENT THE PACIFIC   ENERGY PROGRAMME CO-ORDINATED BY SPEC. THEY ALSO AGREED THAT THE  

 SERVICES OF CRRERIS BE EXTENDED TO SPEC.

 41. NOTING THAT THERE EXISTS SCOPE FOR CO-OPERATION IN RESPECT OF   FEASIBILITY STUDIES, CONSULTANCY SERVICES, PROJECT EXECUTION ETC.,   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT AGREED THAT THE SCOPE OF ACTIVITIES OF THE GROUP   SHOULD BE EXPANDED TO HELP PROMOTE SUCH CO-OPERATION IN COMMERCIAL  

 SCALE ENERGY PROJECTS I N  COUNTRIES OF THE REGION.

 INDUSTRY (UNDERLINED)

 HEADS OF GOVERNMENT CONSIDERED THE REPORT OF THE WORKING GROUP   ON INDUSTRY AND NOTED WITH APPRECIATION THE THRUST OF ITS WORK IN   ASSISTING MEMBER COUNTRIES, ESPECIALLY SMALL ISLAND STATES, TOWARD   THE ACHIEVEMENT OF TANGIBLE RESULTS I N  INDUSTRIAL PROJECTS. THEY   COMMENDED THE WORK OF THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT UNIT ( I D U )  OF   THE CFTC I N  PROVIDING THE NECESSARY TECHNICAL AND FIELD SERVICES FOR   THE ESTABLISHMENT OF PROJECTS ON THE GROUND. THEY NOTED WITH  

 SATISFACTION THAT THE VIABILITY OF MORE THAN SEVENTY INDUSTRIAL   PROJECTS, MAINLY I N  THE SMALL SCALE AND AGRO-BASED SECTORS, HAS BEEN   ESTABLISHED I N  THE REGION AND THAT THEIR PROGRESS TOWARD   IMPLEMENTATION HAS BEEN FACILITATED BY INPUTS OF TECHNOLOGY,   ENGINEERING, INFORMATION EXCHANGES, TECHNICAL COLLABORATION,  

 ENTREPENEURSHIP DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT FLOWS.

 4 3 .  THEY NOTED THE ARRANGEMENTS EFFECTED BY THE GROUP FOR CO­ ORDINATION WITH SPEC AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND EXPRESSED   GRATITUDE FOR THE FINANCIAL AND OTHER PRACTICAL ASSISTANCE PROVIDED   BY INDIVIDUAL MEMBER COUNTRIES. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ALSO APPROVED   THE FUTURE PROGRAMME OF WORK AS PROPOSED IN THE GROUP'S REPORT WHICH  

 COULD LEAD TO FURTHER PROGRESS I N  THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROJECTS.

 AGRICULTURE (UNDERLINED)

 HEADS OF GOVERNMENT CONSIDERED THE REPORT OF THE EXPERT STUDY   GROUP ON AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT SET UP BY THE   SECREGARY-GENERAL IN RESPONSE TO THEIR REQUEST MADE I N  NEW DELHI IN   1 98 0 . THEY ENDORSED THE VIEWS EXPRESSED I N  THE REPORT ON THE   PRIORITY NEEDS OF MEMBER COUNTRIES OF THE REGION AND ITS   RECOMMENDATIONS RELATING TO THE UPGRADING OF PROFESSIONAL SKILLS. , THE EXCHANGE OF PUBLICATIONS AND RESEARCH MATERIALS BETWEEN MEMBER   COUNTRIES., GREATER DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION THROUGH MORE   EFFICIENT UTILISATION OF EXISTING INFORMATION SERVICES., AND THE  

 STRENGTHENING OF PROGRAMMES OF SPECIALIST TRAINING USING EXISTING   INSTITUTIONS WITHIN THE REGION. THEY AGREED THAT I N  ORDER TO PROVIDE / I  3

 A CENTRAL FOCUS FOR THE VARIOUS ACTIVITIES PROPOSED A CONSULTATIVE   GROUP ON AGRICULTURE SHOULD BE ESTABLISHED AND ACCEPTED THE OFFER OF   SRI LANKA TO ACT AS CONVENOR OF THE GROUP.

 I L L I C I T  DRUGS (UNDERLINED)

 4 5 .  HEADS OF GOVERNMENT COMPLIMENTED THE WORKING GROUP ON I L L I C I T   DRUGS WHOSE WORK HAD CONTRIBUTED TO THE AWARENESS OF THE PROBLEMS   ASSOCIATED WITH DRUG TRAFFICKING AND THE NEED FOR CO-OPERATION AMONG   COMMONWEALTH AND OTHER COUNTRIES IN THE REGION. ITS DELIBERATIONS   HAD DEMONSTRATED THAT THE PROBLEM OF I L L I C I T  DRUGS CONSTITUTED A   THREAT TO THE SECURITY, STABILITY AND SOCIAL ORDER OF A NATION. THEY   ENDORSED THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE WORKING GROUP THAT SINCE THE GROUP   HAD FULFILLED ITS MANDATE IT SHOULD ONLY MEET I N  THE FUTURE AT THE  

 REQUEST OF MEMBER COUNTRIES AS AND WHEN THE NEED AROSE

 46.  HEADS OF GOVERNMENT RECOGNISED THE CRITICAL IMPORTANCE OF   MARITIME ISSUES TO ALL MEMBERS OF THE REGION. THEY NOTED, I N   PARTICULAR, THE COMPLEXITY, DIVERSITY AND INTERRELATED NATURE OF   THESE MATTERS WHICH WERE OF BOTH POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC SIGNIFICANCE   TO GOVERNMENT. THEY WELCOMED THE SUGGESTION OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL   THAT POTENTIAL EXISTS FOR CO-OPERATION AMONG MEMBER GOVERNMENTS IN   THIS AREA AND EXPRESSED APPRECIATION FOR THE SPECIFIC PROPOSAL OF THE   GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA FOR THE COMMISSIONING OF A REPORT ON SUCH   CO-OPERATION. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT THEREFORE ASKED THE   SECRETARY-GENERAL AFTER FURTHER CONSULTATIONS WITH GOVERNMENTS AS   APPROPRIATE, TO CONVENE A SMALL GROUP OF EXPERTS FROM  

 MULTIDISCIPLINARY BACKGROUNDS TO PREPARE A REPORT TO BE AVAILABLE AS   EARLY AS POSSIBLE. THIS REPORT SHOULD ASSESS WHAT ACTIVITY I S   ALREADY BEING CARRIED OUT ON A REGIONAL, MULTILATERAL AND BILATERAL   BASIS AND SHOULD IDENTIFY POSSIBLE NEW AREAS WHICH MIGHT BE TAKEN UP   AND WHETHER SCOPE EXISTS FOR COMPLEMENTING EXISTING PROGRAMMES.

 HUMAN RESOURCES (UNDERLINED)

 47. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT RECOGNISED THAT SHORTAGES OF TRAINED   MANPOWER CONSTITUTED A MAJOR CONSTRAINT ON DEVELOPMENT, PARTICULARLY   IN THE SMALL ISLAND COUNTRIES. GAPS I N  THE AVAILABILITY OF HUMAN   RESOURCES EXISTED IN A WIDE RANGE OF TECHNICAL AND PROFESSIONAL   FIELDS THROUGHOUT THE REGION AND HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ACKNOWLEDGED   THAT CONSIDERABLE SCOPE EXSITED FOR ADDITIONAL TRAINING FACILITIES   AND PROGRAMMES. THEY AGREED THAT EACH OF THE CONSULTATIVE/WORKING   GROUPS SHOULD GIVE GREATER EMPHASIS TO MAKING MAXIMUM USE OF   EXISTING INSTITUTIONS WHEREVER RELEVANT.

 EMPLOYMENT/LABOUR (UNDERLINED)

 48. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT WELCOMED THE OUTCOME OF THE FIRST / 1 4

 MEETING OF COMMONWEALTH MINISTERS OF EMPLOYMENT/LABOUR, HELD IN   GENEVA ON 1 JUNE 1 9 8 2 ,  WHICH HAD BEEN ARRANGED IN RESPONSE TO THE   REQUEST BY COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT AT THEIR MEETING I N   MELBOURNE IN OCTOBER 1981. THEY ESPRESSED THE VIEW THAT GREATER   COMMONWEALTH CO-OPERATION ON IMPORTANT EMPLOYMENT AND LABOUR IS SUES,   INCLUDING EDUCATION AND TRAINING AND MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT, WAS   DESIRABLE AND LOOKED FORWARD TO RECEIVING SPECIFIC PROPOSALS FROM   THE 1 98 3  MEETING OF EMPLOYMENT/LABOUR MINISTERS.

 FUNDING (UNDERLINED)

 49. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT, RECOGNISING THAT THE WORK OF THE   CONSULTATIVE/WORKING GROUPS HAD ENTERED A MORE ACTION-ORIENTED PHASE,   TOOK THE VIEW THAT REGIONAL FUNCTIONAL CO-OPERATION REQUIRED A FIRMER   BASIS FOR MOBILISING REGIONAL FINANCIAL RESOURCES. THEY AGREED THAT  

 ADDITIONAL EARMARKED CONTRIBUTIONS FROM MEMBER COUNTRIES, ON A   VOLUNTARY BASIS, SHOULD, THROUGH A SPECIAL ACCOUNT WITHIN THE CFTC, BE USED TO FINANCE ACTIVITIES UNDERTAKEN AT THE REQUEST OF THE GROUPS   ON TRADE, ENERGY, INDUSTRY AND AGRICULTURE AND TO MEET THE COSTS OF  

 THE NEW STUDY GROUP ON MARITIME ISSUES. THE CFTC, I N  PURSUANCE OF   ITS NORMAL ACTIVITIES I N  THE REGION WOULD CONTINUE TO RESPOND TO   REQUESTS FOR ASSISTANCE FROM INDIVIDUAL MEMBER GOVERNMENTS AND   REGIONAL INSTITUTIONS. THEY EXPRESSED THE HOPE THAT THESE FINANCIAL   RESOURCES WOULD BE SUPPLEMENTED FROM OTHER INTERNATIONAL SOURCES   INCLUDING THE UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM.

 APPRECIATION AND NEXT MEETING (UNDERLINED)

 50. HEADS OF GOVERNMENT WELCOMED WITH GREAT PLEASURE THE OPPORTUNITY   OF THEIR MEETING I N  SUVA AND EXPRESSED THEIR APPRECIATION OF THE   EXCELLENT ARRANGEMENTS MADE FOR THE MEETING AND THE WARM AND   FRIENDLY HOSPITALITY OF THE GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE OF F I J I .  THEY   ACCEPTED WITH PLEASURE THE INVITATION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF PAPUA NEW   GUINEA TO HOLD THEIR NEXT MEETING THERE IN ABOUT TWO YEARS.

