---
title: "Special target for community refugee settlement scheme"
date: "1982-12-02"
creators:
  - "Hodges, John"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213895828
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09001877%22
---

 »

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. ,  .  o

 THE HON JOHN HODGES,  MP

 2 December 1982

 SPECIAL TARGET FOR COMMUNITY REFUGEE SETTLEMENT SCHEME

 The Government has decided to set a special target of

 and Ethnic Affairs,  John Hodges,  said that the success of 

 the scheme had led him to decide to allocate the places 

 in 1982/83 to refugees from various parts of the world, 

 sponsored utirder the CRSS. This fi'gure Was not an addition 

 to, but part of, the total refugee program.

 "Experience to date with the CRSS has demonstrated just 

 how effective community support can be, particularly for 

 refugees who require greater personal attention than the 

 Government can provide in hostels,V Mr Hodges said.

 "I refer to the disabled, single parent families, and 

 families or individuals w h o ,  for some other reason, have 

 ailhigher than usual chance of encountering settlement diff­

 iculties." ·

 achievement vin resettling refugees in concert with other

 community interest in becoming more directly involved in 

 the settlement of refugees. «Under the scheme, refugees

 3 000 places to refugees settled under the Community Refugee 

 Settlement Scheme (CRSS).

 In announcing the decision, the Minister for Immigration

 "Such people are doubly disadvantaged. It would not be 

 in keeping with Australia's proud record of. humanitarian

 resettlement countries to forsake this group simply because 

 their needs are greater." '

 The Community Refugee Settlement Scheme had been 

 introduced 1979 in response to an increasing

 were assisted by community groups with special emphasis 

 on accommodation and employment. ' 

 2 /

 Î¿ .  * .  .

 ÎœÎ¤Î¿ date,  about 5 500 refugees have been resettled under 

 the scheme, of whom 2 580 arrived in 1981/82," Mr Hodges 

 said. .  .  .

 ÎŠ ·  V â–  "This means that to realise a target of. 3 000, Australians  are being asked to offer a record number of places under 

 the scheme. I am convinced from experience so far that they 

 w i l l ·successfully respond to that challenge,"Mr Hodges said.

 Media Contacts Anna Marsden-Stewart,  Department of Immigration  * and Ethnic Affairs,  (062) 64.2184, Alberto Corboz,  Department of Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs,  (062) 64 2726 or Scott Prasser,

 ,  Minister's Office (07) 225 2880.

 .  i

 V

 â™¦

 t

 f e » ; ,  ; â– 

