---
title: "Australia contributes $250,000 for anti-piracy programs"
date: "1982-03-12"
creators:
  - "Street, Anthony"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213772841
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10029409%22
---

 MINISTER FOR 

 FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 No. W32 Date 12 March 19^2

 NEWS RELEASE THE HON. TONY STREET, M.P.

 Ό

 AUSTRALIA CONTRIBUTES $250/000 FOR ANTI-PIRACY PpOGRftMS

 The M in is te r fo r Foreign A f f a ir s / the Hon. Tony S treet MR/  announced today th a t A u s tra lia  woyld contribute $250/Q00 to the appeal  by the United Nations High Commissioner fo r Refugees fo r funds fo r an  a n ti-p ira c y  program in the G ulf o | Thailand. f

 The US$3.67 m illio n  program w ill be administered by the  Royal Thai Government/ and w ill re a c tiv a te  and expand e a r lie r  suspended  e ffo rts  to combat p iracy in the region. The M in is te r said he was  pleased th a t eleven other Western n iflo n s  have pledged contributions   to the program. A u s tra lia 's  donaitiSFTTs the fourth largest of the  twelve pledges. * ' }

 Mr S treet s a id / "The A u stralian  Government js  deeply concerned  at the extent of p ira te  a c t iv it y  e ffe c tin g  refugees fre ein g  Vietnam by  boat. There is  not only a need tip protect these so eglled 'boat people' 

 but also to ensure the safety o f fishermen and other le g itim a te  users of  Thai t e r r i t o r i a l  w aters. A u s tra lia 's  co n trib u tio n  to 'th e  a n ti-p ira c y   program is a firm  expression of t | e  Government's humanitarian in te re s t   in seeking an e ffe c tiv e  remedy to th is  abhorrent and inhumane .p ra c tic e ."

 Mr S treet expressed his appreciation fo r the w illingness of  the Royal Thai Government to adm inister the a n ti-p ira c y  program and  noted the past assistance of th at Government in undertaking measures  to combat acts of p iracy w ith in  Thai t e r r i t o r i a l  waters.

