---
title: "New refugee task force co-ordination for Kuala Lumpur"
date: "1982-07-26"
creators:
  - "Hodges, John"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213893192
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09001835%22
---

 i

 From the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

 , / 82|u>i 26 July 1982

 ,  NEW REFUGEE TASK FORCE CO-ORDINATION FOR KUALA LUMPUR

 1 $

 Mr Frank Anglin has been appointed co-ordinator of the

 Australian Refugee Task Force in South East Asia.

 Working from Kuala Lumpur, he will be responsible for refugee 

 !  operations in Malaysia, Thailand, Singapore and Indonesia.

 Mr Anglin takes over from Mr Peter Lange, who has recently 

 returned to Canberra. Mr Anglin will leave Australia on July 27, 

 v i  will spend some time being briefed in Singapore and will take up duty 

 i  in Kuala Lumpur on 30 July.

 I  Bora in Ballarat in 1943, Mr Anglin underwent his primary and

 • I  !  secondary education in that city. He gained his B.A. in Public 

 .  Administration and Anthropology at the University of Queensland.

 For thirteen years from 1963, he served in the Papua New Guinea 

 1  Public Service as a patrol officer and later as a specialist local 

 government officer in the Department of the Chief Minister.

 Back in Australia in 1975, he joined the Commonwealth Department 

 of Aboriginal Affairs in Queensland, and in 1979 joined the Department 

 of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in Canberra. Within the^ Department, 

 he has worked in the post-arrival policy area, the Galbally working 

 group, and the information policy unit. For twelve months, he was 

 involved in the Department's executive development program and was 

 attached to the welfare division of the Department of the Prime 

 Minister and Cabinet.

 Mr Anglin is married with two children. His spare time interests 

 include junior cricket administration and coaching.

 Media contact: Anna Marsden-Stewart,  Department of Immigration and

 Ethnic Affairs, Canberra (0.62) 64 2184.

