---
title: "South African 'Pete Smith' - claims refugee status"
date: "1982-01-07"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213771935
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09001777%22
---

 \

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.

 The Hon. Ian Macphee, MP

 3/82

 ‘  . \

 SOUTH AFRICAN 'PETE SMITH,1  - CLAIMS REFUGEE STATUS’

 "The South African national described as. 'Pete Smith1  in  media reports today has been in Australia for some time  and applied for refugee status several months ago under  his real name," the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic 

 Affairs, Mr Ian Macphee said today. .

 In accordance with normal procedures, the man has  been interviewed for the Determination of Refugee  Status (DORS) Committee which examines all claims  to refugee status by foreign nationals in Australia. .

 "That examination is now virtually complete and the Committee's  recommendation is likely to be available “to me in the  course of the next week or so," the Minister said.

 Commenting on his remarks on the ABC program AM this  morning, Mr Macphee said cases such as this were not simple.   The issue to be considered was not only the question of  draft avoidance or conscientious objection but, most 

 importantly, the activities of the individual and the  prospect.of persecution should he return to his country of  origin.

 Canberra

 7 January 1982

 * * * * * *

 Media Contacts; Alberto Corboz, Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, (062) 64 2726, v

 Anne Simson, Minister's Office (062) 73 3211.

 . y

