---
title: "Caritas house - migrant project subsidy"
date: "1982-03-22"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213772975
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09001791%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  fiS M ih iriA ©  M f e if lE , mp

 ! 17/82 22 March 1982 =

 CARITAS HOUSE - MIGRANT PROJECT SUBSIDY '

 A grant of $5 000 to the Society of St Vincent de Paul, 

 Canberra, towards the cost of furnishing Caritas House was 

 I  announced today by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic 

 Affairs, Mr Ian Macphee. .

 I  '  .

 Caritas House is a special work of the St Vincent de Paul 

 1  Society established to provide accommodation for young 

 refugees of either sex who have no family support in Australia.

 The grant was made under the Migrant Project Subsidy 

 Scheme, which was designed to assist voluntary and non-Governmental 

 organisations in meeting the cost of projects aimed at improving 

 existing or establishing new welfare services for migrants.

 "This project is particularly worthy of support," Mr Macphee 

 said. "Isolated refugee children are without the emotional, .  

 material and practical support of a domestic unit. Caritas House 

 I  will provide them with short to medium-term accommodation and 

 iwith house parent support.

 '  "I am most impressed with the level of the on-going support 

 and the extent of the overall contribution provided by the 

 'sponsoring organisation".

 !Media contacts: Chris Robb,  Department of Immigration and 

 Ethnic Affairs, Canberra (062) 67 1333 or 

 Anne Simson, Minister's Office (062) 73 32.11.

