---
title: "Commonwealth grants to ethnic schools authorities"
date: "1982-07-20"
creators:
  - "Fife, Wal"
source: "Minister for Education"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213893081
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09001538%22
---

 M. 50/82 MINISTER FOR 

 EDUCATION news release

 35 -

 20 July 1982

 / 3

 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO ETHNIC SCHOOLS AUTHORITIES

 Sixty-three ethnic schools authorities in New South Wales, Victoria, 

 South Australia and Tasmania share $206,280 in the first round of 

 Commonwealth Government grants under the Commonwealth ethnic schools 

 program for 1982, announced by the Minister for Education, Senator 

 Peter Baume, today.

 Senator Baume said grants to other organisations would be made soon.

 A total of $3 million was available under the program for approved 

 courses' in community languages and cultures in 1982, and courses 

 -beginning at any time until 1 October would be eligible for a share 

 of these funds.

 The grants are administered by the Commonwealth Schools Commission.

 They are per-capita grants, providing up to $30 per student towards the 

 education-related recurrent costs of providing the courses. Grant 

 money is available for such costs as teachers' salaries, teacher and 

 curriculum development, supply and development of teaching materials 

 and equipment (apart from major capital items), and rental of premises.

 The courses run by ethnic communities may be either inserted in a 

 school schedule or conducted outside normal school time, but they must 

 be open to students regardless of ethnic origin. '

 The Government decided to establish the ethnic schools program after it 

 was recommended by the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs in 

 September 1980. The first grants were made in 1981. The program was 

 for an initial period of two years, but the Government has already 

 indicated that financial support will continue in 1983.

 2

 X

 ^  The 1982 grants approved so far are: .-· - . ' i ·

 /

 New South Wales; ,

 Ashfield Arabic Ethnic School, Ashfield, $1,350; Polish Educational 

 .  Society in NSW, Ashfield, $2,340; Greek Orthodox Community of

 Bankstown (St Euphemia), Bankstown, $21,660; Greek Orthodox Parish and 

 Community of Belmore and District, Belmore, $20,100; Hellenic Orthodox 

 Community of Blacktown and Districts, Blacktown, $3,570; Czechoslovak 

 Sokol Gymnastic Association Ltd, French's Forest, $1,620; Goulburn 

 Greek Community School, Goulburn, $1,110; Homebush West Turkish Ethnic 

 .  School Parents Association, Homebush West, $990; St Andrew's Ukrainian

 Ethnic School, Lidcombe, $3,720; Ukrainian Central School Parents and 

 Citizens Association, Lidcombe, $1,710; Serbian Cultural and Artistic 

 Society (Zavicaj), Liverpool, $900; Ukrainian Association of 

 Merrylands, Merrylands, $300; St Constantine and St Helen Sunday 

 School, Greek Orthodox Church, Newtown, $6,420; Greek Orthodox Parish 

 of Paddington, Paddington, $2,100; Moslem Alawy Society, Punchbowl, 

 $7,830; Macedonian School (Goce Delcev), Queanbeyan, $960;

 Egyptian Islamic Society, Redfern, $1,650; Greek Cathedral Parish of 

 Annunciation of Our Lady, Redfern, $1,680; Lebanese Schools Committee, 

 Redfern, $4,860; St Maron's Cathedral, Redfern, $8,670; St Francis 

 Xavier Spanish Language School, Lavender· Bay, $1,050; Sydney Chinese 

 Tutorial Centre, Summer Hill, $2,190. -

 Total: $96,780.

 Victoria *

 Sunshine Polish Charity Association, Ardeer, $1,380; Hungarian 

 Cultural Council, Armadale, $2,250; Greek Ethnic School Wangaratta 

 and Benalla, Benalla, $480; Templer Community Bentleigh/Moorabbin, 

 Bentleigh, $1,050; The Protypo Bilingual Education Centre, Blackburn, 

 $1,980; Vietnamese Community of Collingwood, Brunswick, $2,280; 

 Antonine Sisters (Our Lady of Lebanon), Carlton, $10,350; Victorian- 

 Croatian Association (Matija Gubec), Carlton South, $4,020;

 2

 Greek Orthodox Community of Clayton Ltd, Clayton, $7,830; Springvale 

 Turkish Association, Clayton South, $1,080; Hellenic Orthodox 

 Community of Doncaster and Templestowe, Doncaster, $3,480;

 Mrs F. Stylianopoulos, East Prahran, $960; Serbian Parish School 

 (Branko Radichevich), Elaine, $1,200; Melbourne Latvian Society, 

 Elwood, $2,940; St Nectaries Greek School, Fawkner, $5,010; Glenroy 

 Greek School Parents Association, Glenroy, $1,470; Greek Orthodox 

 Community of Hampton and Sandringham, Hampton, $1,020; Slovenian 

 Religious and Cultural Centre of Victoria, Kew, $930; Slovenian Ethnic 

 School Geelong, Lovely Banks, $660; Brazilian Club of Victoria, 

 Maribyrnong, $1,050; Greek Orthodox Community of Mentone and 

 Districts, Mentone, $5,670; Mentone Greek Cultural Association, 

 Mentone, $1,260; Spanish School Community Group, Mitcham, $1,200; 

 Epirotic Philanthropic Society Dodoni, Moonee Ponds, $3,180; Hellenic 

 Lyceum "Lepidas", Mt Evelyn, $6,000; Australian Islamic Society of 

 Dandenong, Noble Park, $2,130; Czechoslovak Parents Association, North 

 Melbourne, $900; North and East Sunshine Greek School, North Sunshine, 

 $1,140; Port Melbourne Greek Community, Port Melbourne, $1,650; 

 Vietnamese Parents Association in Richmond, Richmond, $3,480;

 St Albans Turkish Community Child-Care Co-operative Ltd, St Albans, 

 $840; Friends of Refugees of Eastern Europe, St Hilda, $2,310;

 Parish of St Eustathius, Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia, South 

 Melbourne, $1,890; St George Antiochian Orthodox Church, Thornbury, 

 $2,160; North Brunswick Primary School Turkish Parents Association, 

 West Brunswick, $2,250; Turkish School Committee, West Sunshine, 

 $1,620; Macedonian Cultural and Education Society (Kiril Metodi), 

 Yarraville, $1,410.

 Total; $90,510.

 South Australia

 Swedish School, Magill, $330; Adelaide Lithuanian Community Weekend 

 School, Norwood, $1,530; St George Greek Orthodox Community,

 Thebarton, $14,700.

 Total; $16,560.

 Tasmania

 Polish Association in Hobart, New Town, $2,430.

 Total Approvals; $206,280

