---
title: "Grant for migrant self-help project"
date: "1982-08-19"
creators:
  - "Hodges, John"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213893720
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09001843%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration „  and Ethnic Affairs.

 THE HON JOHN HODGES, MP

 V S 0 ! .

 19 August 1982

 GRANT FOR MIGRANT SELF-HELP PROJECT

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr John Hodges, today announced a grant under the Migrant  Project Subsidy Scheme (MPSS) to the Society of St  Vincent de Paul in Tasmania.

 The grant of $260 is to part fund a study tour by Sister 

 Anne Thompson of the Society, of various refugee centres  and welfare agencies on the mainland with the aim of  further developing refugee settlement programs in operation  in Tasmania.

 "The project is only marginally suitable for funding under  the MPSS. I have made an exception in this case in 

 recognition of the good work being done by the Society in  refugee settlement," said Mr Hodges.

 Grants under the Migrant Project Subsidy Scheme are for  self-help activities, and provide once only subsidies to  ethnic and other voluntary organisations to assist them  ίη meeting the cost of migrant welfare related projects.

 The Government recently agreed to increase the total funds  available each year for the Scheme to $200,000 and to  Ln-'rease the maximum possible grant up to $10,000.

 Organisations interested in finding out more about the  Scheme should contact the nearest office of the Department  of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.

 Media Contacts: Mr Peter Thompson, Regional Director, Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, (002) 20408?, Hobart.

