---
title: "Polish refugees arrive on special flight from Vienna"
date: "1982-04-16"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213773313
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09001803%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs. I  Hon Ian Macphee, MP

 > 2-

 POLISH REFUGEES ARRIVE ON SPECIAL FLIGHT FROM VIENNA

 Two hundred Eastern European refugees will arrive in  Australia tomorrow on the first of six Qantas flights from  Vienna, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Ian Macphee, said today.

 Regular Qantas flights from Europe will detour to Vienna  during April and May to aid the movement of Eastern  European refugees. The arrangement is designed to help . Austria cope with large numbers of asylum seekers by speeding 

 up the movement of those to be resettled in Australia. Qantas  has v not operated a schedule service through Vienna since  early 1980.

 The refugees arriving tomorrow will be accommodated in  Australian Government Migrant Centres in Melbourne, Sydney  and Brisbane, Mr Macphee said.

 The other five flights will account for a further 1 160  persons, bringing the total number carried on the special  flights to 1. 360 persons. This will bring Australia's refugee  intake from Austria in the 1981/82 program year to 4 330.  More than 85 'per cent of the people concerned are Poles.

 Mr Macphee added that Australia continues to admit Eastern  European refugees from other first asylum countries,  principally West Germany and Yugoslavia.

 * * * * * * *

 Canberra  16 April 1982

 Media Contacts: Mr Trevor Griffiths, Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, (062) 81-2436, . Mrs Anne Simson, Minister's Office, (062)  73-3446.

