---
title: "Refugees in Somalia: $150,000 grant to save the children fund"
date: "1982-01-26"
creators:
  - "Street, Anthony"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213772158
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10029387%22
---

 MINISTER FOR 

 FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 J,, A U S T R A L IA  zl>

 NEWS RELEASE

 No. M12 Date 26 January 1982 THE HON. TONY STREET, M.P.

 REFUGEES IN SOMALIA : $150,000 GRANT TO  SAVE THE CHILDREN FUND

 The M in is te r fo r Foreign A f f a ir s , the Hon Tony Street MR,  announced today th at the Government would provide a cash grant of  $150,000 to the Save the Children Fund A u s tra lia  fo r the refugee  assistance program in Somalia.

 Mr S treet said th at drought and unrest in the Ogaden region  of Ethiopia had exacerbated the refugee problem in Somalia.

 The Save the Children Fund, in  response to an appeal from the  United Nations High Commissioner fo r Refugees, was providing m edical,  health and emergency r e l ie f  teams fo r two refugee camps containing  142,000 refugees.

 Mr S tre e t said th a t the refugees, many of them women and  c h ild re n , were u su ally in very poor health when they a rriv e d  at the  camps. The $150,000 would be used to purchase supplies fo r i n i t i a l   medical and n u tr itio n a l care fo r the refugees. ,

 i

 A u s tra lia  had provided over $30 m illio n  in  to ta l assistance  to refugees and displaced persons so fa r  in 1981-82. [

 The M in is te r said th at A u s tra lia  was deeply concerned at the  p lig h t o f refugees throughout the world and g re a tly  appreciated the role  in a lle v ia tin g  th e ir  d is tre s s  played by non-government organisations  such as the Save the Children Fund. ■

 I

 \

 I

