---
title: "Migrants receive Federal funds"
date: "1983-01-04"
creators:
  - "Hodges, John"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213896387
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09004789%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs. THE HON JOHN HODGES, MP

 l/83c 4 January 1983

 MIGRANTS RECEIVE FEDERAL FUNDS

 Funds for three projects assisting' South. Australian migrant 

 and. ethnic organisations were announced, today by the Minister 

 for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  John. Hodges.

 Mr Hodges said the grants were valued at $4250.

 He said they were among 13 grants valued at $57 780 made 

 Australia-wcLde under the Migrant Project Subsidy Scheme.

 The organisations receiving funds are:

 The Vietnamese Christian Community in SA ($2000) to buy 

 equipment for a youth centre for refugee Vietnam youth. ·

 Vietnamese Buddhist Association of SA ($ 1250) to buy equipment 

 to back up welfare services for the refugee community.

 Mt Garnbier Italo-Australian Club ($ 1000) for film equipment 

 which will help the club extend, services to isolated Italian 

 women and families in the Mt Garnbier region.

 Contact: Scott Prasser (07) 225 218 ?

 THE HON JOHN HODGES,  MPT

 1 /83b k January 1983

 MIGRANT PROJECTS RECEIVE FEDERAL FUNDS

 Funds for two projects assisting New South Wales migrant and 

 ethnic organisations were announced today by the Minister for 

 Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, John Hodges.

 Mr Hodges said the grants were valued at $10 290.

 He said they were two of 13 grants made under the Migrant 

 Project Subsidy Scheme throughout Australia and valued at 

 $57 780.

 Mr Hodges said the scheme provided funds for self-help welfare 

 projects in ethnic communities.

 The Khmer Community of NSW receives $5220 for tables, chairs 

 etc to furnish the drop-in centre set up by the group to help 

 refugees settle into the community.

 The Mt Druitt Multicultural Centre will receive $5070 for a 

 photocopier, 3-way phone to help interpreting, and other 4 1

 equipment to back up preventative welfare work in Sydney's 

 western suburbs.

 Contact: Scott Prasser (07) 225 2187

