---
title: "Federal Minister for Immigrations and Ethnic Affairs meets with ethnic communities in Adelaide"
date: "1983-06-18"
creators:
  - "West, Stewart"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213899247
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09004735%22
---

 46/83 L+SA,

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.

 THE HON STEWART WEST, MP

 .  w 18 June T983

 FEDERAL MINISTER FOR M I G R A T I O N  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS  MEETS WITH ETHNIC COMMUNITIES IN ADELAIDE ,

 The Federal Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,   Stewart West, today addressed about 150 representatives  of ethnic communities in South Australia about achievements  in his portfolio since taking office.

 Mr West outlined details of a larger,  more flexible refugee  and humanitarian program;  an increased family reunion  program,  and a more liberal approach to entry selection  criteria.  Amendments to the Migration Act had been 

 introduced into Parliament which ended discrimination  in the Act, and amendmentof the Citizenship Act to remove  discrimination and enhance opportunities for citizenship_  was also under consideration, he said.

 "In the budgetary context,  I am working on proposals which  will greatly advance the Government's commitment to provide  services for migrants", said Mr West. .

 "Adult Migrant Education is one area which will benefit,   and the Grants -in-Aid scheme will also be expanded".

 Mr West said that Migrant Resources Centres had already  received an additional $255,000 under the Labor Government.   The Migrant Resource Centre of Adelaide received an  additional $1A ,500 under this special allocation. '·

 "The Laborâ– Government has also distributed $200,000 under  the Migrant Project Subsidy Grant Scheme.  In South  Australia, the Vietnamese community, the Slavic Independent  Welfare Committee and the Greek Orthodox community of 

 Coober Pedy have benefited from this Scheme",  said Mr West.

 "The problems of migrant women are also of major concern  to myself and the Government.  We have immediately  started to address their problem's by establishing a migrant  women's desk in the Department which, will deal with their  special needs", said Mr West.

 . ,/2

 Mr VJest said that he had recently presented to the  Parliament a report on the recognition of overseas  qualifications in Australia. "

 "I will be consulting with State Governments and other  organisations to ensure that skills and qualifications '   of people settling in Australia will be viewed equitably",  Mr West said. ·

 "The Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs is also  under re\.Tiew to ensure that its aim and objectives, and '   of responding to the needs of ethnic communities,  are  being met".

 "We will monitor closely·  the .  effects of the changes '   that we are making", Mr VJest said.

 "Further adjustments may from time to time be necessary -  for example, the currently operating health requirements  for permanent entry. There have been cases in the past  when very rigid decisions, totally.lacking in compassion, 

 have been made. I will be reviewing the entry health  criteria in the very near future", Mr West said.

 "I believe that the Labor Government has already taken  major initiatives to end discrimination and further  promote the multicultural nature of our society".

 "The allocation of funds alone is only part of the problem  and part of the solution. The Labor Government will  continue to fight against racism, prejudice and  discrimination", Mr" VJest said.

