---
title: "Increased support for CRSS sponsors"
date: "1983-02-10"
creators:
  - "Hodges, John"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213896945
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09004769%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs. THE HON JOHN HODGES,  MP

 16/83 10 February 1983

 INCREASED SUPPORT FOR CRSS SPONSORS

 An increase in the financial support to community groups 

 sponsoring refugees under the Community Refugee Settlement 

 Scheme (CRSS) was announced today by the Minister for 

 Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, John Hodges.

 The Community Refugee Settlement Scheme is designed to 

 move small units of refugees directly into the community 

 where families,  groups and organisations undertake to 

 i  provide initial accommodation, assistance in finding 

 employment and general social support.

 The increase is in recognition of the rising cost involved

 in helping refugees to settle in Australia and will be 

 back-dated to 1 January 1983.

 The increased funding, amounting to more than $21,000, 

 will raise the upper limit" of grants to community sponsors 

 to $170 for individuals.and $450 for family groups. This 

 compares with previous rates of $150 and $400 ^respectively.

 Grant levels for large families will also rise under the 

 new funding. Sponsors will be eligible for the basic rate 

 of $450 for a family with up to four members, with an extra

 2

 amount of $70 allowable for subsequent family members. 

 Previously, family groups attracted the basic grant only, 

 regardless of the number of family members.

 "This new arrangement recognises that family units are 

 economically more effective," Mr Hodges said.

 "The old flat rate for families of more than five members 

 was clearly inequitable."

 Under the new funding arrangements, sponsors of handicapped 

 refugees will receive special funding to cover the extra 

 financial burden they face during their sponsorship. 

 Applications will be assessed on a case by case basis, 

 having regard to the costs involved and the nature of the 

 assistance requested.

 "More than 5,800 refugees, both Indo-Chinese and Eastern 

 European, have settled successfully in Australia with the 

 help of sponsoring community groups," Mr Hodges said.

 "The new funding recognises the importance of the 

 contribution these groups make, and the relevance of the 

 Community Refugee Settlement Scheme to refugee settlement 

 in Australia for some time to come. .

 Media contact: Scott Prasser, Minister's Office, (07) 1  225 2187, Anna Marsden-Stewart,  .Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, (062) 64 2184 or Alberto Corboz, Department of 

 Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, (062) 64 2726.

