---
title: "Cheque for refugee loans"
date: "1983-02-03"
creators:
  - "Hodges, John"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213896783
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09004775%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigratioru  and Ethnic Affairs. THE HON JOHN HODGES, M.P.

 13/83 3 February 1983

 EMBARGOED UNTIL 10.45 AM FRIDAY 4 FEBRUARY

 CHEQUE FOR REFUGEE LOANS

 '  .  t ,

 Some people in the Australian community were under the 

 mistaken impression that refugees received huge handouts 

 from the Government when they arrived here, the Minister 

 .'for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, John Hodges, said in 

 Sydney today. ,

 Mr Hodges was speaking at a meeting of the Committee 

 for the Allocation of Loan Funds to Refugees in Centres 

 (CALFRIC) .  _

 CALFRIC is a registered company made up of six voluntary 

 agencies to make loans to refugees staying in migrant 

 centres. The loans are made to help refugees move.out of 

 migrant centres by providing some of the money needed for 

 items such as bond, advance rent, and connection of electricity 

 and phone. .

 The Minister was at the meeting to hand over a cheque 

 for $50,000, the first instalment of a payment of $250,000 

 allocated this year to CALFRIC by the Commonwealth Government.

 The loans, which are interest free, are repayable over 

 two years. The maximum amount lent is $600 per family, 

 with $250 for a married couple and $100 for a single person. 

 Loans are restricted to refugees in need.

 Since the scheme began in 1979, loans of over $2 million 

 have been made by recirculating the Commonwealth Government's

 . . . 2 .

 allocation of' $1.2 million. Austcare has contributed 

 $150,000 to the loan pool.

 "The CALFRIC loan is not a gift. Refugees have a 

 responsibility to repay the loan, which they have done 

 admirably to date. '  '

 "Helping refugees move out quickly reduces the cost 

 to the Commonwealth of running migrant centres.  The money 

 given by the Commonwealth to CALFRIC is recycled so 

 that more and more refugees are able to move into their 

 own accommodation very quickly."

 Mr Hodges said the scheme was a good example of the 

 Government and voluntary agencies working together.

 "The Government is able to provide funds while the 

 voluntary agencies possess an awareness of needs and an 

 understanding of problems,  which enable refugees to be 

 helped in an area of need."

 Media Contacts:  Minister's Office, Brisbane, Scott Prasser, (07) 225 2880. Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Canberra, Anna Marsden-Stewart (062) 64 2184 or Albert Corboz,  (062) 64 2726.

