---
title: "Skilled migrant numbers cut"
date: "1983-01-09"
creators:
  - "Hodges, John"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213896425
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09004788%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs. THE HON. JOHN H O D G E S ,  M..P.

 2/83 9 January 1983

 EMBARGOED UNTIL 3 PM

 SKILLED MIGRANT NUMBERS CUT .

 John H o d g e s , Minister for Immigration and Ethnic A f f a i r s , said 

 today that following the release of the latest Occupational Demand 

 Schedule the number of migrants entering Australia under the 

 Labour Shortage Category would fall b'y more than 10,00Q from 

 its present planned level of 31,000.

 The Labour Shortage Category represents 25 percent of the 

 planned migrant intake for 1982/83.

 Mr Hodges explained that the Labour Shortage Category was

 designed to contract or expand in line with changes to the 

 Australian labour m a r k e t .

 "A contraction is exactly what is occurring n o w " , he said.

 "I emphasise that the 15 to 20,000 migrants coming to Australia 

 under the Labour Shortage路 Category include wives and child r e n " ,  

 said Mr Hodges. 路

 "In f a c t , only about 6,000 persons under this category will 

 actually be entering the w o r k f o r c e " ,  Mr Hodges stressed.

 . . .  / 2

 Mr Hodges said the Government was closely monitoring Australia's 

 migration program to ensure that it met Australia's long term 

 interests.

 He explained that this recent adjustment to the Labour Shortage 

 Category based on changes in the Occupational Demand Schedule 

 had been accompanied by other measures in the preceding six months.

 These measures included:

 reduced priority for processing applicants 

 with occupations in demand;

 - stricter requirements for training or recruiting 

 Australian residents before employers could lodge 

 nominations for overseas workers; .

 - tighter checks on the ability of sponsors tt)

 support family migration applicants; \

 ~ validity of migrant entry visas reduced from 

 12 to 6 months; -

 - tightening of the Working Holiday Maker Scheme;

 - a crackdown against illegal immigrants.

 1

 Mr Hodges said that his Department had taken action to ensure 

 that time lags for approval of skilled workers to enter路-. 

 Australia be reduced as much as possible.

 "It is for this reason that we have reduced the validity of 

 entry visas from 12 to 6 months",, fie said.

 "I want to stress that the reduction in the Labour Shortage 

 Category will have no effect on the Family Reunion or Refugee 

 Categories", Mr Hodges said. .

 MEDIA. CONTACTS: SCOTT PRASSER A/H 07/38 3364 ) R 路  , .  B/H 07/225 2880) tirisbane

 ANNA MARSDEN-STEWART '  B/H 062/64 2184 Canberra

 ALBERT CORBOZ B/H 062/64 2726 Canberra

