---
title: "Christmas message to the ethnic media from the Minister for Immigration and Ethic Affairs, the Hon. Stewart West, MP"
date: "1983-11-30"
creators:
  - "West, Stewart"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213902765
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09004687%22
---

 FROM THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 95/83 30 November 1983

 CHRISTMAS MESSAGE TO THE ETHNIC MEDIA FROM THE MINISTER FOR  IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS, THE HON. STEWART WEST, M P .

 Each of the different cultures represented in Australia mark  the Christmas and New Year seasons in different ways, but  all of them are in one way or another celebrating past  achievements and expressing hope for the future.

 Our multicultural society owes its richness and diversity  to the number of people from varying backgrounds who have  chosen Australia as their home.  Our futures will be shared  together. Every Australian has a right to ‘expect a fair go  from all elements of society, and also has an obligation to  offer the same in return.

 The Australian Government is committed to that principle,   and is approaching its first Christmas with a significant  record in achieving equality of treatment and opportunity  for all people living in Australia.

 In my portfolio, legislative changes taking place in the  Migration and Citizenship Acts, greatly increased welfare  funding, amendments to the migrant selection system and  greater concentration on family reunion and refugee intakes  have created a much more humane and equitable system.

 In the coming years I expect to be able to continue develop­ ing policies which promote the equality of all individuals,  and eliminate discrimination and unfair privilege.

 Through the ethnic media, I take the opportunity of extending  the Season's Greetings to all members of the ethnic communities  in Australia and their relatives and of wishing you all a  safe and prosperous 1984.

 STEWART WEST

