---
title: "Results of 1983/84 program"
date: "1984-09-07"
creators:
  - "West, Stewart"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213907039
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03002380%22
---

 PRECIS OF STATEMENT TO PARLIAMENT BY MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  ETHNIC AFFAIRS, >  SEPTEMBER 1984

 Results of 1983/84 Program

 62,350 migrants and refugees were visaed in 1983/84. Settler  arrivals totalled 69,805. This result was as predicted in the  Minister's May statement.

 Total settler arrivals have fallen considerably since 1981/82;  from 119,000 in 1981/82, to 93,000 in 1982/83, to almost 70,000  in 1983/84.

 The Government has announced a responsible program for 1984/85,  of 72,000 visaed migrants and refugees with a 2,000 contingency  reserve.

 The Government's program continues to reflect strong enphasis on  humanitarian concerns and family rights: 36,739 people were visaed in the family migration categories in 1983/84, compared  to approximately 18,000 people in 1982/83, under the former 

 Government's policies.

 Figures tabled show quite clearly there is no discrimination in  the Government's program: in 1983/84, migrants from the U.K. and Ireland, excluding refugees, received 23.8% of total visas issued  from 11.2% of total applications. On the other hand, migrants 

 from Asia, excluding refugees, received 34.7% of visas from 29.4%  of applications.

 Settler arrivals from Asia have remained relatively steady over  the past five years. 1983/84 arrivals (25,324) actually  represent a decrease over 1981/82 arrivals (26,528).

 Family migration from the U.K. and Ireland has increased from  4,442 in 1978/79 to 8,901 in 1983/84.

 The drop in U.K. and Irish migration from the 1981/82 figure  of 38,863 to the 1983/84 figure of 13,624 is a direct result of  the former Government's decision to drastically reduce the  nunfoer of skilled and independent migrants.

 Trip to the Americas

 The Minister's trip embraced Washington, El Salvador, Costa Rica,  Argentina and Chile.

 Mr West emphasised to U.S. officials that Australia believed  progress on non-resettlement issues to be long overdue, and that  resettlement in Australia was conditional upon pursuing lasting  solutions.

 -  2 -

 V

 Mr West informed U.S. officials that voluntary repatriation  should be seriously addressed as an option for displaced  Indochinese for whom resettlement outside the region was not  appropriate - for example long-term carp stayers and the Lao Hill  Tribe people.

 Australia's refugee program will only accommodate genuine  refugees. Resettlement programs should not perpetuate outflows  or displacements which could seriously destabilise particular  regions. .

 Australia will not encourage the 260,000 Cambodians gathered  along the lhai-Caitbodian border to believe that they will be  resettled.

 Australia will only accept people from re-education carps with  close family in Australia.

 In Central America, Mr West examined the operations of the  Government's refugee and special humanitarian programs to ensure  that Australia's programs were only accepting people who net the  correct entry criteria.

 Australia's Central American programs are carefully managed. The  Special Humanitarian Programs of Canada, Australia and the United  States ensured that the 1983 aimesty for political detainees in 

 El Salvador was successful.

 Australia's Central and South American program will remain at a  modest 1,500 for 1984/85, and selections will be based on a case-  by-case judgement of need.

 Skilled Labour and Business Migration

 The former Government was responsible for the sharp rise in  skilled and independent migration, from 43,000 in 1979/80 to  70,000 in 1980/81, peaking at 75,000 in 1981/82.

 Realising the havoc this caused to the Australian labour market,  the former Government reduced the number of arrivals in these  categories to 49,000 in 1982/83, and this Government further  reduced the numbers to 21,000 in 1983/84.

 The Government's present approach to skilled labour intake is to  strictly assess the needs and demands of the Australian labour  market through the Occupational Share Schedule. Currently there  are only 50 occupations seen as being of need in the workplace,  

 and only 24 of those occupations have been allocated a 'share'  for the recruitment of migrants.

 Australia believes that the intake of skilled workers should be  on the basis of superior skills, regardless of origin.

 ../3

 -  3 -

 Business Migration

 The Government's intake in this category will be 4,000 in  1984/85, of which 1,400 will be principal applicants.

 The program will only accept people with tested business  background, and will not take people with funds but no business  credentials.

 The program will be none closely monitored, more tightly  controlled, and will operate in a more professional manner.

 * * * * * * * * * *

 Finally, the Government will welcome a return to bi-partisanship  which allows for rational discussion based on the facts. The  Government's immigration program is sound, and responsible; we  do not want social divisions created which denigrate the 

 contributions migrants have already made, and will continue to  make, to Australia's future.

