---
title: "Child care for migrants and refugees attending English classes in the Wollongong area"
date: "1984-06-03"
creators:
  - "West, Stewart"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213906147
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03002400%22
---

 ■  M i l  ιι|

 3 3

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION   A N D  ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 The Hon. STEWART WEST, M.P.

 36/84 3 June 1984

 CHILD CARE FOR MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES ATTENDING ENGLISH  CLASSES IN THE WOLLONGONG AREA

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and Federal  Member for Cunningham, Stewart West,  today announced that  child care facilities for migrants and refugees attending  English classes in the Wollongong area would be expanded.

 "The Federal Government provided an additional $550 000  in the 1983/84 budget for the expansion of child care  facilities under the Adult Migrant Education Program,"  Mr West said.

 "My Department has consulted with the Office of Child Care,   State Child Welfare Authorities and other child care bodies  to pinpoint areas of need throughout Australia.

 "In Wollongong, child care will be available to parents  attending the Fairy Meadow Education Centre.

 "Cringila Education Centre child care facilities will also  be expanded, with additional staff and extra equipment.

 "My Department,  and other relevant bodies,  are also  considering the possibility Of increasing child care  facilities in central Wollongong.

 "I encourage all parents wanting to attend English classes  to telephone my Department in Wollongong to find out details  of child care arrangements.

 "I am sure these extra facilities will be of great benefit  to new settlers in the Wollongong area, who might not  otherwise be able to attend English classes;," Mr West said.

 Media Contacts:  Helen Motyl, Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Wollongong (042) 27 1566.  Telephone Interpreter Service: (042) 28 3044.

