---
title: "21 grants to ethnic and community organisations"
date: "1984-10-23"
creators:
  - "West, Stewart"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213908050
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03002366%22
---

 6 7

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 ZJ October VJ84

 21 GRANTS TO ETHNIC AND COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Stewart West, today  announced 21 grants to migrant and community organisations under the  Migrant Project Subsidy Scheme.

 "These grants, totalling $90,110, are designed to improve migrants' access  to welfare services, and to encourage self-help among the ethnic  communities" Mr West said.

 "Together with the Grant-in-Aid Scheme, the Government provides a  comprehensive and generous package of grants to assist ethnic and community  organisations look after the welfare and settlement needs of migrants in  Australia".

 Mr West said that a major disease afflicting migrant women in the workplace  was tenosynovitis, and he was particularly pleased to be able to provide a  grant to the Tenosynovitis and Overuse Injuries Association Limited to make  seven language versions of a film on tenosynovitis.

 "This film will be a valuable addition to the written material already  available on overuse injuries, and will reach a large number of migrants in  factories and workplaces" Mr West said.

 "There are other hazards in the workplace which migrants should be able to  readily identify and deal with.

 "The Workers' Health Centre at Lidcombe in New South Wales has been  invaluable in alerting workers to these hazards, and I have provided the  Centre.  with a grant to further this work.

 "The grant will be used to publish leaflets on asbestos and noise in five  community languages, which will be widely distributed in Industrial  workplaces.

 "Leaflets in different languages are essential for migrants, providing  information in the workplace and in a wider context.

 "The Inter-Agency Migration Group in New South Wales has been given a grant  to produce, translate and print an immigration advice kit in English and 9  community languages.

 "These leaflets will be used by legal, community and migrant workers, as  well as by members of ethnic communities who want easy access to  immigration questions" Mr West said.

 A further round of grants will be announced in April 1985.

 A list of the 21 grants is attached.

 Contact: Ms Kerry-Anne Walsh (062) 733 446

 2

 NEW SOUTH WALES

 1 TENOSYNOVITIS AND OVERUSE INJURIES ASSOCIATION LTD $10,000

 To make seven (7) different community language versions of a ten  minute English version film on tenosynovitis to be shown to migrant  workers, job delegates and ethnic organisations.

 2 WORKERS HEALTH CENTRE $10,000

 To publish two leaflets In five (5) community languages to Inform  migrant workers on occupational hazards of asbestos and noise.

 3 INTER-AGENCY MIGRATION GROUP $10,000

 To produce an Immigration advice kit consisting of an advice manual in  English for use by legal, community and migrant workers/ and a set of  leaflets on immigration related subjects in nine (9) community  languages for clients with an immigration query.

 4 FEDERATION OF NETHERLANDS SOCIETIES LTD $4,000

 To survey elderly Dutch migrants living in institutions, identify  their welfare needs and assess the need for a nursing home.

 5 BOTANY FAMILY AND CHILDREN'S CENTRE $3,500

 To publish quarterly a multi-lingual newsletter informing migrants and  refugees about services related to their needs and encouraging their  participation in the Centre's programs.

 6 CO.AS.IT $8,550

 Towards the purchase of a mini-bus to extend and expand the provision  of welfare services to geographically isolated and physically  handicapped Italian migrants.

 7 DULWICH HILL COMMUNITY CENTRE AND MAY MURRAY NEIGHBOURHOOD CENTRE" ' $2,100

 For the purchase of conference telephones to facilitate use of  interpreters, and to buy other essential items of office furniture and  equipment for an office located in Marrickvllle and assisting the  Vietnamese migrants.

 VICTORIA

 1 GREEK ORTHODOX COMMUNITY OF MELBOURNE AND VICTORIA $10,000

 Towards the cost of equipment, software and associated administrative  expenses, to establish a Greek Information Service by compiling a  computer data base relating to the services available to the Greek  community.

 2 NOAH’S ARK TOY LIBRARY FOR HANDICAPPED CHILDREN $9,000

 Towards the employment of a project officer to conduct a survey to  determine the ethnic origin and specific needs of current and  potential Library members, with the view to developing specialised  services for migrant handicapped children.

 3 VICTORIAN ASSYRIAN COMMUNITY $3,000

 To produce a basic Information kit in Assyrian langugae, covering  available services, welfare entitlements and the rights of migrants.

 4 GEELONG ETHNIC COMMUNITIES COUNCIL $1,260

 To buy recreational equipment for use by several ethnic senior  citizens' groups.

 5 RUSSIAN HOUSE, CULTURAL ADVANCEMENT SOCIETY $2,150

 To purchase two sewing machines, equipment to maintain and repair  library booJzs and books on occupational therapy in the Russian  language for the elderly.

 6 CEYLONESE WELFARE ORGANISATION $1,260

 To purchase essential catering equipment for the use of the senior  citizens' day care centre.

 QUEENSLAND

 1 KOREAN SOCIETY OF QUEENSLAND $1,700

 To purchase a photocopier for a specific purpose, self-help project to  assist in the dissemination of information for Korean migrants in  Queensland.

 2 REDLANDS GERMAN CLUB INC. $2,360

 For the purchase of a typewriter, a stencil duplicator and a filing  cabinet to facilitate the preparation of a bi-lingual information  material for the use of German, Austrian and Swiss migrants in  Queensland.

 SOUTH AUSTRALIA

 1 CAMBODIAN AUSTRALIAN ASSOCIATION $3,200.

 Towards the costs of furniture and equipment for the newly acquired  premises to enable provision of orientation programs; and for the  purchase of audio equipment and materials for the production of a  radio program in the Khmer language.

 2 UNITED ETHNIC COMMUNITIES OF SA $2,300

 To provide basic office furniture and equipment for newly acquired  premises including an office desk and chairs, a typewriter and a  telephone answering unit.

 3 GREEK ORTHODOX COMMUNITY OF ST GEORGE, THEBARTON $2,000

 For the purchase of a television set, video recorder and a typewriter  to improve the provision of welfare, social and recreational programs  and services to the elderly and the youth of the Greek population in  Thebarton.

 4 VIETNAMESE STUDENTS’  ASSOCIATION $800

 For the purchase of a typewriter to Improve and expand the welfare and  educational services of the Association.

 TASMANIA

 1 POLISH ASSOCIATION IN HOBART $1,330

 To purchase an electric typewriter to facilitate the publication of an  information bulletin to Inform the Polish community about welfare  provisions and services, Government policies and other matters of  interest.

 NORTHERN TERRITORY

 1 "DANTE ALIGHIERI" ITALIAN CUTLURAL SOCIETY, DARWIN BRANCH $1,600

 To purchase a typewriter to facilitate the production of a monthly  newsletter and a weekly radio program broadcasted through the 8 Top FM  radio station.

