---
title: "$75,950 in grants for migrant self-help projects"
date: "1984-06-07"
creators:
  - "West, Stewart"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213906252
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03002396%22
---

 UrTL· MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 40/84 7 June 1984

 $75,950 IN GRANTS FOR MIGRANT SELF-HELP PROJECTS

 Project grants totalling $75,950 to 24 ethnic and community  organisations throughout Australia were announced today by the  Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affiars, Mr Stewart West.

 The grants are made under the Migrant Project Subsidy Scheme,  which provides once-only subsidies of up to $10,000 for projects  in the field of migrant welfare.

 The latest grants bring to 58 the total number of proejct grants  awarded in 1983/84, which are worth a total of $200,000.

 "A number of the applications I have just approved are for  innovative projects in^ areas of special need such as the migrant  aged, youth and isolated women", Mr West said.

 "These Projects have the potential to help ethnic communities  develop self-help programs, and improve migrants' access to  welfare services.

 "I am also pleased that a number of smaller and more recently  established communities have been assisted.  It is important  that a Scheme such as this is able to benefit groups which are  less likely to attract funding under other grant schemes", Mr West said.

 Attached is a list of the approved grants.

 CONTACT: Ms Kerry-Anne Walsh 062/733 446

 NEW SOUTH WALES

 1 AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OF MARRIAGE COUNSELLING  ORGANISATIONS

 Toward the employment of a project officer to  survey the existing marriage counselling  services, with the view of making these more  culturally relevant to migrant clients.

 2 ST EPHRAIM SYRIAN ORTHODOX CHURCH OF ANTIOCH

 For the purchase of a photocopier and a  typewriter, and for the installation of a coin  operated telephone to enable the production and  distribution of a newsletter.

 3 PORT KEMBLA YOUTH PROJECT

 For the purchase of production material and  printing of the first five issues of a free  monthly, multilingual, community based newspaper.

 4 CHRISTIAN IN-CARE CENTRE $4,000

 To buy essential office equipment and furniture  for a welfare office providing support to  Vietnamese refugees, including unaccompanied  refugee minors.

 5 POLISH WELFARE AND INFORMATION BUREAU IN NSW $3,000

 Toward the cost of organising a two day seminar  for social workers providing welfare services to  the Polish community.

 6 ILLAWARRA COMMUNITY HOUSING TRUST LTD $1,200

 To produce advertisements for television in  community languages to inform migrants about the  Housing Information Service and its facilities.

 VICTORIA

 $8,550

 $3,500

 $4,500

 1 VICTORIAN ASSOCIATION OF CITIZEN'S ADVICE BUREAUX $3,500

 For the purchase of a audio-video unit, a  projector and other equipment to be used for  training workshops for voluntary workers.

 2 DANDENONG COMMUNITY ADVISORY BUREAU $3,000

 For the purchase and installation of a  communication system to facilitate the work of  the Grant^-in-Aid social worker assisting the  migrant communities in Dandenong and surrounding 

 areas.

 3

 4 SPANISH LATIN-AMERICAN "MOTHERS" ASSOCIATION INC

 For the purchase of two electric setting machines  and sewing cabinets for sewing classes aimed at  helping isolated women.

 5 PARKS LEGAL SERVICE

 For the purchase and installation of a conference  telephone unit to facilitate use of interpreters  in the provision of legal services to non-English  speaking clients.

 WESTERN AUSTRALIA

 1 ETHNIC COMMUNITIES COUNCIL OF WA

 Towards the employment of a part-time research  officer to collect and process data on needs of  aged migrants and to assess whether the existing  house care facilities are catering for migrants.

 2 CENTRECARE

 Towards employment of a project worker to interpret the collected research data on  Philippina-Australian marriages, and to cover the  costs of preparing and printing of the final 

 report.

 3 SPANISH CLUB INC

 For the purchase of a photocopier to be used for  the dissemination of information to Spanish  workers on industrial issues and other matters.

 4 BUDDHIST SOCIETY OF WA

 To purchase a cassette recorder, microphone and a  cassette duplicator for the production and  recording of religious, information and cultural  programs.

 5 SERBIAN ETHNIC COMMUNITY INC

 For the purchase of a typewriter for the  production of a newsletter, and a stereo system  for programs to assist the aged and isolated  community members.

 6 LATIN-AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF WA

 To buy an electric typewriter to assist in  production of an information newsletter.

 $1,250

 $500

 $5,000

 $3,000

 $2,800

 $2,300

 $1,800

 $1,400

 2

 3 MORDIALLOC HALFWAY HOUSE

 For the purchase and installation of a three-way  telephone to facilitate use of interpreters in  counselling.

 QUEENSLAND

 1 CROATIAN CATHOLIC CENTRE

 Towards the cost of a mini-bus to enable the  isolated elderly and disadvantaged persons to  participate in the community's activities.

 2 VIETNAMESE COMMUNITY IN AUSTRALIA (NATIONAL)

 To buy a photocopier and a typewriter to  facilitate the production of a news and  information digest.

 3 MOUNT ISA ETHNIC COMMUNITY COUNCIL

 To buy a typewriter and a photocopier to assist  in the dissemination of information in an  isolated area with limited resources.

 4 BRITISH LADIES CLUB, SANDGATE

 For the purchase of a typewriter and tables to  assist in the dissemination of information to  migrants settling in the local community.

 SOUTH AUSTRALIA

 1 LATVIAN RELIEF SOCIETY OF AUSTRALIA  "DUAGAVAS NAVAGI" INC (ADELAIDE BRANCH)

 Towards the employment of a part-time coordinator  to establish a volunteer network to provide care  and welfare services to the aged, disabled and  isolated.

 2 ST NICHOLAS ROMANIAN ORTHODOX PARISH OF  ADELAIDE

 Towards the cost of furniture and equipment,  including telephone answering unit, tables and  chairs for Church hall to be used for welfare and  social activities.

 3 AUSTRALIAN SPANISH LATIN-AMERICAN  INSTITUTE INC / To buy office furniture and equipment including a 

 typewriter, telephone answering unit, filing  cabinets and a conference table for an office and  meeting area in renovated premises.

 $550

 $5,000

 $3,500

 $3,400

 $1,600

 $6,800

 $3,300

 $2,500

