---
title: "Income tax gift provisions: Funds for the relief of person in developing countries"
date: "1984-10-16"
creators:
  - "Keating, Paul"
source: "Treasurer"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213907868
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09011899%22
---

 !SS

 â– Î¯«Î¯

 TREASURER

 NO. 154 

 R E L E A S E

 NO EMBARGO

 STATEMENT BY THE TREASURER, THE. HON. PAUL KEATING, MP

 INCOME TAX GIFT PROVISIONS ;  FUNDS' FOR' THE RELIEF OF PERSONS

 IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES .

 The Commonwealth Government has decided to make donations to 

 a further 10 overseas aid organisations tax deductible.

 This has been done under the scheme whereby gifts to a public 

 fund qualify for a deduction where the Treasurer is satisfied 

 that the fund has been established exclusively for the relief 

 of persons in countries that have been certified by the 

 Minister for Foreign Affairs as developing countries.

 The effect of this decision is .that gifts of $2 or more made 

 to the nominated funds will qualify for deduction for income -  

 tax purposes.

 A Gazette published today specifies, those overseas 'aid funds 

 that will be eligible funds under the scheme. The effect of the 

 Gazette notice is that gifts of $2 or more made to the. funds 

 on or after today will qualify for deduction for income tax .  

 purposes.

 The funds are :  â– 

 The Australian Foundation for the Peoples of the South 

 Pacific Overseas Aid Fund, which finances aid development 

 projects in that region.  '

 2 .

 The Asian Aid Organisation Limited Developing Countries 

 Aid Fund. The"organisation assists children in Korea, 

 Bangladesh,.India, Nepal and â–   Pakistan.

 The Interplast Overseas Aid Fund, which provides medical 

 assistance to developing countries.

 The ICARE Overseas Aid Fund, which has been formed by 

 International Christian Aid Relief Enterprises Ltd.

 The Overseas Children's Aid Fund, which provides assistance 

 to needy children in developing countries.

 The St. Veronica Welfare Committee Overseas Aid Fund, 

 which aims to assist refugees, orphaned and otherwise .  

 handicapped children, particularly in the Asian region.

 The. Bible Society in Australia Overseas Literacy 

 Development Fund, which funds literacy programs in 

 developing countries.

 The Vellore Christian Medical College and Hospital 

 Support Fund, which supports a hospital of that name in 

 India. '

 The World Concern Aid and Development Fund,  which is part 

 of an international Christian humanitarian relief and 

 development agency.

 The World Literature Crusade Overseas Aid 'Fund,  which 

 seeks to provide food, shelter, clothing, medical and 

 other assistance to people in developing countries.

 CANBERRA ACT 

 16 October 1984

 I

