---
title: "Increased funding for child care in Queensland"
date: "1984-10-18"
creators:
  - "Grimes, Don"
source: "Minister for Social Security"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213907937
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09011220%22
---

 / 0 3

 DJG 92/84  18 October 1984

 Minister for  Social Security

 INCREASED FUNDING FOR CHILD CARE IN QUEENSLAND

 Commonwealth funding for a child care centre on the Sunshine Coast  is among five Commonwealth grants announced today by the Minister  for Social.Security, Senator Don Grimes, to improve children's  services in Queensland.

 Senator Grimes said the five grants, totalling more than $160,000,  were part of an on-going Federal Government program in 1984/85 to  improve children's services throughout Australia.

 He said all the projects would be funded as part of a special  $30 million allocation in this year's Budget for new or expanded  services.

 The latest grants for Queensland services include funding for the  child care centre, two Outside School Hours Care Programs and  an Aboriginal occasional care service. Details are as follows.

 Child Care Centre, Nambour - Annual funding of $111,500 and an  equipment grant of $6,800 is to be provided to Maroochy Shire  Council to operate the 68-place Nambour Child Care Centre. The  Council established the Centre and has operated it for 12 years, but 

 is unable to maintain funding. Without Commonwealth assistance,  the Centre would probably be forced to close, causing hardship for  local families and increasing pressure on other child care services 

 in the area. The centre, the only one of its type in Nambour,   provides long day care services for children aged up to five,  including handicapped children and those from single parent families.  Funding will commence on 1 January 1985.

 Outside School Hours Care Project, Wynnum West - An annual grant of  $11,852 and an equipment grant of $500 is to be provided to establish  an out-of-school-hours care program at Wynnum West State School,  with places for 37 children. The project, which will help meet an 

 urgent need in the area,  will be run by the Queensland Police and  Citizens Youth Welfare Association, and will operate for 42 weeks  a year. The program will cater for children in the Wynnum, Hemmant and Linaum areas, who can be transported to the School 

 in a bus owned by the Association.

 Outside School Hours Care Project, St Lucia - An annual grant of  $8,269 and an equipment grant of $500 is to be provided to the  Ironside Community After-School Activities Committee to help run  their after-school program at St Lucia. The program caters for  between 15 and 18 children, 42 weeks of the year.

 ...12

 2

 Kutjala Playgroup, Charters Towers - An annual grant of $12,215  and an equipment grant of. $4,000 is to be provided to expand  and improve the services of the Kutjala Playgroup,  which provides  a range of occasional care services for Aboriginal children.  Playgroup sessions are held daily between 9.00 am and 12.00 noon,  and it is planned to expand the service to offer tutorial  groups for school-aged children twice a week, to be organised  and supervised by a co-ordinator.

 Vietnamese Association of Queensland - A grant of $6,342 will be  provided to this organisation, which is based in Darra,  to employ  a field worker for 12 weeks to conduct a survey of child care  needs among South East Asian families in Brisbane. The survey,  which will gather information on the numbers and distribution of 

 Laotian,  Kampuchean and Vietnamese children, is rated as a high  priority by the Queensland Department of Children's Services,  the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  and the .   Indo-Chinese Refugee Association.

 CANBERRA

