---
title: "Chipp replies to Hodman's immigration policy"
date: "1984-10-18"
creators:
  - "Chipp, Don"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213907967
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09007799%22
---

 PRESS RELEASE THE SENATE

 18.10.84

 CANBERRA 84/222

 CHIPP REPLIES TO HODGMAN1S IMMIGRATION POLICY

 "The announcement of Mr. Hodgman's Immigration and Ethnic Affairs 

 policy on behalf of the Liberal Party offered, the opportunity for 

 the Liberal Party to get away from the half-veiled racial 

 slurs into which the Party has recently sunk. The motive for 

 Mr. Hodgman and Mr. Peacock falling back on this dishonourable tactic 

 has been all too clear - possible electoral gain. In reality, under 

 Labor, there have been fewer refugees from Indo-China entering 

 Australia than there were under the Fraser years Mr. Hodgman 

 allegedly pines for. At the same time, Mr. Hodgman continues to 

 persist with the ridiculous rhetoric of returning to a "balanced" 

 immigration policy.

 It was with considerable disappointment that I read Mr. Hodgman's 

 statement. To put it bluntly he has simply muttered platitudes.

 He has said nothing to allay the growing apprehension of the many 

 migrants who have increasingly felt that they are not welcome here.

 More than half the policy is a verbatim repetition of 1978 policy - 

 in the most general terms.

 In the short current part of the policy statement, Mr. Hodgman 

 says that the Liberals are in favour of a bi-partisan immigration 

 policy. He refuses to acknowledge that there was a bi-partisan 

 policy until he and his Party changed it. It has been from Mr. 

 Hodgman and his colleagues that we have heard the most racist 

 comments in years.

 In the area of Ethnic Affairs the Liberal policy is a disgrace.

 Mr. Hodgman had decided that there should be no more ethnic services. 

 His lack of awareness of the plight of migrants is astonishing.

 How could migrants use general services if these services are not 

 multi-lingual?

 see over .../

 (2)

 Finally, it is disturbing to me and the Australian Democrats that 

 sueto a vitally important issue as Ethnic Affairs and Immigration 

 could, be dealt with in such a patronising fashion".

 Senator Don Chipp

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Helene Teichmann (03) 613692

