---
title: "Australia's refugee effort"
date: "1985-05-08"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213911996
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09015102%22
---

 3 3

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  A N D  ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 5 - The Hon. CHRIS HURFORD, M.R.

 MPS 28/85

 AUSTRALIA'S REFUGEE EFFORT

 "Australia is continuing its substantial program of  resettling Indochinese refugees from Malaysia," the  Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Chris Hurford, said in Kuala Lumpur today.

 Mr Hurford was speaking at the end of a visit to-Malaysia,  during which he held discussions on the refugee problem  with the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Home  Affairs, Datuk Musa Hitam and the Minister of Foreign  Affairs, Tengku Ahmad Rithauddeen, and visited the Sungei 

 Besi Holding Centre. Mr Hurford, who is also Minister  Assisting the Treasurer, met the Finance Minister, Encik Daim Zainunndin, during his visit.

 "Australia has been in the forefront of efforts to resolve  the Indochinese refugee problem," Mr Hurford said.

 "Australia has resettled more Indochinese refugees as a  proportion of its population than any other country in the  world. It has settled, as part of its total intake of  about 90,000 Indochinese refugees, more than 36,000  Vietnamese boat people who originally landed in Malaysia.

 "In spite of the difficulties it presents for us, we see a  continued resettlement program out of Malaysia as another  sign of our friendship with this country. I expect  Australia will resettle around 2,500 refugees from  Malaysia this year," Mr Hurford said.

 Mr Hurford said he understood a particular problem that  had emerged in recent years was the significant number of  young single males in Pulau Bidong (an island refugee  camp) with no relatives in third countries, little  education and few skills.

 In an effort to improve their resettlement prospects, a  vocational training program to teach these people basic  skills was being undertaken on Pulau Bidong.

 "I am able to announce that Australia has decided to  resettle up to 50, or about 40 percent, of the first group  of students who have completed this program," Mr Hurford  said.

 Parliament House, Canberra

 2

 Λ

 "In taking a lead in relation to these more difficult  cases, I stress that the Indochinese refugee problem can  only be resolved thoibugh a co-ordinated international  effort.

 "This must involve sharing the resettlement burden among  many of those nations that have done very little to date.

 "I hope Australia's action will give the lead to some of  those nations, which Malaysia has recently been urging to  take an interest in refugee resettlement," he said.

 Mr Hurford said there would also be a need to help some  refugees return to their homelands.

 "For example, the Australian Government believes that  voluntary repatriation should be pursued vigorously for  refugees from all countries in the region," Mr Hurford  said.

 He said he would raise this issue in Vietnam over the next  few days.

 "I am encouraged by the support I have received for this  approach from countries I have visited on this tour,  including senior people in the U.S. Administration and now  from the Malaysian Government," Mr Hurford said.

 Kuala Lumpur  8 May, 1985

 Contact: Mick Atkinson Office 72 6545  Home 49 8048

