---
title: "Overseas visit by immigration minister"
date: "1985-04-12"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213911407
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09015107%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS ,

 ζ λ π .  C\

 υ

 The Hen. CHRIS HURFORD, M.P.

 MRS 24/85

 OVERSEAS V IS IT BY IMMIGRATION MINISTER

 The M in is te r fo r Iironigration and Ethnic A f f a ir s , Mr. Chris Hurford,  w ill leave A u s tra lia  th is  Sunday (A p ril 14) to  v i s i t  the United  

 S tates, Europe and South-East A sia.

 In his capacity as M in is te r A ssisting the Treasurer, Mr. Hurford w ill   represent A u s tra lia  a t  meetings o f the In te rn a tio n a l Monetary Fund and  the World Bank in  Washington and a t the Asian Development Bank in   Bangkok.

 In his capacity as the new M in is te r fo r  Immigration and Ethnic   A f f a ir s , he w ill v i s i t  the countries from which most o f A u s tra lia 's   immigrants have come, namely the United Kingdon, I t a l y  and Greece.

 " I w ill be contacting Government, business and community leaders in   these countries to discuss im m igration, refugee and m igrant-w elfare   issues," Mr. Hurford said .

 " I w ill also examine firs t-h a n d  how our overseas immigration o ffic e rs   deal w ith ap p licatio n s to s e ttle  in A u s tra lia ."

 In Europe, Mr. H u rford's v i s i t  w ill emphasise the importance the Hawke  Labor Government places on i t s  tra d itio n a l immigration lin k s  w ith   B r ita in , I t a l y  and Greece. He w ill in d ic ate the Government's in te re s t   in continued immigration from a l l  European countries.

 In South-East A sia, Mr. Hurford w ill v i s i t  refugee camps in Malaysia  and Thailand, and w ill discuss progress in helping displaced people in   th a t region. He w ill also v i s i t  Vietnam to discuss fa m ily  reunion 

 under the o rd e rly  departure program.

 Both in  Washington and South-East A s ia , Mr. Hurford w ill address the  p o s s ib ility  o f some refugees fin d in g  a secure fu tu re  in t h e ir  own  region, ra th e r than being re s e ttle d  in  th ird  co u n tries, such as  A u s tra lia .

 11

 Parliament House, Canberra

 -  2 -

 Mr. H u rford's itin e r a r y  is :

 A p ril 14 14 -  15

 15 -  19 

 20 -  23 

 23 -  25 

 25 -  28

 29 -  4 May

 May 4 - 7  

 7 - 8

 8 -  9

 9 

 10

 Adelaide   12 A p r il, 1985

 Media Contact: Mick Atkinson

 Depart Sydney 9 pm San Francisco Washington London Rome Athens

 Bangkok (in c lu d in g  v i s i t  to Thai-   Cambodian border) Kuala Lumpur Bangkok

 Hanoi Ho Chi Minh C ity  (Saigon) A rrives Sydney 9.20 am

 (08) 2132200 (w)  (08) 2710842 (h)

