---
title: "Chipp welcomes Hurford's new proposal for Irian Jayan refugees"
date: "1985-11-01"
creators:
  - "Chipp, Don"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213914704
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09012936%22
---

 PRESS RELEASE THE SENATE

 P.R. 8.5/283  Canberra  1 November 198.5

 CHIPP WELCOMES HURFORD'S NEW PROPOSAL FOR IRIAN JAYAN REFUGEES

 Senator Don Chipp, Leader of the Australian Democrats, today  welcomed reports of Mr. Hurford's change of heart on the whole  question of Irian Jayan refugees.

 "While the problem of the 8 refugees on Australian Territory  has not been solved, Mr. Hurford is reported as proposing  Australian involvement in a. solution to the more pressing  problem of Irian Jayan refugees in Papua New Guinea.

 "I am delighted that the Minister is now prepared to face the  problem head on in a systematic and principled way, which will  be acceptable to Papua New Guinea, the United Nations High  Commission for Refugees and Australia's long term needs.

 "I hope that Cabinet endorses this sensible proposal, Mr. Hurford certainly has our full support. '

 "The only addition to the plan that I would like to make",   Senator Chipp said, "is that the 5 Irian Jayans found to be  refugees by the DORS Committee.and the other 3 should they  be found to be refugees, be allowed to settle in Australia,  before this particular avenue for entry is closed off 

 permanently. "  .

 "An orderly departure programme for genuine Irian Jayan  refugees in Papua New. Guinea, with Australia being one of  the 3rd countries of resettlement is the best possible  solution"> Senator Chipp concluded.

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION: Senator Chipp (062) 88 7623

 .  Helene Teichmann (03) .61 3064

