---
title: "Closure of endeavour migrant hostel"
date: "1985-08-23"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213913303
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03004355%22
---

 P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A

 H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S

 OFFICE OF P H IL IP  R U D D O C K, M.P.

 MEMBER FOR DUNDAS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR  IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 SUITE 302   EASTWOOD CENTRE  160 ROWE STREET  EASTWOOD, N S W. 2122  TEL. 858 1011

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE  CANBERRA, A CT. 2600   TEL. (062) 72 1211

 PRESS STATEMENT BY PHILIP RUDDOCK SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS 

 "CLOSURE OF ENDEAVOUR MIGRANT HOSTEL”

 "Suggestions of ghettoing of Indo-Chinese refugees in Sydney's  south west will certainly become vocal by the closure of the  Endeavour Hostel in Coogee", Opposition Spokesman for  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Philip Ruddock warned today.

 Mr Ruddock said that the closure of Endeavour Hostel would  mean a concentration of migrant centres in the south west. '

 "It has long been understood that one of the principle  reasons settlement of large numbers of Indo-Chinese occurred  in the Fairfield/Cabramatta area of Sydney was that much of  the early settlement in Sydney centred around the three migrant  centres in the south west where post arrival services were  available.

 "In planning with community organisations to redress some of  these settlement problems and ensure successful integration  of migrants and refugees, great emphasis was placed upon  ensuring that Indo-Chinese refugees were not only' settled 

 in the south west but also located in Sydney's one other  migrant centre at Endeavour.

 Mr Ruddock said that although sale of the Coogee site  offered the Government a better short term profit,  the closure 'of the Endeavour Hostel would have important  consequences for the future success of the Government's  program for resettling Indo-Chinese refugees in Sydney.

 "Successful integration in the shortest possible time  would be better achieved if the new style migrant centres  are dispersed throughout the community and not developed  around existing centres.

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION: 062 72.6817 23 August 1985 .

