---
title: "Opposition urges expanded refugee program for Khmers"
date: "1985-04-07"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213911273
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03004297%22
---

 P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A  

 H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S

 P A R L I A M E N T  H O U S E  

 C A N B E R R A .  A C T  2 6 0 0  

 TE L. 72 1211 .

 PRESS STATEMENT BY PHILIP RUDDOCK MP SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 "OPPOSITION URGES EXPANDED REFUGEE PROGRAM FOR KHMERS"

 "Opposition Spokesman for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Philip Ruddock has called on the Government to respond  to persistent rumours that they intend to further reduce  the intake of Indo Chinese Refugees.

 Speaking at the Festival to celebrate the Cambodian New  Year, Mr Ruddock urged that special attention be paid  to the plight of Kampucheans.

 "In the light of the recent Vietnamese military offensive  in Kampuchea there will be an increasing and appropriate  demand for Australia to assist settlement of displaced  Khmer people.

 Mr Ruddock said that it was already a matter of some concern  that there had been a significant decrease from 3,996  Kampuchean refugees in 1982/83 to only 1,604 in ·  1983/84.

 "There is scope, and this has been verified by the Indo China  Refugee Association, for an increased number of places to  be found for Kampucheans and Laotian refugees, few of whom  succeed under present programs.

 "There are obviously many with family ties, an Australian  education, or with a special interest in coming to Australia,  who should be accepted for resettlement here.

 "It is important for Australian officials to continue working  in Thailand with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,  the Indo China Refugee Association and other international agencies  to properly identify and interview genuine refugees.

 Mr Ruddock said it should be stressed however that any increase  in Khmer intake should not be at the expense of Laos, Homong or  Vietnamese.

 "It should also be recognised that any change by Government to  further reduce the refugee program and to increase Orderly  Departure1  arrangements would disadvantage further the Khmers.

 "This is because it is unlikely, in the short term that  'Orderly Departure1  arrangements of the sort in place for Vietnam  could be put in place for Kampuchea.

 7 APRIL 1985

 FURTHER INFORMATION: Philip Ruddock 02 630.4575

