---
title: "Vietnamese aggression condemned"
date: "1985-01-15"
creators:
  - "Peacock, Andrew"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213909291
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03003661%22
---

 VIETNAMESE AGGRESSION CONDEMNED

 The Opposition Leader, Mr Andrew Peacock, today condemned  the continuing assault by the Vietnamese Army on the Cambodian  refugee camps along the Thai-Cambodian border.

 Mr Peacock said the attacks were "contemptible and without  shame".

 He said that since the Vietnamese began their dry season  offensive two months ago more than 133,000 Cambodian civilians  had been forced to flee to Thailand.

 "The Vietnamese have directed their aggression principally  against civilian refugee camps and the non-Communist military  border camps," he said.

 "These Vietnamese actions have met with some success and  have been directed at the two major non-communist resistance  groups."

 Mr Peacock said the Vietnamese actions were of considerable  concern.

 "They are a clear attempt by the Vietnamese to weaken the  ASEAN and Western diplomatic position regarding the future of  Cambodia," he said.

 "It is also a further indication that the Vietnamese have  opted for a long term military solution to the Cambodian  situation."

 The Opposition Leader said that Vietnam had rejected every  proposal for restoring self-determination to the people of  Cambodia.

 "Despite the continuous bloodletting in Cambodia, Vietnam  still maintains 180,000 troops in that country to protect their  client regime from rebel forces."

 He said that contrary to pursuing a peaceful solution, the  Vietnamese were now embarked on their most ruthless military  campaign since their invasion of Cambodia in 1978. %

 Inquiries: 0 6 2 - 7 2 6 9 9 4

 2

 *

 "The unavoidable conclusion is that the Vietnamese are  unwilling to engage in serious talks about ending the war in  Cambodia," he said.

 "If the Cambodian people are to be allowed to choose their  own Government, it is imperative that the West continue to  apply pressure on Vietnam to withdraw its forces."

 Mr Peacock said the Labor Government had only acknowledged  the Vietnamese assault in the most half-hearted of fashions.

 "Australia's timidity in the face of Vietnam's actions,  runs counter to the interests of the Cambodian people, to the  interests of ASEAN and the interests of Australia," he said.

 Mr Peacock said the Labor Government would do well to take  a clear-headed look at the nature of the Vietnamese Regime.

 He said the Government, in order to preserve its so-called  "special relationship", was in danger of being used by the  Vietnamese to undermine our regional allies and the West's  principled stand on Cambodia.

 11 January 1985

 For further enquiries: Ian Perkin 062 726994

