---
title: "Australia's refugee policy"
date: "1985-09-25"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213913863
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09015068%22
---

 Ο

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  A N D  ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 The Hon. CHRIS HURFORD, M.P.

 MPS 67/85

 AUSTRALIA7 S REFUGEE POLICY

 "Resettling the world's refugees in Australia was not an   adequate solution for all their problems," the Minister   for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Mr Hurford, told the   National Population Council in Adelaide today (Wednesday).

 "More comprehensive policies are needed."

 Mr Hurford said Australia would continue its outstanding   record on refugee issues,  but this did not necessarily   mean we should continue unchanged with existing policies.

 According to a recent report of the United Nations High   Commissioner for Refugees,  Australia was now home to   89,000 refugees.

 Australia had responded quickly to many crises.

 For instance, when the El Salvadoran Government declared   an amnesty for political prisoners,  Australia had taken   100 who were under threat from death squads.

 Australia continued to play a major role in the refugee   outflow from Indochina. Australia was now home to 89,000   refugees.

 Despite Australia's massive resettlement of Indochinese   refugees,  10 years after the first arrivals, the   fundamental problems persisted.

 "The Hawke Labor Government has taken a leading role in   looking for more lasting solutions to the problems in   Indochina," Mr Hurford said.

 "We have increased family reunion migration from Vietnam   and worked towards a political settlement of Indochina's   problems.

 "It is these more durable solutions which have the best   chance of success."

 "In the meantime, we have developed a means of orderly   departure by our family reunion program from Vietnam.

 Parliament House, Canberra

 2

 "Many of those now leaving Indochina are motivated by a  desire for family reunion or a better economic future.

 "Resettlement must continue to be a major instrument of  refugee policy, but many see its importance diminishing."

 Mr Hurford said that when he was in Thailand and Malaysia  in April this year there was concern that resettlement was  not available to some of those most in need of the  protection provided by third-country resettlement.

 For others, resettlement caused shock and dislocation. For those in the source country, large-scale resettlement  had a "draw" effect that could exacerbate the exodus.

 "We need to search for other solutions and mechanisms," Mr Hurford said.

 "We must avoid empty rhetoric. There is no point calling  for ever increasing refugee intakes irrespective of the  nature of the basic problem and of the needs of refugees."

 Voluntary agencies which helped refugees settle in  Australia should address the realities. They should  respect community attitudes and help sell to the public  the need for a humanitarian refugee policy.

 "Australia's settlement program is distinguished from  those of other resettlement countries by the principal  role of government," Mr Hurford said.

 "The voluntary sector needs to consider what more it can  do in the way of practical assistance, community education  and advising governments."

 Adelaide 25 September, 1985

 Contact: Michael Atkinson, Minister's Office Parliament House, Canberra  Tel: (08) 213 2200

 NOTE: The United Nations Geneva Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees defines a refugee as a  person who:

 "... owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted  for reasons of race, religion, nationality,  membership of a particular social group or  political opinion, is outside the country of his  nationality, and is unable or, owing to such fear, 

 is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of  that country; or who, not having a nationality and  being outside the country of his former habitual  residence, is unable or, owing to such fear, is  unwilling to return to it."

