---
title: "Chipp: Hurford a disgrace"
date: "1985-07-30"
creators:
  - "Chipp, Don"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213912703
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09013029%22
---

 PRESS RELEASE the senate P.R. NO. 8 5/167  .  CANBERRA 

 .  30 JULY 1985

 CHIPP: HURFORD A DISGRACE

 Senator Don Chipp, Leader of the Australian Democrats, today  called upon Mr Hurford, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs, to change his mind and allow the five Irian Jayan '   refugees on Thursday Island to stay in Australia.

 "I was horrified to read this morning of the news story of  Indonesian brutality in Irian Jaya.

 "When Mr Hurford refused to accept these people as refugees he  did so in a callous, insulting and inhumane way.· At the time I  described his comments .as thinly veiled racism.  When he made his  decision,  Mr Hurford had either not decided whether the five 

 Irian Jayans were genuine refugees, or had not bothered to  invenstigate their case. Either way,  he was not having them in  Australia. ,  .

 "Today's story and actions by their legal counsel make it  clear that these men are refugees and that Australia has both a  moral and international obligation to take these people.

 "The frank admission by Mr Hurford that he did not want to anger  the.Indonesians by taking five refugees says it all as far as I  am concerned. The appeasdement of Indonesia has gone far enough!

 "That Mr Hurford can still dare to call his immigration policy  'humanitarian and multiculturally based'  after his statements and  actions in this case is outrageous .  He is not worthy of his  portfolio," Senator Chipp concluded.  .

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: HELENE TEICHMANN 03 61 3064

 Printed by C. J. T hompson,  Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra

