---
title: "Chipp slams Hurford on Iranian Jaya refugees"
date: "1985-07-19"
creators:
  - "Chipp, Don"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213912488
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09013041%22
---

 PRESS RELEASE THE SENATE

 P.R. NO. 85/Îª51 CANBERRA 19 JULY 1985

 CHIPP SLAMS HORFORD ON IRIAN JAYA REFUGEES

 Senator Don Chipp, Leader of the Australian Democrats, today  strongly criticised Mr Chris Hurford, the Minister for  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. ·

 "I was horrified at the way Mr Hurford spoke about the five Irian  Jaya refugees on Thursday Island on the radio programme,  'PM', on  Wednesday," Senator Chipp said.

 "The Minister did not even bother to fully check whether these  people were refugees or not before he ruled that they could not  stay. ·  ,  .

 "Twice during the interview he talked about people coming from  Irian jaya to Australia so that they could live, off Australian  welfare payments. I for one find this way of speaking about  people offensive .and racist. .

 "Mr Hurford has made it clear that no refugees will be accepted  under any circumstances, and that if he is convinced that they  are genuine refugees he'll see if he can find a third country to  take them, if he is not convinced that they’re refugees h e ’ll  ship them back - possibly to their deaths. .

 "At the end of the interview.he actually drew a picture of Irian  jaya.ns collecting Australian social security, slipping into their  boats and living in Irian jaya only returning presumably for  their next payment. It was, to be quite blunt, not even thinly  veiled racism. .  .  .

 "If Mr Hurford reflects the so-called ’humanitarian based  immigration policies of the Government’, then this Government  certainly has lost its way," Senator Chipp concluded.

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION  SENATOR DON CHIPP  HELENE TEICHMANN

 CONTACT: . 03 61 3137 03 61 3064

