---
title: "Portugese rush Oz"
date: "1985-08-01"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213912750
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09015078%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 MPS 51/85

 PORTUGESE RUSH OZ

 Australia's migration office in Lisbon, Portugal, is   besieged by would-be migrants.

 Since July 22, hundreds have queued outside the migration   office in the Australian Embassy.

 Police have been needed to control the queue, which   usually stretches along a city block, three and four   deep. So far the queue has been orderly but it becomes   restless at times.

 The office, which is manned by a single officer, Mr John Eck, has received mountains of mail and its phones   do not stop ringing, day or night.

 A local radio broadcast claiming Australia wanted 84,000   Portugese is thought to be the cause of the rush. The   broadcast misinterpreted news stories about Australia's   1985/86 migration program, announced on June 3 by the   Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Chris Hurford.

 The migration program allows a global total of 84,000   places in three main categories - family reunion, refugees   and skilled labor/business. This is an increase on the   1984/85 program, which resulted in 70,000 arrivals.

 Portugal provided Australia with 793 migrants in 1984/85   and 680 in 1983/84. This does not include Timorese   refugees coming to Australia via Portugal

 Lisbon newspapers reported the program accurately, and   sparked interest, but the radio broadcast appears to have   started the rush. Statements from the office correcting   the report have not diminished Portugese enthusiasm for   Australia.

 More than one million people each year express interest in   migrating to Australia. Our overseas migration offices   have not advertised for many years except in the narrow   business migration category.

 Parliament House, Canberra

 2

 "Advertising is unnecessary.in Portugal," Mr Eck said from  Lisbon last night (Wednesday).

 "The Portugese have a utopian view of Australia. They don't believe there's unemployment."

 Mr Eck has been interviewing applicants from 8 a.m. to  11 p.m. and on weekends.

 "Portugese all insist on being dealt with personally," he  said.

 Notices or disclaimers did not dissuade them.

 "The reality is that the vast majority of applicants will  not get to first base."

 None were refugees, almost none had relatives in Australia  and few could qualify under the restricted categories of  skilled labor specified in the Occupational Share Scheme.

 All is quiet at the only equivalent migration office in  Lisbon, Canada's. '

 Canberra  1 August, 1985

 Contact:  Mick Atkinson

 Minister's Office, Parliament House (062) 72 7075 (08) 271 0842 (home)

