---
title: "Humanitarian assistance for Indochinese refugees, returnees and displaced persons"
date: "1985-09-12"
creators:
  - "Hayden, Bill"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213913616
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09014496%22
---

 \<5 No. Mi4 9  Date 12 September 198-5 HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE FOR INDOCHINESE REFUGEES,  RETURNEES AND DISPLACED PERSONS The Minister for Foreign Affairs,  Mr Bill Hayden,   M.P., today announced that Australia would provide  humanitarian assistance worth about $1 million to the  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and  the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for  care and maintenance programs for Indochinese refugees,   returnees and displaced persons. Mr Hayden said that UNHCR would receive 60 tonnes  of high protein biscuits and 60 tonnes of whole milk powder  valued at around $300,000 including freight, to assist  it feeding programs for Cambodian refugees in holding ·   camps in Thailand.  He said Australia would also contribute  a cash grant of $300,000 to ICRC for its continuing relief  programs for diplaced Cambodians in the Thai/Cambodian  border region. Mr Hayden said a further contribution of $100,000  would be made to UNHCR for its Cambodian returnees project  which aims at assisting designated villages to upgrade  their facilities for the reintegration of returnees. In  addition, UNHCR would receive an initial allocation of  1000 tonnes of rice, for its feeding programs for Cambodian  returnees. Mr Hayden said that a cash grant of $150,000 would  be provided to UNHCR to assist with' screening procedures  for Lao seeking refugee status in Thailand and to provide  relief aid to Lao civilians who wish to voluntarily return  to their homeland. The contribution form part of the Australian  Government's humanitarian response to disaster situations  throughout the world and are provided from funds .   administered by the Australian Development Assistance  Bureau.  -

 No. Mi4 9  Date 12 September 198-5

 HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE FOR INDOCHINESE REFUGEES,  RETURNEES AND DISPLACED PERSONS

 The Minister for Foreign Affairs,  Mr Bill Hayden,  

 M.P., today announced that Australia would provide 

 humanitarian assistance worth about $1 million to the 

 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and 

 the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for 

 care and maintenance programs for Indochinese refugees,  

 returnees and displaced persons.

 Mr Hayden said that UNHCR would receive 60 tonnes 

 of high protein biscuits and 60 tonnes of whole milk powder 

 valued at around $300,000 including freight, to assist 

 it feeding programs for Cambodian refugees in holding ·  

 camps in Thailand.  He said Australia would also contribute 

 a cash grant of $300,000 to ICRC for its continuing relief 

 programs for diplaced Cambodians in the Thai/Cambodian 

 border region.

 Mr Hayden said a further contribution of $100,000 

 would be made to UNHCR for its Cambodian returnees project 

 which aims at assisting designated villages to upgrade 

 their facilities for the reintegration of returnees. In 

 addition, UNHCR would receive an initial allocation of 

 1000 tonnes of rice, for its feeding programs for Cambodian 

 returnees.

 Mr Hayden said that a cash grant of $150,000 would 

 be provided to UNHCR to assist with' screening procedures 

 for Lao seeking refugee status in Thailand and to provide 

 relief aid to Lao civilians who wish to voluntarily return 

 to their homeland.

 The contribution form part of the Australian 

 Government's humanitarian response to disaster situations 

 throughout the world and are provided from funds .  

 administered by the Australian Development Assistance 

 Bureau.  -

