---
title: "Statement: Australia's immigration debate"
date: "1985-02-28"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213910434
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03004315%22
---

 P A R L I A M E N T  OF  A U S T R A L I A P A R L I A M E N T  H O U S E  

 C A N B E R R A  A C T .  2 6 0 0  

 T E L . 72 1211

 xo

 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 PRESS RELEASE 

 28 February 1985

 PHILIP RUDDOCK, M.P. Shadow Minister for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs

 I very much agree with the statement by the Minister for  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. Chris Hurford, that  Australia's immigration debate should centre on issues such as  the economics of immigration, the principles to be allocated to  migration categories particularly, such as family reunion, 

 refugees, skilled workers aid businessmen. These latter  questions have been particularly vigorously pursued by the  Leader of the Opposition, who has frequently raised the  question of a balance within categories as an important  aim to be pursued.

 The Opposition's policy on Immigration and Ethnic Affairs  is predicated on the following fundamental principle:  Immigration policy should be applied on a basis which is - > non-discriminatory. Non-discrimination means that  policy will be applied consistently to all applicants, 

 regardless of race, colour, national descent, nation  or ethnic region or sex.

 The question of the economics of immigration has been the  subject of a research project being conducted by Professor  Neville Norman on behalf of the Department of Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs and the Committee for Economic Development of  Australia. The project is due to report this year. From  public comment by Professor Norman some indication of the 

 preliminary results is to hand ;  " Overall, immigration  continues to exert a generally favourable economic impact  in Australia, though the magnitude of net economic benefit  is probably much less than in the 1950's, when vigorous 

 secondary-industry growth, more receptive attitudes and  the need to fill a population 'hole' created by low birthrates  in the 1930's each enabled immigration to contribute more  tangibly to the Australian economy than it does, apparently,  today. " .

 Traditional trade union mythology that immgration  programmes must be cut back at times of high unemployment is  a matter that Professor Norman has addressed. It is already  clear that, if the Australian economy is improving as the  Government asserts, there exists considerable scope for 

 increasing Australia's immigration programme when entry  targets are established later this year. The Opposition  supports the view that a significant immigration programme  does not contribute to increased unemployment but actually 

 stimulates the economy and therefore employment opportunities.  To the extent that there is a debate, the Opposition will  join issue with those who would seek to limit further  Australia's immigration programme.

 Tel: (062) 72 6817

