---
title: "Chipp: compassion needed with Irian Jayan refugees"
date: "1985-10-24"
creators:
  - "Chipp, Don"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213914525
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09012945%22
---

 PRESS RELEASE P.R. NO. 85/271CANBERRA24 OCTOBER: 1985 THE SENATE .  CHIPP: COMPASSION NEEDED WITH IRIAN JAYAN REFUGEES .

 Senator Don Chipp, Leader of the Australian Democrats, today 

 urged the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Hurford, 

 to treat the new Irian Jayan refugees in Torres Strait with 

 compassion.  .

 "In the past, Mr Hurford has claimed that these refugees are .

 coming to Australian territory to reap the benefits of Australia's 

 social security system. The reality is far removed from this 

 cynical and misanthropic interpretation.

 "These people are desperate enough to risk capture en route and 

 the consequences of being caught. The fact that they are 

 prepared to go to such lengths is a sign of their true motives.

 "No doubt, the Minister would have been happier had these people 

 either not come, or been prepared to be talked into returning to 

 Irian Jaya, but that not being the case Australia has an overriding 

 humanitarian obligation to treat them with compassion and if they 

 can establish their cases, accept them as refugees.

 "To suggest, as Mr Hurford has, that under no circumstances, 

 whether these people are genuine refugees or not, will Australia 

 take them is outrageous. But to then take the next step and say 

 that these people would be better off elsewhere like Austria, 

 and this is a major reason why we should not have them in 

 Australia, is absolutely absurd," Senator Chipp concluded.

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Senator Don Chipp 03 61 3137

 Helene Teichmann 03 61 3064

