---
title: "Chipp backs royal commission into Nazis in Australia"
date: "1986-04-21"
creators:
  - "Chipp, Don"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213918259
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09020249%22
---

 M E D IA  R E L E A S E

 P.R. No. 86/90

 T H E  SENATE 

 CANBERRA  21 APRIL 1986

 CHIPP BACKS ROYAL COMMISSION INTO NAZIS IN AUSTRALIA.

 Senator Don Chipp, Leader of the Australian Democrats, today  backed the call by the NSW Parliament to establish a Federal  Royal Commission into Nazi War Criminals in Australia.

 "The two "programmes so far in the ABC Series "Nazis in 

 Australia" raise some vital questions which must be answered.  How were these people accepted as refugee migrants? How did  it happen that at every stage when these people were up for  investigation vital evidence on their past was not presented?

 "Not only is it a question of the last Nazi probably dying in  Australia of old age, but of A S 10 officials being either  unbelievably inept, or more likely covering up for these  people for political motives.

 "If it is true that Nazis were given sanctuary by the 

 Australian intelligence community, then those intelligence  officers must be held accountable.

 "Nor is it good enough for Mr. Hurford to say, as he did in  the Parliament last Wednesday, that investigations were  carried out in the past and the Governments of the day 

 decided to take no further action. This is exactly the 

 matter that now needs the attention of a Royal Commission.

 "A Royal Commission would be able to establish all the facts,   and innocent people would be protected.

 "No doubt Mr. Hurford would prefer to have a quiet life and  not to have open this can of worms, while the Liberals would  be fearful of what might be revealed,but to use Mr. Hurford1s  own words "it is of benefit to us all to remind each success­

 ive generation of how appalling can be man's inhumanity to  man." If there are any doubts that Australia has, in the 

 past, and is still harbouring Nazi War Criminals they need to  be settled now.

 "Mr. Hurford's refusal to reply to a list of questions put to  him by that programme based on the activities of a particular  individual may be an attempt to protect that individual.  However, it is not for Mr. Hurford to decide on the truth or  otherwise of the evidence, but to put it before a Royal 

 Commission to decide.

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION: Helene Teichmann (03) 61 3064

