---
title: "Address by the Minister for Education At the Opening of Careers"
date: "1986-07-01"
creators:
  - "Ryan, Susan"
source: "Minister for Education"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213919800
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09022055%22
---

 ADDRESS' BY THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, SENATOR SUSAN RYAN, AT THE OPENING  OF CAREERS '86 AT BRUCE TAPE ON 1 JULY 1986

 The huge array of displays assembled ^here is indicative of the range of  career choices facing young people today. It underlines how important it  is for young people to consider all their options in planning a  productive and fulfilling future.

 Without doubt, young people who visit Careers 186 will see quite clearly  the relationship between education and their future options - whether  employment or more education.

 Our Government has been very active in increasing those options.

 Australia is going through a period of change.  It used to be the case  that only a small minority of students went through to the last years of  school. For the rest, there were trades (for boys), or easily available  jobs. -

 We have left behind that pattern of education, training and employment.

 In today's world the demand for young unskilled workers has fallen  markedly, and the need for increasing skills across the board has been  widely recognized.

 As.well, Australia is no longer able to rely on our natural resources for  prosperity. If we ever were content to be the world's quarry and farm,  recent developments in our terms of trade have surely dispelled that  notion. · .

 To secure our future prosperity, the skills of all Australians must be  developed to the full. ·

 Education holds the key to many of the changes which are necessary to  ensure a productive Australia for the future.

 We need an increase in our levels of education participation so that the  skill base on which Australian industry can build will be broadened.

 If we, as a nation, upgrade our levels of general skills, then, in turn,  we have a better base on which to develop specific vocational skills. The.re-structuring of industry, and the impact of rapid technological  change, mean that adaptable skills are the most valuable, and re-training 

 assumes more importance than before. .

 Technical and Further Education has a particular role to play in  providing extensive training and retraining facilities and courses. This  role is a growing one, as it becomes more common for workers to expect to  acquire two or three sets of skills through their working life, rather 

 than the single career which was customary in the past.

 Our Government has recognised the changing economic environment, and the  role which education can play in responding to it. We know that the  value and importance of education, to individuals and to society at large  cannot be overestimated. .

 We know too that every young Australian should be facing a useful choice  - whether in education, employment or some combination of the two. For  this reason we have launched an ambitious campaign through our Priority  One strategy to ensure that these choices exist. The new traineeship 

 scheme, with its emphasis on quality training, the improved and  rationalised education allowances and the continued expansion of the  number of places available in post-secondary education are all designed  to extend and enhance the choices available to young people.

 In the past we have wasted much of the talent available to us by failing  to ensure that all groups get all they can out of school.

 Girls, for instance, have been under-achievers, or moved into areas which  restrict their later options. I am more confident than ever before that  we are, as a nation, at the verge of cracking some of the major problems  which have prevented girls from benefiting equally from our education 

 systems. Last week in a landmark decision the Council of State and  Federal Education Ministers agreed to the development of a National  Policy on the Education of Girls. Through concerted and co-operative  effort we can look forward to some real improvements in the returns that  girls receive from our investment in their education.

 The participation in school of other groups has also been less than  complete - for instance those from poorer families or some ethnic or  racial minorities.

 Changing schools so that they truly meet the needs of all is a big job.  Our Government has been playing a leading role with the Participation and  Equity Program, in schools and in TAFE. This program, allocated $43 

 million this year, has given many education institutions the means to  improve their programs so that they are useful for all students, and the  whole of the community, not just a small part of it.

 We have seen, over the past three years, great increases in education  participation. Retention rates to the last year of school have risen  over 25 per cent, and by next year there will be 28,000 more higher  education students than there were in 1983.

 We want to make sure^ that this increased participation benefits all  groups in society. As an integral part of Priority One, therefore,  student allowances have been increased and rationalized. By bringing  allowances for young people into one age-related scheme, we will provide  a stronger incentive for young people to study and will be able to assist 

 those families which otherwise cannot afford to keep their children at  school.

 When all the changes to youth allowances are in place by 1989, we will  have aligned student allowances to the rate of unemployment benefit, thus  elimating the financial disincentive to study. Allowances, and any  income tests for eligibility, will be indexed, to maintain their real  value.

 Today also is the first day of operation of a government scheme which  will assist those students who find themselves in the unfortunate  situation of being homeless. The Young Homeless Allowance will provide  financial assistance up to $73.28 a week to eligible secondary and 

 tertiary students who are homeless and without parental support.

 * \

 .. ^

 3.

 Students likely to qualify for assistance are those with no parental  home, such as orphans, wards and refugees without parents in Australia  aind students whose family circumstances make it unreasonable to require  them to live at home. We have introduced this allowance to ensure that  young people with the greatest needs are not disadvantaged and can  continue in education.

 The Labor Government is a Government of reform and of vision. Our vision  for young Australia is of a future featuring real choices in education,  training and employment. This future is one in which the talent and 

 energies of our young can be used to the full. .

 Careers 186 spreads out before us a whole range of options for young  people to choose from.

 I want to congratulate the organizers of this exhibition for the record  number of displays, and the expected record number of visitors.

