---
title: "Community Development Fund grants increased by 12.3%"
date: "1986-06-26"
creators:
  - "Scholes, Gordon"
source: "Minister for Territories"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213919678
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09023081%22
---

 ®  M edia statement e m e d i a  s t a t e m e n t  ©  media STATEMENT @  MEDIA STATEMENT ®  MEDIA STATEMENT

 M inister fo r Territories H O N . G O R D O N  SCHObES, m.p. MEMBER FOR C O R IO

 The Minister for Territories,  Gordon Scholes, today 

 announced Community Development Fund grants totalling 

 $2,149,426 to health and welfare organisations in the 

 ACT for the 1986/87 financial year. Mr Scholes said 

 this represented an increase of 12.3 per cent on the 

 amount allocated last year.  ,  .

 Recommendations for the grants had been approved 

 following consideration by the Health and Welfare 

 Advisory Committee and the ACT House of Assembly 

 Standing Committee on Health, Housing and Welfare.

 Mr Scholes said that arrangements for payment were now 

 under way to enable cheques for the first quarterly 

 instalment to be issued in the first week of July.

 Grants in the Youth and Community and the Heritage and 

 Tourism categories were expected to be finalised 

 tomorrow and would be announced as soon as possible. It 

 was hoped to make these payments next week also.

 Details of the grants are attached.

 26 June 1986

 - 2-

 Name of Body or Person Amount $ Purpose/Conditidns

 Indo-China Refugee 7,000

 Association (ACT) Inc.

 Jobless Action 86,440

 Reachout Project

 Oops Multi Arts Group 5,000

 Canberra Civil 5,500

 Rehabilitation Committee

 North Belconnen 4,500

 Community Child Care  Association Inc.

 Spence Children's 3,800

 Cottage Association Inc.

 Women's Child Care 3,700

 Collective Inc.

 Towards meeting the operational expenses.of the  Association and the salary  of a Community Development  Officer providing welfare 

 services to Indo-Chinese  refugees.

 Towards meeting the  operational costs of the  Reachout Project to provide  information, counselling,  support and advocacy  services to unemployed  people and low income 

 earners in the ACT.

 . Payment of 1 January 1987  and 1 April 1987 payments  are subject to an  evaluation of the  organisation and project  by the Department of  Territories'.

 Towards salaries and  operational costs of the  conduct of arts activities 

 by the organisation at  Quamby Children's Shelter.

 Towards the provision of  assistance for prisoners,  ex-prisoners and their  families by the  organisation.

 Towards meeting the  operational costs of the  Association.

 Towards meeting the cost of  rent for the government  house occupied by the  Association.

 Towards meeting the cost of  rent for the government  house used as a creche by  the Collective.

 - 3-

 0 1  Connor Family Centre 1, Inc.

 O'Connor Family Centre 7, Inc.

 Barnardo's Australia 10,

 Noah's Ark 1,

 Noah's Ark 10,

 ACROD ACT Division 1,

 Citizen Advocacy (ACT) 7, Inc.

 Disabled Adults 4,

 Residential Establishments ACT Inc.

 Technical Aid to the 2,

 Disabled (ACT Regional  Branch)

 Canberra Parents and 2,

 Citizens Association  for Deaf Children

 Towards the purchase of  child care equipment for use  by the Centre.

 Towards meeting the  operational costs of the  Centre's child care program.

 .  Payment of the grant is  subject to a satisfactory  review of the Centre's  management structure by 

 the Department of  Territories.

 Towards meeting the  operational costs of the  Kid's Friends programme  conducted by Barnardo's.

 Towards the cost of  replacement of toys and  equipment used in the toy  library conducted by the  organisation.

 Towards meeting the costs of  salaries, rent and  operational expenses of the  organisation.

 Towards meeting the  operational costs of the  organisation.

 Towards meeting the costs of  salary and rent to match  Department of Community  Service funding and towards 

 the operational costs of  organisation.

 Towards meeting the  operational costs of  organisation.

 Towards meeting the  administrative and  operational costs of the  organisation.

 Towards meeting the  operational costs of the  organisation.

 721

 146

 000

 500

 700

 100

 446

 000

 200

 500

 - 4 -

 SHOUT Inc- 16,

 SHOUT Inc- 2,

 Blind Society of the 5,

 ACT

 Blind Society of the 1,

 ACT

 Genesaret Local 5,

 Committee of L 1  Arche

 Genesaret Local  Committee of L'Arche

 ACT Council on 2,

 Intellectual Disability

 Lone Fathers Association  (ACT) Inc.

 Parent Support Service 15,  (ACT) Inc.

 Parent Support Service 10,  (ACT) Inc.

 Canberra Marriage 10,

 Counselling Service Inc.

 Towards meeting the costs of  operating a joint  secretariat and resource  centre for member 

 organisations of SHOUT.

 Towards the cost of  partitioning the SHOUT  office to create a secure  storage area.

 Towards meeting the costs of  salaries, rent and  administrative expenses of  the organisation-Towards meeting the cost of 

 equipment and furnishings to  be used by the organisation.

 Towards meeting the costs of  the operating expenses of  the organisation.

 Towards the cost of office  equipment to be used by the  organisation.

 Towards meeting the cost of  seminars to be conducted by  the organisation and towards  meeting the cost of the  -  operating costs of the 

 organisation.

 Towards meeting the costs of  operating the Domestic  Crisis Support programme  conducted by the  Association.

 Towards meeting the salary  costs associated with crisis  counselling conducted by the  Service.

 Towards meeting the  operating costs of support  groups for separated parents  and their children.

 Towards meeting the cost of  subsidising fees for clients  who cannot afford to pay for  marriage counselling.

 050

 89 3

 900

 000

 000

 250

 150

 600

 000

 000

 700

 Pregnancy Support 12,

 Service (ACT) Inc. ,

 One Parent Family 13,

 Support - Birthright

 Woden Community 28,

 Service

 Woden Community 110,

 Service

 Woden Community 68,

 Service

 Melba Neighbourhood 54,

 Centre

 Melba Neighbourhood 3,

 Centre

 Northside Community 69,

 Service

 Council of Social 115

 Service of the ACT Inc.

 Council of Social Service of the ACT Inc.

 Canberra Welfare 48,

 Rights and Legal Centre

 5-

 Towards meeting the  operating costs of the  Service.

 Towards meeting the salary  costs of a Welfare Co­ ordinator employed by the  organisation.

 Towards meeting the costs of  salary and expenses of a  Youth Worker employed by the  Service.

 Towards meeting the  operating costs of the  Lollipop Occasional Care  Centre.

 Towards meeting the costs of  providing community support  services in the Woden area.

 Towards meeting the costs of  providing community support  services in the Melba Flats  area.

 Towards meeting the costs of  a program of weekend  activities for young people  in the Melba Flats area.

 Towards meeting the costs of  providing community support  services in the North  Canberra area.

 Towards meeting the cost of  salaries and administration  expenses of the  organisation.

 Towairds meeting the purchase  of a typists chair ($150)  two footstools ($50) two  document holders ($100) and  towards the installation of  a connecting door at its  office.

 Towards meeting the cost of  salaries and other general  administration expenses of  the organisation.

 600

 000

 530

 000

 328

 737

 240

 120

 169

 750

 043

 - 6 -

 Belconnen Community  Service Inc. 96,300 Towards the cost of 

 providing community support  services in the Belconnen  area.

 Tuggeranong Community  Service Inc. 249,380 Towards the payment of staff  salaries for Kambah House,  

 Appletree House, South  Tuggeranong Family Centre  and part payment of  Director's salary and 

 towards the provision of  community support services  in the Tuggeranong area and  for the purchase of  furniture, toys and  eguipment for use in its  occasional care centres.

 The Smith Family 139,000 Towards the provision of 

 emergency relief payments  and welfare services to low  income earners.

 The Society of  St Vincent de Paul 30,000 Towards the administrative  expenses of the Society.

 The Society of  St Vincent de Paul 51,339 Towards the provision of a  home visitation service to 

 persons in need.

 The Society of  St Vincent de Paul

 5,250 Towards the provision of  emergency welfare assistance  to persons in need.

 The Abortion  Counselling Service 12,600 Towards meeting the cost of  salaries and operational 

 expenses of the counselling  service.

 Nursing Mothers  Association of  Australia, ACT Branch

 1,000 Towards meeting the 

 operational expenses of the  organisation.

 GROW Canberra 7,000 Towards meeting the cost of 

 salaries and operational  expenses for the  organisation.

 ACT Repetitive Strain  Injury Support Group Inc. 7,000 Towards meeting the costs of  the salary and 

 administrative expenses of  the Group.

 Multiple Sclerosis  Society of the ACT 15,000 Towards meeting the cost of  salaries and operational 

 expenses of the Society.

 - 7-

 Richmond Fellowship of 9, the ACT Inc.  ,

 Childbirth Education 5,

 Association

 Canberra Schizophrenia 5, Fellowship

 Epilepsy Association 1,

 of the ACT Inc.

 ACT Hospice Society 9,

 Diabetes Association 2,

 of the ACT Inc.

 Diabetes Association  of the ACT Inc.

 ACT Council on the 28,

 Ageing

 Australian Red Cross 16,

 Southside Neighbourhood 22,  Centre Inc.

 Southside Neighbourhood 1,  Centre Inc.

 Weston Creek Community 58, Health Centre Inc. '

 Towards meeting the costs of  salaries and administrative  expenses of providing  support services to ex­ psychiatric patients.

 Towards meeting the salary,  rent and administrative  costs of the organisation.

 Towards meeting the cost of  employing a project worker  and towards the operational  costs of the organisation.

 Towards meeting the  operational costs of the  organisation.

 Towards meeting the cost of  providing support services  to the terminally ill and  their families.

 Towards meeting the cost of  running workshops on  diabetes.

 Towards the cost of  purchasing a typewriter for  its own use.

 Towards meeting the  promotional and operational  costs of the Council.

 Towards meeting the cost of  providing a meals on wheels  service in the ACT.

 Towards meeting the cost of  rent and operational  expenses for the  organisation.

 Towards the cost of  purchasing eguipment to be  used by the organisation.

 Towards meeting the cost of  providing community support  services in the Weston Creek

 000

 000

 000

 287

 000

 000

 550

 400

 000

 617

 000

 088

 area.

 - 8 -

 Weston Creek Community  Health Centre Inc.

 Chinner Crescent Day 6,

 Care Centre

 Canberra Pensioners  Social and Recreational  Club Inc·

 TOC H Australia (Inc.)  Canberra Branch

 TOC H Australia (Inc.)  Canberra Branch

 Narrabundah Senior  Citizens Group

 Australian Deafness 5,

 Council (ACT)

 Guide Dog Association 8,

 of the ACT Inc.

 ACT Society for the 3,

 Physically Handicapped

 Handicapped Citizens' 217, Association of the ACT  I nc.

 Towards meeting the costs of  purchasing office equipment  to be used by the 

 organisation.

 Towards meeting the salary  costs of a part-time co­ ordinator and general  operational costs of the day 

 care centre.

 Towards meeting the  operational costs of the  club.

 Towards the cost of  maintenance of emergency  alarm' systems for aged and  infirm people.

 Towards the cost of  manufacture and installation  of emergency alarm systems  for aged and infirm people.

 Towards meeting the cost of  bus excursions for members  of the group.

 Towards meeting the  operational costs of the  Organisation.

 Towards meeting the  operational and maintenance  costs of the Blindness  Resource Centre conducted by  the Association.

 Towards meeting the rent  costs of Hartley House.

 Towards meeting the -  costs of  rental on two government  houses leased to the  Association for use by  handicapped citizens; 

 salaries and administrative  expenses of the  Association's Welfare and  Training Divisions;  

 residential programmes  assistance; maintenance  expenses; and salaries of  Executive Director, Director  of Welfare Services and 

 social worker.

 300

 400

 600

 300

 300

 300

 000

 000

 500

 280

 - 9-

 CARE Inc- 100,000 Towards meeting the costs of 

 providing a credit and debt  counselling service.

 Lifeline 45,000 Towards meeting the cost of 

 providing a telephone and  personal counselling  service.

 Salvation Army Family 165,850 Welfare Bureau Towards meeting the cost of  the organisation's operating 

 expenses and the provision  of emergency relief to:  low  income earners.

 Salvation Army Family 10,000 Welfare Bureau Towards meeting the cost of  establishing and operating 

 an office of the Bureau in  Wanniassa.

 Catholic Social .  57,472

 Services

 Towards meeting the cost of  salaries and administrative  expenses of the  organisation.

 $ 2,149,426

