---
title: "Indo-Chinese refugees"
date: "1986-05-25"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213918973
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04000461%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IM M IG R A TIO N   A N D  ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 The Hon. CHRIS HURFORD, M .P.

 MBS 49/86

 T N D O - C H T N F . S F .  R E F U G E E S

 S  The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Chris

 i  Hurford, said today (Sunday) the exodus of boat people

 ;  from Vietnam was not abating as expected and was causing

 |  increasing concern in countries of first refuge,  as well

 !  as in the resettlement nations such as Australia.

 Mr Hurford noted that those Indo-Chinese already in  Australia had been genuine refugees in fear of political  persecution. They had been screened as refugees in  earlier times.

 However, it was now well accepted internationally that a  t large proportion of those leaving the countries of

 j  Indo-China could not establish any claim of individual

 |  politically-motivated persecution.

 1  "We know that not only from our own interviewers, but also 

 I  from information from the United Nations High Commissioner

 1  for Refugees (UNHCR) and other interviewing nations," Mr

 I Hurford said.

 i  J "An independent United States panel, including voluntary |  agency representatives, concluded recently that many of

 :  those leaving are migrants pure and simple.

 "There is no doubt that economic conditions in Vietnam are  extremely bleak and that people have every incentive to  want to leave to secure a better future.

 "But the same is true of a distressingly large number of  countries around the world. We have one million people  interested in the less than 100,000 places available. It  is unfair on so many queued up elsewhere if there is a 

 'fast track' for some who are not political refugees but  people seeking a better life economically and socially. 

 j

 Parliament House, Canberra

 2

 "Emigration is no solution to the economic,  social and  political problems existing in Vietnam. The real answer  is to help people build a decent life for themselves  within their own country. The isolation of the Socialist  Republic of Vietnam is to be deplored."

 Mr Hurford said it was time that Vietnam opened up and  began to take part in the world community. Then other  nations would be able to help in the necessary rebuilding.

 Australia was in no way sacrificing the interests of  genuine refugees to diplomatic considerations.

 "We are simply determined to ensure that the very scarce  resources Australia and the international community  generally have available to respond to the needs of  genuine refugees are not abused by others with no real 

 claim for refugee status," Mr Hurford said.

 He pointed out that refugee status was not accorded by the  Australian Government,  but by the United Nations High  Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).  It was only when this  body had assessed people as refugees that they became 

 eligible for resettlement in countries such as Australia.

 "It needs .to be added that although collectively the  nations concerned must address the problems of the  continuing flow of boat people, Australia will continue to  take an increasing number of family reunions from Vietnam 

 as part of its humanitarian policy," Mr Hurford said.

 Canberra  25 May 1986

 Media contact: Godfrey Wiseman Tel: (062) 72 7075

