---
title: "Two Federal MP's just returned from Philippines say that elections are a case of now or never"
date: "1986-01-26"
creators:
  - "Sharp, John"
source: "Office of Sharp, John, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213916347
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09020852a%22
---

 P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A  

 H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S

 Two Federal M P 1s who have just returned from the Philippines   today have said many people in and around Metro Manila have'   warned that the elections are a case of now or never.

 Tim Fischer M P , (Farrer), Shadow Minister for Veterans'   Affairs, and John Sharp MP, (Gilmore), were in the   Philippines on the final leg of the Coalition Refugees and   Drugs Task Force tour of South-East Asia. .

 Mr Fischer and Mr Sharp attended huge campaign rallies as   neutral observers and met with a wide cross-section   including local M P 1s from the Marcos and Aquino camps.

 In a joint statement the two M P 1s said they were told   repeatedly the Presidential Elections must be fair, with   minimal fraud in the vote count as now is the last   opportunity for a democratic election in the Philippines.

 If the election is judged to have involved massive fraud and   cheating in the count then there will be major problems and   instability in the Philippines whatever the actual result   d e c l a r e d . ■  .  .

 The reality is that the experienced Marcos machine will   determine to what extent the election will be fair and if   the charismatic widow Aquino will have any real chance.

 There are aspects of the election which we will report on to   the Coalition Party leaders and to A ndrew Peacock as Shadow   Minister for Foreign Affairs as there are many important   ramifications for Australia if there is major instability in   our near northern neighbour. -

 Mr Fischer and Mr Sharp warned that any high-powered   international observer team would have an almost.impossible   task with some 90,000 polling booths and a proposed ban on   foreigners coming within 50 metres of the booths.

 Notwithstanding all of this it was a privilege and a   democratic tonic to witness the tremendous excitement   throughout the rally crowds as they look forward to   participating by voting for the next President.

 Mr Fischer added that the extensive reference to   Wor-ld War II veterans and the respect in the Philippines for   war veterans had been especially interesting as far as his   own role as Shadow Minister for Veterans Affairs was  

 c o n c e r n e d . "

 26 January 1986 '  '

 Contact: Tim Fischer 02-665 5026 until 1.15 pm 060-21 3264 after approx 4.00 pm   069-27 1456 home overnight

