---
title: "Albury siege in prospectus"
date: "1986-08-03"
creators:
  - "Fischer, Tim"
source: "Shadow Minister for Veterans' Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213920387
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09020820%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE TIM FISCHER MP

 Member for Farrer 

 Shadow Minister for Veterans' Affairs

 ALBURY SIEGE IN PROSPECTUS

 Shadow Minister for Veterans' Affairs and National Party Member  for Farrer Mr Tim Fischer said today that the actions of the  gunman involved in the Albury siege over the weekend should be  seen in prospectus.

 "The siege, which cause some considerable disruption in the  central business district, involved at various stages large  numbers of Police and was brought successfully to a conclusion  without loss of life. This was due to their professional and 

 patient approach.

 "I have nothing but praise for the work of the NSW Police, in  particular Detective Inspector John Marheine, for the way the  whole matter was handled.

 "The actions of one person, who was a refugee from Indo-China  should be seen in prospectus and should not be utilized by any  extremist for their purposes."

 Mr Fischer added that the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Chris Hurford had handled the extremely complex case  very carefully thus far, and further consideration was being  given to the matter.

 "In January of this year I visited Thailand and Laos with the  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Mr Alan  Cadman, and the Member for Gilmore Mr John Sharp looking at  refugee camps and the refugee and drug problem.

 "Whilst I totally reject the use of guns to prove any point and  obviously enormous stress is created for many people to come  through the very difficult condition in the very crowed refugee  camps."

 Mr Fischer said that he had sent a message to Mr Alan Cadman MP  in relation to the events in Albury and he would seek discussions  and further representations with the Minister for Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs, Mr Chris Hurford on Monday.

 On Friday night at the request of the Police, Mr Fischer cut  short commitments in Griffith and returned to Albury and spoke  with the gunman and provided him with certain additional  information to help further persuade him to end his protest.

 Mr Fischer further said that the role played by the Senior  Officer of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Bill Day was most commendable throughout the whole siege, in  particular in the early stage when the gunman first occupied the 

 office.

 #ENDS 3 August 1986

 Contact: Sunday - (07) 2044100 Monday - (060) 213264

