---
title: "Government reassures Cambodian community on Khao-I-Dang"
date: "1986-12-10"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214043232
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04000396%22
---

 COMMONWEALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION   AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS'  y

 The Hon. CHRIS HURFORD, M.P.

 MPS 1 3 5 / 8 6

 G O V E R N M E N T  R E A S S U R E S  C A M B O D T A N  C O M M U N IT Y  O N  K H A Q - I - D A N G

 The Minister ifdr Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Chris Hurford, -said today (Wednesday) that the Government   was making a compassionate response to the desires of   Cambodian-Australians for family reunions from Khao-I-Dang  

 and other camps on the Thai border.

 "We have been well aware of the concerns felt by   Cambodian-Australians over the future of their relatives   in Thailand resulting from the Thai Government decision to   close the Khao-I-Dang refugee camp," Mr Hurford said.

 "We will not turn our back on those concerns.

 "In fact, within our planning levels for refugees and   family reunions, we shall settle some 40% more Cambodians   from Thailand than in the previous year."

 The Minister noted that, although the Thai authorities had   indicated that Khao-I-Dang would close at the end of 1986,   the action was being taken in full consultation with UNHCR.

 Mr Hurford said that the Thai authorities were well aware   of the Australian position on any possible relocation of   the population of Khao-I-Dang.  Australia expected that   any relocation should be conducted with compassion and  

 full respect for the dignity and safety of those involved.

 Mr Hurford noted that the actual location of refugees and   displaced persons within Thailand was a matter for the   Thai authorities to determine and was not something over   which other countries could rightly or realistically   expect to exercise any control.  The actual closure of   Khao-I-Dang was a matter which fell within Thai  

 sovereignty.

 "Despite groundless rumours to the contrary, there is no   suggestion that the population of Khao-I-Dang will be sent   back to Cambodia. Anxiety about this, which is a cause   for concern to the Government, is needless and must be   dispelled," Mr Hurford said.

 Parliament House, Canberra

 2

 Mr Hurford said there was no parallel between the current  situation and the events of 1979 when, in two days,  40,000  Cambodians crossed the border into Thailand.  Khao-I-Dang  in 1979 was a holding centre and operated under very  different arrangements from those which exist today, 

 including in respect of the now active and full  participation of UNHCR.

 The Minister noted that Australia had taken extensive  measures to respond to the foreshadowed closure of  Khao-I-Dang.

 "The Australian Embassy in Bangkok has been giving  priority to the processing of the Khao-I-Dang caseload  over the past six months and will continue to do so.

 "We expect to have finalised all current family  sponsorships by the time of the closure," Mr Hurford said.

 "I believe that Australia's response to the tragic plight  of Cambodians will be recognised as both generous and  responsible.  It will continue to be so."

 Canberra  10 December

 Media contact:  Mr Dennis Richardson, DIEA, Tel: (062) 64 2296

 Mr Ian Porter,  Minister's Office  Tel: (062) 72 3365

