---
title: "Address to the third national conference of the Australian population association"
date: "1986-12-03"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214043100
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04000401%22
---

 MINISTER FOR

 IMMIGRATION &  ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 The Hon. Chris HURFORD m .p.  Parliament House, Canberra, ACT 2600

 THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS,  CHRIS HURFORD.

 ADDRESS TO THE THIRD NATIONAL CONFERENCE  OF THE AUSTRALIAN POPULATION ASSOCIATION,  ADELAIDE, 3 DECEMBER 1986

 I AM DELIGHTED TO OPEN PROCEEDINGS AT YOUR THIRD NATIONAL

 Co n f e r e n c e ,  an d am p a r t i c u l a r l y  p l e a s e d  t h a t  you are

 HOLDING TH IS CONFERENCE IN MY HOME C IT Y . I NOTE THAT THE  

 THEME FOR TH IS  CONFERENCE, "A U S T R A L IA ^  POPULATION AND THE

 Fu t u r e " ,  r e f l e c t s  my own v e r y  r e a l d e s i r e  for in f o r m e d  and

 RATIONAL DISCUSSION AND DEBATE ON THIS IMPORTANT AND AT  

 TIMES NEGLECTED TOPIC.

 Th i s  has b e e n a p a r t i c u l a r l y  i n t e r e s t i n g  year i n  t h e

 POPULATION FIE LD  WITH SOME MAJOR CONTRIBUTIONS EMERGING TO  

 FUEL THE DEBATE.

 Mo st r e c e n t l y ,  of c o u r s e , t h e r e  has b e e n t h e p u b l i c a t i o n

 OF THE FINAL REPORT OF THE STUDY BY D r GRAEME HUGO AND HIS  

 RESEARCHERS FROM THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF LABOUR STUDIES

 here a t Fl i n d e r s  Un i v e r s i t y . As you w i l l  be a w a r e,  I

 FORMALLY RELEASED THE REPORT, ENTITLED AUSTRALIA'S CHANGING

 Po p u l a t i o n : Tren d s and I m p l i c a t i o n s , j u s t  t h r e e  w eeks

 AGO, AND I AM LOOKING FORWARD TO HEARING THE VIEWS OF  

 THOSE WHO ARE NO DOUBT EAGERLY ANALYSING IT  AT THE MOMENT.

 2

 As I SAID AT THE TIME OF ITS RELEASE, POLICY MAKERS AND   PLANNERS FACE MAJOR CHALLENGES FROM THE PROFOUND CHANGES  

 NOW TAKING PLACE IN AUSTRALIA'S POPULATION, AND I URGED 

 PLANNERS EVERYWHERE TO REFLECT ON THE LONG-TERM  

 IMPLICATIONS RAISED IN THAT EXCELLENT REPORT, I #M SURE  

 THERE IS NO NEED FOR ME TO RE-EMPHASISE THAT MESSAGE TO  

 YOU LADIES AND GENTLEMEN PRESENT TODAY.

 I n Oc t o b e r  I t a b l e d  i n  Pa r l i a m e n t  my De p a r t m e n t ' s 1986 

 r e p o r t  on Au s t r a l i a ' s Po p u l a t io n  Tr en d s and Pr o s p e c t s

 WHICH AGAIN UNDERLINED THE FACT THAT, WITHOUT IMMIGRATION,  

 OUR POPULATION WILL BEGIN TO DECLINE BY THE YEAR 2030. As 

 YOU ARE NO DOUBT AWARE, THAT REPORT ALSO INCLUDED AS A  

 SPECIAL TOPIC AN ANALYSIS OF THE AUSTRALIAN FAMILY,  

 HIGHLIGHTING THE FACT THAT, DESPITE SOME SIGNIFICANT  

 CHANGES SINCE THE LAST CENTURY, THE FAMILY WILL REMAIN THE  

 CONTEXT IN WHICH AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN WILL BE RAISED.

 Ho w e v e r , a g r e a t e r  d i v e r s i t y  of f a m i l y  t y p e s  can be

 EXPECTED.

 An o t h e r  i n i t i a t i v e  i s  t h e d e v e l o p m e n t  of a p o p u l a t io n  k i t

 FOR SECONDARY SCHOOLS. THIS HAS BEEN A COLLABORATIVE .  

 EFFORT BETWEEN MY DEPARTMENT AND VICTORIA COLLEGE,

 Me l b o u r n e . I n o t e t h a t  t h i s  pac kag e  w h ic h  i s  to be

 PUBLISHED IN TIME FOR THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE 1988  

 ACADEMIC YEAR, IS  THE SUBJECT OF A PAPER TO BE PRESENTED  

 IN THE SESSION ON TEACHING POPULATION STUDIES AT THIS  

 CONFERENCE.

 I n Se p t e m b e r  I r e l e a s e d  t h e f i n d i n g s  of t h e s t u d y  by 

 Dr Ha l Ke n d ig  a n d Dr John McCa l l u m ,  of t h e Au s t r a l ia n  

 Na t i o n a l  Un i v e r s i t y ,  on t h e im p a c t s  of our a g e in g  

 Au s t r a l i a n  p o p u l a t i o n . Th a t r e p o r t ,  Gr e y in g  Au s t r a l i a ,

 3

 HIGHLIGHTED THE CHALLENGES FACING A SOCIETY IN WHICH THE  

 NUMBER OF PEOPLE AGED OVER 60 IS EXPECTED TO DOUBLE WITHIN

 35 y e a r s . Th i s  r e p o r t  was p r e p a r e d  for t h e Na t i o n a l  

 Po p u l a t io n  Co u n c i l , w h ic h  p r o v i d e s  in d e p e n d e n t  a d v i c e  to

 ME ON POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION MATTERS. I NOTE WITH  

 INTEREST THAT THE FINAL SESSION OF TH IS CONFERENCE, ON  

 POPULATION FUTURES FOR AUSTRALIA, IS  TO BE BASED ON A  

 REPORT WHICH I ASKED THE COUNCIL TO DEVELOP, ENTITLED 'THE

 Au s t r a l i a n  Po p u l a t i o n : Op t i o n s  and Sc e n a r i o s ' .

 Al l t h e s e  r e p o r t s  a r e, of c o u r s e , g r i s t  to t h e m i l l  of t h e 

 in t e n s e  i n t e r e s t  of t h e Hawke Labor Go v e r n m e n t  i n  t h e 

 q u e s t io n  of p o p u l a t io n  growth and i n  t h e p a r t  w h ic h

 IMMIGRATION CAN AND MUST PLAY IN THAT GROWTH.

 Sin c e  c o m in g  to o f f i c e , t h e Go v e r n m e n t  has r e v i t a l i s e d  

 Au s t r a l i a ' s i m m i g r a t i o n  program , has made i t  more

 RESPONSIVE AND ATTUNED TO AUSTRALIA'S ECONOMIC  

 CIRCUMSTANCES, AND HAS ENCOURAGED RATIONAL AND INFORMED  

 PUBLIC DEBATE IN AN EFFORT TO PLACE POPULATION AND !

 IMMIGRATION ISSUES ON AUSTRALIA'S NATIONAL AGENDA.

 De s p i t e  t h e c y n ic s  and k n o c k e r s , and d e s p i t e  a t t e m p t s  by a

 FEW TO AROUSE RACIST OR ILLIBERAL PASSIONS WITHIN THE

 Au s t r a l i a n  c o m m u n it y , t h e m a j o r i t y  of Au s t r a l i a n s  are

 INCREASINGLY SYMPATHETIC TOWARDS THE UNDERLYING RATIONALE  

 OF OUR IMMIGRATION PROGRAMS. INCREASINGLY, AUSTRALIANS  

 HAVE COME TO APPRECIATE THAT PEOPLE ARE A NATION'S  

 GREATEST ASSETj THAT IMMIGRATION DOES NOT POSE A THREAT TO  

 THE EMPLOYMENT PROSPECTS OF RESIDENT AUSTRALIANS; THAT  

 MANY MIGRANTS, PARTICULARLY REFUGEES, HAVE SPECIAL  

 SETTLEMENT D IF F IC U L T IE S  WHICH NEED ADDRESSING AND THAT  

 POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION MUST BE SEEN AS JUST AS  

 IMPORTANT TO OUR FUTURE AS THEY HAVE UNDENIABLY BEEN TO  

 OUR PAST.

 The im p o r t a n c e  of p u b l i c  d e b a t e on Au s t r a l i a ' s p o p u l a t io n

 FUTURE SHOULD NOT BE UNDERSTATED. We SHOULD ALL 

 PARTICIPATE IN DETERMINING THE FUTURE AUSTRALIA, AND WHAT 

 IS A NATION IF  NOT PEOPLE?

 TO ENSURE THAT PUBLIC DEBATE IS INFORMED I WILL CONTINUE 

 TO EMPHASISE THE IMPORTANCE OF PROMOTING AN AWARENESS OF 

 POPULATION TRENDS. To TH IS END, AND TO GAIN A BETTER  

 APPRECIATION OF THE LEVEL OF UNDERSTANDING WITHIN THE  

 COMMUNITY, MY DEPARTMENT CONDUCTED A NATIONAL SURVEY ON  

 POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION ISSUES IN NOVEMBER OF THIS YEAR.

 I WISH TO SHARE WITH YOU TODAY SOME OF THE SURVEY'S

 f i n d i n g s . Ov e r 2 , 2 0 0  r e s p o n d e n t s  i n  both r u r a l and urban

 AREAS AND REPRESENTATIVE OF THE AUSTRALIAN POPULATION  

 PARTICIPATED. THE SURVEY WAS CONDUCTED BY REARK RESEARCH  

 ON BEHALF OF MY DEPARTMENT.

 Ha l f of t h o s e  s u r v e y e d  knew t h a t  Au s t r a l i a ' s p r e s e n t  

 POPULATION WAS 1 5  OR 16 M IL L IO N . A FURTHER QUARTER SAID  

 i t  was 12 t o 14 or 17 t o 20 m i l l i o n . The r e m a i n i n g

 QUARTER WERE WILDLY ASTRAY.

 One i s s u e  c o n f r o n t in g  t h e Go v e r n m e n t  i n  i t s  l o n g - term

 IMMIGRATION POLICY DELIBERATIONS IS THAT OF AN OPTIMUM

 POPULATION. T he d i f f i c u l t i e s  a s s o c i a t e d  w it h  t h i s  c o n c e p t  

 WERE DISCUSSED AT THE RECENT ANU CONFERENCE ENTITLED 'HOW

 Man y More Au s t r a l i a n s ? '

 I n t e r e s t i n g l y , t h e m a j o r i t y  of r e s p o n d e n t s  to t h e s u r v e y

 CONSIDERED THAT THERE IS EITHER NO IDEAL POPULATION SIZE

 for Au s t r a l i a  or t h a t  t h e o p t im u m  p o p u l a t io n  i s

 SIG N IFIC A N TLY GREATER THAN OUR PRESENT POPULATION. ONLY  

 10% BELIEVED THAT OUR PRESENT POPULATION IS EXCESSIVE.

 5

 I n d e e d , t h e m a j o r it y  c o n s id e r e d  t h a t  a t h i n l y  p o p u l a t e d

 CONTINENT WOULD CAUSE PROBLEMS FOR AUSTRALIA IN THE  

 FUTURE, AND TWO~THIRDS FELT THAT WITH PROPER MANAGEMENT A  

 LARGER POPULATION NEED NOT HARM OUR ENVIRONMENT.

 On e- t h i r d  of Au s t r a l ia n s  f a v o u r e d  a l a r g er  p o p u l a t io n  for

 DEFENCE REASONS ALONE. 85% THOUGHT THAT A U S TR A LIA ^  

 POPULATION GROWTH RATE IS EITHER ABOUT RIGHT OR TOO LOW.

 There were some a p p a r e n t  c o n t r a d i c t io n s  r e v e a l e d . 60% of

 THOSE SURVEYED SAID THAT AUSTRALIANS DO NOT FAVOUR LARGER  

 FAMILIES AND OVER HALF SAID THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD NOT  

 PROVIDE FINANCIAL OR OTHER KINDS OF HELP TO ENCOURAGE  

 PEOPLE WHO WISH TO HAVE MORE CHILDREN TO DO SO. AND YET,  

 WHEN ASKED HOW FASTER POPULATION GROWTH COULD BE ACHIEVED  

 FOR THIS COUNTRY, 60% SAID THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD ENCOURAGE  

 LARGER FAMILIES IN PREFERENCE TO INCREASING IMMIGRATION OR  

 A COMBINATION OF THE TWO. ;

 I n a n n o u n c in g  t h e c u r r e n t  i m m i g r a t i o n  p o l i c y  e a r l i e r  t h i s

 YEAR I MADE REFERENCE TO THE AGEING OF AUSTRALIA'S

 p o p u l a t i o n . S in c e  t h e n t h e 'G r e y i n g  Au s t r a l i a ' r e p o r t  has

 BEEN RELEASED. ONE OF THE FINDINGS WAS THAT IMMIGRATION  

 CAN POSTPONE THE IMPACT OF POPULATION AGEING.

 I m m i g r a t i o n , of c o u r s e , c a n n o t  r e v e r s e  t h e p r o c e s s  b u t i t

 CAN HAVE A SMALL BUT SIG NIFIC A NT RETARDING* EFFECT,  

 PARTICULARLY WHEN THE COST IMPLICATIONS OF AN OLDER  

 POPULATION ARE RELATED TO THE FINANCIAL BURDEN ON

 t a x p a y e r s . The Go v e r n m e n t  d o es no t use i m m i g r a t i o n ' s i

 IMPACT ON AGEING AS THE RATIONALE FOR INCREASING THE  

 INTAKE BUT IT  DOES REGARD SUCH AN IMPACT AS B ENEFIC IA L.

 i

 6

 The a i m  of t h e 'G r e y i n g  Au s t r a l i a ' r e p o r t  was p r i m a r i l y  to

 RAISE THE LEVEL OF COMMUNITY AWARENESS OF OUR AGEING

 p o p u l a t i o n . More th a n  t h r e e - q uar ter  of r e s p o n d e n t s  to the

 RECENT SURVEY INDICATED SOME UNDERSTANDING OF THIS

 s u b j e c t . Two- t h i r d s  c o n s id e r e d  t h a t  an a g e in g  p o p u l a t io n  

 i n  Au s t r a l i a  would be to t h e c o u n t r y ' s d is a d v a n t a g e  or a t

 LEAST OF SOME CONCERN AND MORE THAN DOUBLE THOSE IN FAVOUR  

 OF INCREASED IMMIGRATION SUPPORTED THE IMMIGRATION OF MORE  

 YOUNG PEOPLE AND FAM ILIES SO AS TO SLOW DOWN THE AGEING OF

 t h e Au s t r a l i a n  p o p u l a t i o n .

 On t h e q u e s t io n  of Au s t r a l i a  g r o w in g  to t w ic e  i t s  p r e s e n t

 POPULATION, MORE PEOPLE THAN NOT CONSIDERED THIS WOULD  

 PRODUCE A SIMILAR OR HIGHER STANDARD OF LIV IN G  FOR THE

 a v e r a g e  Au s t r a l i a n .

 A 1 9 8 4  PUBLIC OPINION POLL FOUND THAT TWO"THIRDS OF  

 Au s t r a l i a n s  t h o u g h t  t h a t  a 9 0 ,0 0 0  i m m ig r a t i o n  program  was 

 too h i g h . I n No v e m b er  1 9 8 6 , o n l y 36% i n d i c a t e d  t h a t  th e 

 1 9 8 6 / 8 7  MIGRATION PROGRAM OF 9 5 ,0 0 0  WAS TOO HIGH WITH SOME  

 60% SAYING THAT IT  WAS EITHER ABOUT RIGHT OR TOO LOW.

 Cl e a r l y ,  Au s t r a l i a n s  are b e c o m in g  p r o g r e s s iv e l y  more

 ACCEPTING AND SUPPORTIVE OF LARGER IMMIGRATION PROGRAMS.

 Th e y p a t e n t l y  se e b e n e f i t s  i n  p o p u l a t io n  growth, t h e y

 WOULD LIKE TO SEE GREATER F E R T IL IT Y  BUT ARE PESSIM ISTIC  

 ABOUT IT  HAPPENING AND THEY DO NOT FORESEE POPULATION  

 INCREASES HAVING A SERIOUS IMPACT ON THE ENVIRONMENT SO  

 LONG AS A BALANCE IS  MAINTAINED IN THEIR MANAGEMENT.

 The s u r v e y  d i s c l o s e d  some f u r t h e r  o p t i m i s t i c  and p o s i t i v e

 ATTITUDES WHICH I CAN SHARE WITH YOU. OVER HALF THE  

 PEOPLE SURVEYED BELIEVED THAT AUSTRALIA'S REFUGEE AND  

 HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMS SHOULD BE EITHER KEPT AT THE PRESENT  

 LEVEL OR INCREASED AND ONLY 12% OF THOSE SURVEYED

 7

 INDICATED THAT THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD BE DOING LESS TO HELP  

 NEW MIGRANTS TO SETTLE IN AUSTRALIA. INDEED, ALMOST  

 ONE-THIRD WANTED THE GOVERNMENT TO DO MORE. To REITERATE, 

 IT  IS CLEAR THAT AUSTRALIANS ARE OVERWHELMINGLY  

 SYMPATHETIC, BENEVOLENT AND PO SITIVE TOWARDS THE PLIGHT OF  

 REFUGEES AND THE SETTLEMENT D IF F IC U L T IE S  CONFRONTING MANY  

 NEW MIGRANTS GENERALLY.

 Ha v i n g  s a i d  t h a t , I n e e d to e m p h a s iz e  and to r e- e m p h a s iz e  

 t h a t  « -t h e. Go v e r n m e n t  w i l l  o n l y b e - a b l e to a f f o r d  t o do more

 FOR THOSE WHO NEED HELP IF  THE, UNDERLYING ECONOMIC  

 RATIONALE OF OUR MIGRATION PROGRAM IS PRESERVED. PUT  

 SIMPLY, WE NEED TO M IN IM ISE THE COSTS AND TO MAXIMISE THE  

 BENEFITS OF OUR OVERALL INTAKE.

 I t i s  i n  THIS CONTEXT THAT I WISH to c o n t in u e  t h e r a t io n a l  

 PUBLIC DEBATE ABOUT AUSTRALIA'S POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION

 f u t u r e s . T h i s  Go v e r n m e n t  i s  c o m m it t e d  to r e s t o r in g  , 

 Au s t r a l i a ' s i n t e r n a t i o n a l  c o m p e t i t i v e n e s s  and to r a i s i n g  

 r ea l l i v i n g  s t a n d a r d s  for a l l . I ca n n o t  c o n t e m p l a t e  a n y

 ECONOMIC OR SOCIAL STRATEGY TOWARDS THESE ENDS WHICH WOULD  

 NOT EMBRACE A CENTRAL ROLE FOR POPULATION GROWTH AND  

 EXPANDED IMMIGRATION OF THE RIGHT BLEND. .

 As more Au s t r a l i a n s  a c c e p t  t h a t  under our m anaged  and

 EXPANDING IMMIGRATION PROGRAMS WE ARE ATTRACTING AN  

 INCREASING NUMBER OF MIGRANTS, WITH PO SITIVE ECONOMIC  

 QUALITIES AND MOTIVATION, COMMUNITY SUPPORT FOR  

 IMMIGRATION AS THE ONLY EFFECTIVE POLICY INSTRUMENT IN  

 POPULATION GROWTH WILL CONTINUE TO INCREASE. THE

 Go v e r n m e n t  s h a r e s  t h e c o m m u n it y ' s g e n e r a l  f e e l i n g  t h a t  a

 RETURN TO HIGHER F E R T IL IT Y  LEVELS IS UNLIKELY IN THE  

 FORESEEABLE FUTURE AND THAT ANY INTERVENTION BY THE

 8

 Go v e r n m e n t  to enc o u r a g e  p e o p l e  to have lar g er  f a m i l i e s  i s

 NEITHER APPROPRIATE NOR LIKELY TO SUCCEED. ACCORDINGLY,  

 POPULATION AND ECONOMIC GROWTH WILL HAVE TO BE  

 SUBSTANTIALLY UNDERWRITTEN BY MANAGED, ECONOMICALLY  

 DRIVEN, EXPANDING IMMIGRATION PROGRAMS. O n THIS QUESTION,

 t h e Go v e r n m e n t , m o s t of b u s i n e s s  and commerce  and a

 GROWING PERCENTAGE OF THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY ARE  

 EFFECTIVELY AT ONE.

 YOU WILL RECALL THAT IT  WAS I WHO BEGAN TH IS DEBATE ALMOST  

 A YEAR AGO. I AM INCREASINGLY HEARTENED BY THE GROWING  

 SUPPORT FOR THE CENTRAL RATIONALE THAT I POSTULATED IN

 Pa r l i a m e n t  i n  Ap r i l . M y a d v o c a c y , I m u s t r e m in d  yo u, was

 AND IS FOR IMMIGRATION TO BE INCREASED IN MANAGEABLE  

 STEPS, NOT IN A DRAMATICALLY RAPID COUNTER-PRODUCTIVE AND  

 COSTLY WAY AS HAS BEEN SUGGESTED BY SOME POLITICAL AND  

 BUSINESS SPOKESPEOPLE. THE SURVEY RESULTS TO WHICH I HAVE  

 ALLUDED TH IS  MORNING DO NOT REVEAL SIG NIFIC A NT SUPPORT  

 FOR, OR PEADY ACCEPTANCE OF, TOO RAPID AN ESCALATION OF  

 IMMIGRATION NUMBERS. THEY DO, HOWEVER, REVEAL A POSITIVE  

 AND PERSISTENT TREND TOWARD COMMUNITY ACCEPTANCE OF THE

 Hawke Labor Go v e r n m e n t ' s p o p u l a t io n  and m i g r a t i o n  

 p h i l o s o p h y . I t i s  my f i r m  c o n v i c t i o n  t h a t  c o m m u n it y

 SUPPORT WOULD BE MUCH GREATER BUT FOR THE SPORADIC  

 OUTBURSTS OF RACISM AND INTOLERANCE AND WITH A GREATER  

 PUBLIC UNDERSTANDING AND AWARENESS OF AUSTRALIA'S L IM ITE D  

 POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION OPTIONS.

 I LEAVE YOU WITH A CONCLUDING THOUGHT. ÎªÎ— Î• ROLE OF THE  

 APA IS BOTH PROFESSIONAL AND CONTEMPORARY. I ENCOURAGE   YOU TO CONSIDER THE RELEVANCE OF YOUR P R O G R A M S  A N D  T H E  

 CAPACITY FOR CONTRIBUTING TO HPlGHTENED PUBLIC 

 UNDERSTANDING AND KNOWLEDGE. ANYTHING WHICH YOU CAN

 9

 USEFULLY DO TO PARTICIPATE AS PROFESSIONALS IN THE DEBATE  

 AND DISCUSSION ON AUSTRALIA'S FUTURE WOULD BE A  

 CONTRIBUTION OF SIG NIFICANCE. YOU HAVE EFFECTIVELY  

 ACKNOWLEDGED TH IS NEED BY THE CHOICE O F YOUR CONFERENCE 

 THEME.

 I WISH YOU WELL IN YOUR DELIBERATIONS OVER THE NEXT 3 DAYS.

