---
title: "Wran CSIRO Appointment 'Poor Joke'"
date: "1986-12-01"
creators:
  - "Archer, Brian"
source: "Shadow Minister for Science"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214043019
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09019807%22
---

 SHADOW  MINISTER FOR SCIENCE  SHADOW  SPECIAL MINISTER OF STATE  OPPOSITION SPOKESMAN O N  TASMANIAN AFFAIRS PRESS RELEASE

 I COMMONWEALTH 1

 I parliamentary LIBRARY I  I C.LS. _J SENATOR BRIAN R. A R C H E R  SENATOR FOR TASMANIA

 THE SENATE

 A STATEMENT FROM THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

 WRAN CSIRO APPOINTMENT 'POOR JOKE'

 Neville Wran's reported imminent appointment as Chairman of  the new CSIRO Board has offended and insulted the scientific  community,  CSIRO,  and leaders in Austrlian industry, the  Shadow Minister for Science, Senator Brian Archer, said 

 today.

 "Such appalling political cronyism will be terribly damaging  to the status of the CSIRO at a time when the major move in  Australia has been to build up the relationship between  industry and the CSIRO, and to raise the independence and  stature of the CSIRO in the community.  "

 The reported appointment,  if true, would be totally 

 inappropriate under the circumstances , and very damaging to  the development of those relationships.

 The CSIRO is Australia's most important scientific and  industrial research organisation, and crucial to the  reindustrialisation of Australian industry as a springboard  to economic recovery, and has a record of never previously  having been subjected to political manipulation.

 Furthermore as Premier of N.S.W., Mr W r a n ’s record in  supporting research and development was appalling.

 In March this year the Chairman of the N.S.W. Science and  Technology Council, Professor Michael Birt, warned that the  future viability of NSW's scientific and technological base  was at risk, showing that spending on R&D in NSW was only 

 $86 per head compared with a national average of $103 a  head,  $119 a head for Victoria, $203 for Britain and $321  for the USA.

 After years of uncertainty, almost continuous review and  sagging morale, the CSIRO is looking to a new era,  a new  partnership with Australian industry, and the choice of a  non-scientist ex-politician has even before it is officially  announced already drawn criticism from many eminent men of 

 science, and includes such people as the former CSIRO head  Dr Paul Wild and Science Federation leader Professor F red  Smith.

 .  .  .  /2.

 2

 i S

 To meet the technological challenges of the next decade the  CSIRO requires a Chairman with imaginative leadership, a  proven record in science, industry or both. It is unlikely  that role will be adequately filled by a political refugee 

 from N.S.W. with a poor record in promoting R&D.

 It is clear that the CSIRO has been offered as 2nd Prize to  Neville Wran after missing out to David Hill at the ABC. It  is obvious that merit was not a consideration.

 The appointment marks a concerted thrust in political  cronyism from the Hawke Labor Government with David Hill,  Neville Wran, and Nick Whitlam the beneficiaries.

 Contact :  (062) 726185

 December 1 1986

 v

