---
title: "ANZUS communique"
date: "1986-08-12"
creators:
  - "Peacock, Andrew"
source: "Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213920521
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09018594%22
---

 P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A  PARLIAMENT HOUSE

 H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S  CANBERRA. A C T . 2600

 TEL. 72 1211

 FA73/86 12. 8.86

 ANZUS COMMUNIQUE

 The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Andrew Peacock today 

 called for the public release of letters exchanged between 

 Australia and the United States affirming continuation of 

 commitments under the A'NZUS Treaty.

 "I've been told that the letters are not to be released. If 

 there has been no watering down of the alliance, the letters 

 should be made public. The Treaty itself has been a matter of 

 public record - freely distributed - and I see no reason why the 

 arrangements now should remain secret. The Australian people 

 have a right to know."

 Mr. Peacock said that the Joint Communique issued after the 

 Australia-US Ministerial talks in San Francisco should be viewed 

 with scepticism.

 "Messrs Hayden and Beazley have been less than frank. In Labor's 

 own 1983 defence review, Cabinet reaffirmed ANZUS as 

 'fundamental' to our foreign and defence policies. In the 

 communique they merely note its importance. There has been a 

 determined undermining and dilution of ANZUS, and now the new 

 arrangements are to remain secret."

 Mr. Peacock said that the statement by Mr. Hayden'and Mr. Beazley 

 expressing regret that no resolution had been possible with New 

 Zealand, was. hypocritical.

 "This Government has made no real effort to influence the New 

 Zealand Labor Government. It has consistently abrogated any 

 leadership role with its Labor colleagues in Wellington. They 

 should have worked to keep New Zealand in ANZUS."

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT STEPHEN BRADY 72 7724.

