---
title: "Speech by the Prime Minister to welcome her Majesty, the Queen of Australia"
date: "1986-03-03"
creators:
  - "Hawke, Bob"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213917089
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09022484%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

 SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER  TO WELCOME HER MAJESTY, THE QUEEN OF AUSTRALIA  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 3 MARCH 1986

 YOUR MAJESTY; YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS,

 IT IS MY GREAT PLEASURE TO GREET YOU ON BEHALF OF THE  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE.

 YOUR MAJESTY, YOUR VISITS HERE GIVE THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA  AN OPPORTUNITY TO DEMONSTRATE THE AFFECTION WITH WHICH YOU,  AND YOUR FAMILY ARE REGARDED IN THIS COUNTRY. THIS VISIT IS  CLEARLY NO EXCEPTION.

 I AM DELIGHTED THAT DURING YOUR VISIT YOU WILL BE ATTENDING  THE 15OTH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS. OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA. WE  WERE DELIGHTED THAT THE PRINCE AMD -PRINCESS OF WALES  WERE ABLE TO ATTEND VICTORIA'S CELEBRATIONS LAST YEAR.

 IN TWO YEARS TIME AUSTRALIA WILL CELEBRATE OUR NATIONAL  BICENTENARY. AS WE APPROACH 1988, WE CAN REFLECT WITH PRIDE  ON AUSTRALIA'S EMERGENCE AS A MATURE, STABLE, TOLERANT  SOCIETY, VIGOROUSLY DIVERSE IN ITS POPULATION, WITH SOLID  ACHIEVEMENTS IN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, CULTURAL AND 

 INTELLECTUAL LIFE AND SPORTING ENDEAVOURS.

 IT WAS PARTICULARLY APPROPRIATE, YOUR MAJESTY, THAT YOU WERE  ABLE, YESTERDAY, TO PROCLAIM THE AUSTRALIA ACT. THE  PROCLAMATION OF THE ACT COMPLETES A CENTURY OF  CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT WHICH HAS ENDED FOR ALL TIME ANY 

 RESIDUAL SENSE OF AUSTRALIA NOT BEING IN FULL CONTROL OF ITS  OWN DESTINY.

 THE DIVERSITY OF AUSTRALIA WILL BE ONE OF THE SOURCES OF  CELEBRATION IN 1988 AND THE THEME OF THE BICENTENNIAL YEAR -  LIVING TOGETHER - ALSO REFLECTS THE HIGHLY VARIED NATURE OF  AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY AND THE DIFFERENT CONTRIBUTION MADE TO 

 IT:

 - BY THE ABORIGINALS, WITH THEIR UNIQUE CULTURE AND THEIR  FEELING FOR THIS RUGGED CONTINENT;

 - BY THE SETTLERS FROM BRITAIN AND IRELAND WHO BROUGHT TO  US THE VALUES OF A LIBERAL SOCIETY, AND

 •v

 2 

 irJ

 - BY THOSE IMMIGRANTS FROM ALL OVER THE WORLD WHOM THIS  COUNTRY HAS WELCOMED, AND WHO TOGETHER WITH THEIR  DESCENDANTS HAVE GIVEN AUSTRALIA ITS VIBRANT  OUTWARD-LOOKING CHARACTER.

 WE ARE PARTICULARLY PROUD THAT OVER THE LAST TEN YEARS  AUSTRALIA HAS RESETTLED AROUND A HUNDRED THOUSAND REFUGEES  FROM ASIA.

 TODAY IN AUSTRALIA THERE IS A NEW SPIRIT OF COOPERATION, TO  MEET AND TO FACE THE CHALLENGES BEFORE US. GOVERNMENT,  BUSINESS AND THE TRADE.  UNIONS ARE JOINTLY ENDEAVOURING TO . . . .   ESTABLISH A FIRM BASIS FOR OUR FUTURE ECONOMIC GROWTH. :WE  ARE ALSO WORKING TOGETHER WITH OTHER COUNTRIES IN THE  ASIA-PACIFIC REGION TOWARDS A SECURE AND PEACEFUL FUTURE, A 

 FUTURE IN WHICH OUR REGION WILL REALISE ITS DYNAMIC ECONOMIC  POTENTIAL.

 OUR BICENTENARY WILL BE AN IMPORTANT OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO  REFLECT ON THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE PAST AND TO LOOK FORWARD  WITH RENEWED VIGOUR AND CONFIDENCE TO THE FUTURE. AND THE  FUTURE BELONGS TO THE YOUTH OF THIS COUNTRY. COLLECTIVELY, 

 THEY ARE OUR GREATEST ASSET. THE GOVERNMENT IS GIVING A  HIGH PRIORITY TO THE NEEDS, THE CONCERNS AND THE ASPIRATIONS  OF YOUNG AUSTRALIANS.

 YOUR MAJESTY, YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS,

 IT IS WITH A FEELING OF AFFECTION AND PRIDE THAT THE PEOPLE  OF AUSTRALIA WELCOME YOU AGAIN. PLEASE FEEL AT HOME HERE -  BECAUSE YOU ARE AT HOME AND ARE AMONG FRIENDS WHO WISH YOU  WELL.

 ***************************

