---
title: "Australian aid builds school for Palestinians in West Bank"
date: "1987-12-26"
creators:
  - "Hayden, Bill"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214051876
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09027268%22
---

 ^  L i . MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS .AND TRADE Ainu i k m u c

 X  A U S T R A L IA ,,^

 NEWS RELEASE

 No. Date

 M192 26 December 1987

 COMMONW EALTH  

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY 

 C. I. S.

 Australian aid builds school for Palestinians in West Bank

 Australia will provide $850 000 to the United Nations Relief and Works  Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA) over the next two financial years for  the building of a preparatory girls school in the West Bank near Bethlehem,  the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr Bill Hayden, M.P., announced 

 today. .

 The school serves children living outside refugee camps in the Sur Baher  village and surrounding area near Bethlehem. Two private houses are  currently being rented for classrooms with the school operating on a double  shift arrangement due to insufficient space for the 575 students.

 Mr Hayden said that by owning the school UNRWA would make a significant  saving on rental costs and also larger classes and classrooms would reduce  teaching costs.

 UNRWA expects that construction of the school will begin in March 1988  with the building completed in time for the beginning of the 1989 school  year.

 The UN agency, which started work in 1950, provides education, health and  welfare services to over two million registered Palestinian refugees in  Jordan, Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic and the occupied West Bank and  Gaza Strip.

 Australia committed $1.2 million for UNRWA's work in the 1987/88  budget. The Government's support for the work of UNRWA is part of the  humanitarian aid program managed by the Australian International  Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB).

 For further information contact Billy Williams, Acting Director AIDAB Public  Information. Tel: (062) 495 801 (w), (062) 581 323.

