---
title: "$200 000 to assist Mozambican refugees in Southern Tanzania"
date: "1987-10-27"
creators:
  - "Hayden, Bill"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214050754
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09027308%22
---

 No. Date t s . 

 M1 57 2 7  O c t o b e r  1 9 8 7

 $200 000 to assist Mozambican refugees in Southern Tanzania

 Australia will make an immediate grant of $200 000 to the United Nations  High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to provide emergency assistance  for the increasing number of Mozambican refugees in Tanzania, the Minister  for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr Bill Hayden, M.P., announced today.

 It is estimated that 57 000 Mozambican refugees have crossed the border  into Southern Tanzania including 3 000 during a three week period in  September/October.

 Mr Hayden said that most of the refugees, of which 40 per cent were  children, arrived with little or no clothing, some were malnourished and all  were in desperate need of the most basic items.

 "Many of the refugees are from villages which suffered atrocities at the hands  of the RENAMO guerillas," he said.

 The UNHCR, which has been conducting an emergency program for the  refugees since August, estimates that US$ 800 000 is needed to provide  food, shelter and immunisation requirements to the end of 1987. The UN  agency says a further US$1.5 million is needed for a census, registration 

 and the relocation of a semi-permanent camp further from the border in

 Australia's emergency assistance for the Mozambican refugees forms part of  the Government's humanitarian aid program managed by the Australian  International Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB).

 For further information please contact Annmaree O'Keeffe, AIDAB Public  Information, Tel: (062) 495 801.

 1988.

 ^^COMMONWEALT?-i Hf  PARLIAMENTARY'LIBKARY i

