---
title: "Palestinian refugees - humanitarian assistance"
date: "1987-02-26"
creators:
  - "Hayden, Bill"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214044540
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09027448%22
---

 MINISTER FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 ' m

 .

 NEWS RELEASE

 26 February 1987

 PALESTINIAN REFUGEES - HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE

 The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Bill Hayden, M.P., announced  that the Australian Government is providing an iumediate additional  $250,000 to the UN Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) for humanitarian  relief assistance to refugees and persons living in areas adjacent  to the refugee camps in Lebanon.

 The Government will also be registering its concern to Government  officials in Syria about the welfare of Palestinian people in  refugee camps in Lebanon and in the densely populated Shia suburbs  surrounding the Beirut camps. It will seek to encourage the Syrian  authorities to ensure that relief supplies get through to these  camps.

 Mr Hayden said that in making this announcement the Australian  Government was responding to its humanitarian concern about  conditions in Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon and was  .  acknowledging the justifiable worries being expressed to it by 

 many Australian Lebanese residents and Members of Parliament.

 He said the principal problem in providing relief has been for  relief workers to gain access to the camps and surrounding areas  with supplies held by the relief agencies. The worst affected  areas appear to be the Beirut camps of Shatila and Bourj el Barajneh, 

 the suburbs surrounding these camps and the South Lebanon camp of  Rashadiyeh.

 There have been conflicting reports about food and medical supplies  having been allowed into these areas. UNWRA in Vienna and Damascus  has told our Embassies on 25 February that, for the first time in  recent weeks, food and medical supplies reached the worst affected 

 camp of Bourj el Barajneh. Equivalent supplies were given to the  Shia Amal group for distribution in the surrounding suburbs.

 UNWRA has advised that, although its: supply efforts were still  impeded, inhabitants in the besieged Palestinian camp of Rashadiyeh  in the South of Lebanon were being permitted to go out each day to  buy supplies.

 Mr Hayden said that Australia is not a party principal to efforts  to promote a solution to the problems in Lebanon, including the  position of the Palestinian refugees. The Government has urged all  parties involved to exercise maximum restraint and to enter into 

 negotiations aimed at national reconciliation and a peaceful settlement  to these problems. We will continue to support efforts in the United  Nations to achieve this objective.

 For further information contact Annmaree O'Keeffe/ Director/ ADAB   Public Information/ tel. (062) 49 5801.

