---
title: "Additional Settlement Services for New Migrants"
date: "1987-09-15"
creators:
  - "Young, Mick"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214049969
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09027668%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION,  LOCAL GOVERNMENT  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 MPS 53/87

 ADDITIONAL SETTLEMENT SERVICES FOR NEW MIGRANTS

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mick Young, has announced additional funding for  three programs aimed at helping in the settlement of  newly-arrived migrants in Australia.

 The programs are the Grant-in-Aid Scheme, the Migrant  Resource Centre Program, and a special program of assistance  for refugees.

 Mr Young, said tonight the Grant-in-Aid Scheme would receive  an extra $140,000 which would provide eight new grants on a  full-year basis.

 The Scheme awards subsidies to community-based agencies to  enable them to employ social or welfare workers who help  migrants with problems arising from the migration process.

 Mr Young said the Migrant Resource Centre Program would  receive an additional $86,000.

 The Program encouraged ethnic communities to participate in  the delivery of specific services for migrants and raise  awareness of migrant needs in local communities.

 Refugees and Special Humanitarian Program migrants from  non-English speaking backgrounds would be helped by the  allocation of an additional amount of around $230,000 the  Minister said.

 The funding would allow the employment of additional staff  to provide counselling and advice to newcomers.

 "The provision of information on living in Australia and  gaining access to available services is basic to the  successful settlement of migrants," Mr Young said.

 "Additional staff in my Department's Regional Offices will  provide better orientation and support for those who are  newly-arrived and in most need of immediate help."

 Parliament House, Canberra

 001174

 Mr Young said the higher allocations for the Grant-in-Aid  Scheme and the Migrant Resource Centre Program represented  real increases, as additional allowance had been made for  cost-of-living increases.  The real increases were  commensurate with the migration program increases achieved 

 since 1985-86.

 "The Budget demonstrates yet again the Government's  commitment to helping those newly-arrived in Australia by  providing resources to community-based organisations which,  in turn, assist migrants to settle more quickly in the  Australian environment," he said.

 CANBERRA, 15 September 1987

 MEDIA CONTACTSi Peter Cotton Minister's Office  (062) 72 6751

 Trevor Rodgers  DILGEA (062) 64 2061

 001175

