---
title: "Medical assistance for Afghan refugees"
date: "1987-09-18"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214050058
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09027342%22
---

 No. 

 Μ1 24 

 Date 

 18 S e p t e mb e r  1987

 Medical assistance for Afghan refugees

 The Australian Red Cross Society has been granted $75,000 to send a  medical team to treat Afghan refugees in Pakistan, the Acting Minister for  Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans, announced today.

 'This grant to the Red Cross is in line with Australia's humanitarian concern  for Afghan refugees,' Senator Evans said.

 The team, comprising a senior surgeon, an anaesthetist and a surgical  theatre nurse, will start its mission this month (September 1987) and will  spend 6 months in Peshawar treating primarily victims of the military  conflict in Afghanistan.

 Peshawar is located in Pakistan's North-West Frontier Province, close to the  Afghan border and the Khyber pass.

 The Australian Government provided $50,000 in 1985 to support the .  sending of a medical team to the hospital at Peshawar run by the  International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).

 The ARCS will contribute the remainder of the total of $90,000 needed to  send the medical team to Peshawar.

 The assistance is part of Australia's emergency humanitarian aid program  which is administered by the Australian International Development  Assistance Bureau (AIDAB).

 For further information please contact Billy Williams, A/Director AIDAB  Public Information. Ph.(062) 49 5801.

