---
title: "Minister Calls for Media Restraint"
date: "1987-10-21"
creators:
  - "Young, Mick"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214050654
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09027659%22
---

 .23

 ν\Π

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION,  LOCAL GOVERNMENT  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 MINISTER C. iLS FOR MEDIA RESTRAINT

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mick Young has asked Media workers to exercise more  sensitivity and restraint in stories involving applicants  for refugee status. . 

 i

 Mr Young said he was particularly disturbed by a recent j

 report in a major daily newspaper which detailed claims for ! refugee status by three young Iranians and included their  names and photographs.

 "While the claims of these young men to refugee status may,  or may not be accepted, friends and family in their country  of origin may be placed in a difficult or even dangerous  situation if the details of their cases are publicised in  Australia," he said.

 "Part of the brief of all foreign embassies in Australia is  to collect stories from the local media which might be of  interest to their governments.  j

 "Given these facts, I ask media workers to deal sensitively  with information they receive about refugee applicants as  the welfare of these people and their families should be of |

 paramount concern to all of us," Mr Young said. I

 The Minister said his Department treated all information :

 pertaining to refugee applications as confidential and was  therefore often unable to correct misleading or false media  reports concerning these applicants.

 He said refugee applications were difficult and complex to I assess and Australia was a signatory to the United Nations  Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees.

 Mr Young said the UN Charter was based on the principle of  compassion and Australia measured applicants for refugee  status against this international convention.

 CANBERRA 21.10.87

 MEDIA CONTACT: Peter Cotton Minister's Office  (062) 72 6751

 Parliament Mouse, Canberra

