---
title: "Meeting with Soviet delegation"
date: "1987-11-19"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214051168
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09024722%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  News Release by John Howard, MR

 MEETING WITH SOVIET DELEGATION

 L158/87

 \ '

 I met this morning with the Deputy Chairman of the Presidium  of the Supreme Soviet, Mr Nishanov.

 I firmly put to him the Coalition's serious concern over the  continued Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. I totally  rejected his assessment of the situation in Afghanistan and  his view that the Afghan question could be separated from ■   the general question of improved Australian-Soviet  relations.■  <

 Mr Nishanov stated that a timetable for the withdrawal of  Soviet troops from Afghanistan had been agreed by the Soviet  leadership. In response I told him that while the Coalition  hoped this to be the case, the Soviet Union had a poor 

 record of honouring many such past commitments made over  eight years.  Only last year Mr Gorbachev announced a  similar withdrawal that turned out to be a ruse.

 These occasional tantalising hints of flexibility and . progress have been covers to minimise and deflect  international pressure.

 The fact is that while outdated anti-aircraft units and a  few exhausted regiments have been withdrawn in the past  year, 115,000 Soviet troops still remain in Afghanistan.

 Since the Soviets invaded Afghanistan on 27 December 1979  almost one million Afghans have been killed - most of them  civilians. The brutality and oppression of the Soviet  occupation has created the world's largest refugee  population, now estimated at 4 million people. This  represents a staggering 20 per cent of Afghanistan's pre-war 

 1979 population.

 This massive haemorrhaging of population stands as testimony  to the inhumanity of the Soviet occupation.

 We also discussed the proposed human contacts treaty between  the Soviet Union and Australia. I made it clear that if the  treaty is finalised it is the Coalition's hope that a  greatly increased number of Soviet Jews would be allowed to  emigrate.  .  .  .  .

 s  . /

 2

 Mr Nishanov replied that Moscow had "a new way of thinking  on this issue". However the only litmus test of such a  treaty's value and, more generally, of glasnost will be hard  results.  '

 We discussed arms control and disarmament issues and I  stated the Coalition's hope that effective and verifiable  agreements on both strategic and conventional .weapons could  be reached. \

 Despite the major differences at the political level there  is great potential goodwill between the peoples of Australia  and the Soviet Union.

 I welcomed today's opportunity for a frank dialogue.

 19 November 1987  Canberra 

 v

