---
title: "Peace and disarmament"
date: "1987-06-30"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214047443
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09024621%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  News Release by John Howard, MR A Statement of Fundamental Principles  by the Liberal Party of Australia

 PEACE AND DISARMAMENT L113/87

 " ... they shall beat their swords into ploughshare^,  and their spears into pruninghooks ..."

 Isiah 11,4

 Introduction

 Those words encapuslate the enduring goal and the hope of  mankind throughout the ages; they also represent aspirations  held by all Liberals.

 We recognise that all Australians, regardless of other things  about which they differ are absolutely united in their desire  for peace; for security; for the elimination of the threat of 

 war - both nuclear and conventional; for justice; for responsible  disarmament and for personal freedom.

 Within Australia the only debate on these questions turns on  the issue of the best specific policies to be adopted to achieve  these ends.

 The Liberal Party believes that its policies are the only  realistic ones presented which can achieve in practice the  goals which all Australians seek. Our policies are responsible  and realistic, they are active and achievable.

 Peace in Perspective

 We cannot achieve a meaningful and lasting peace without  actually working for it.

 From the earliest historical days through until the era of  "appeasement" in Europe it has been evident that a policy of  simple pacifism, no matter how superficially attractive, does  not work. Such a policy did not prevent Belgium being invaded 

 in 1914, nor Afghanistan being overrun in 1979.

 The Liberal Party believes that it is the first responsibility  of any Federal government to provide for the nation's defence  and security. History and common sense teach that nations  must approach the search for peace from a position of strength .  

 and security.

 Our Foreign Affairs and Defence policies set out clearly the  steps which a Liberal Government will take to provide this  strength and security for Australia.

 2

 The maintenance of our Alliances, especially that with the  United States is crucial. It provides a global and regional  environment of stability within which wc can pursue our long­ term goals of achieving meaningful progress in disarmament.  Recent events in the South Pacific, the intrusion of Soviet 

 and Libyan influence in the region, about which the Liberal  Party ha# uunsleLeuLly warned and the overthrow of the  democratically elected Government of Fiji# have served to  remind us that even in this region, peace and stability  cannot be taken for granted.

 Australia must continue to be an active participant in all  the International fora and talks which are aimed at securing  peace and disarmament. We have pursued an active policyyof  participation in such talks. Similarly we endorse the  conclusion of the ASTEC Inquiry into Australia's Role in the  Nuclear Fuel Cycle that we should continue to develop the  peaceful uses of nuclear energy as this gives ns the status  necessary to remain an active participant in international 

 talks about the future of nuclear weapons and nuclear matters  in general.

 Disarmament Aims

 Of central importance to the Liberal Party is the prevention  of war, both nuclear and conventional.

 onr primary aim is the eventual elimination of nuclear  weapons from the planet. No-one can "win" a nuclear war. The expenditure on nuclear weapons is, ultimately, wasteful. We support a policy of disarmament through the symmetrical 

 reduction of nuclear stockpiles so that mutual deterrence  continues whilst stockpiles are diminished. We reject  unilateralism. A Liberal Government will give full support,  in concert with its allies, to those talks which are aimed  at securing balanced reductions in all aspects of nuclear  weaponry leading to the eventual elimination of all nuclear 

 armaments.

 Nuclear war is not the only threat, and we support similar  moves to reduce the levels of conventional forces and  weapons wherever appropriate.

 The Liberal Party absolutely rejects the use of chemical or  biological weaponry and supports the immediate elimination  of all stockpiles of such weapons and calls for their complete  outlawing in the international arena.

 Disarmament agreements of course must be verifiabile -  without accurate methods of verification not only can there  be no progress in arms reduction, there also cannot be the  necessary degree of mutual trust between .the parties concerned. 

 The Liberal Party thus strongly supports the operation of the  Joint Defence Facilities in Australia because of the key role  which they play in this internationally vital task.

 Beyond the Absence of War

 True peace is more than simply the absence of armed conflict.  A true peace can only be secured in a world where basic  human wants are satisfied, where there is justice and where  there is freedom. The absence of these elements leads to  domestic and international tensions which often erupt  suddenly into conflicts and war.

 Australia has had a proud record in helping to combat  starvation, hunger, disease and homelessness around the  world. Policies on international aid and in matters of  refugee policy have always had a high priority under Liberal  Governments. As one of the world’s leading nations in such 

 areas as food, agricultural and medical research the Liberal  Party accepts that we have a very particular moral  responsibility to help those nations less fortunate than  ourselves.

 Australia has a proud record under Liberal Governments of  contributing to international pKnuc-Xeeping forces which  have served effectively to prevent conflict in various parts  of the world. We regret the decision of the Labor Government  -  to withdraw from participation in many of. these activities.

 A Liberal Government will restore Australia's willingness to  play an active role in Lhese direct peacQ-koopinq activities.

 Internal tensions which arise from racial conflict and the  suppression of human rights are of concern to the Liberal  Party because they are morally indefensible and because of  their potential to disrupt the international environment.

 The Liberal Party believes that the elimination of racisiti and  the promotion of human rights must continue to be a feature  of our foreign policy. Working through international fora  such as the United Nations Human Rights Commission and non­ government bodies such as the International Commission of  Jurists and Amnesty International, a Liberal Government will  continue to be an active international participant in the  pursuit of those objectives.

 Peace and the Liberal Spirit

 The philosophy of Liberalism and the purusit of peace are  themselves inextricably intertwined. Liberalism places  primary emphasis upon the rights and responsibilities of  Individuals. Neither these rights nor these responsibilities  can be enjoyed and exercised unless there is both international  peace and domestic freedom. It is thus an inherent part of v  our own basic philosophy to work to secure peace and freedom 

 throughout the world.

 Î¯ -V .

 4

 Conclusion ,

 The Liberal Party takes second place::to no-one in its desire  to secure lasting peace for all mankind,

 A Liberal Government will be totally committed to positive,  realistic policies designed to secure peace, multilateral  disarmament and social justice.

 Adelaide  30 June 1987

