---
title: "Government response to the report of the committee to advise on Australia's immigration policies"
date: "1988-12-08"
creators:
  - "Ray, Robert"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214058492
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08017506%22
---

 COMMONWEALTH

 parliamentary library ' MICAH MICAH

 GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE TO ADVISE  ON AUSTRALIA'S IMMIGRATION POLICIES BY SENATOR THE HON. ROBERT RAY, MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND  ETHNIC AFFAIRS .

 Mr President,  I seek leave to make a ministerial statement  on the Government1s response to the report of the Committee  to Advise on Australia's Immigration Policies.

 Mr President,  I wish to advise the Senate of the  Government's decisions on the report of the Committee to  Advise on Australia's Immigration Policies to which, for the  purpose of-the Statement I will refer as the Committee. At 

 the outset, I wish to pay tribute to the Chairman, Dr  Stephen FitzGerald, and the other members of the Committee  for their dedication to the very difficult task they had  before them; a task which they approached with vigour and 

 imagination. Examination of the issues required a high  level of commitment and often personal sacrifice - both of  which members gave readily and willingly. I wish to express  the Government's appreciation for the personal and 

 collective efforts of all members of the Committee.

 I would also like to inform Honourable Senators of the  context of the Committee and of the process followed for  evaluating its findings. Establishment of the Committee  followed a Labor Party election commitment in 1987, in 

 recognition of concerns and misunderstandings about  immigration which have grown in recent years.  It was the  first major examination of immigration in 10 years. In the  9 months it took to examine the issues,  the Committee  conducted consultations with 587 individuals and  organisations; received 970 written submissions and held 

 four workshops for detailed examination of specific topics  including selection mechanisms and legislation. In  addition, the Committee commissioned 11 consultancies to  advise it on a wide range of immigration related topics. The Committee probably undertook the widest ranging 

 examination of immigration in Australia's history and it has  set the broad direction for the changes I am about to ·   announce.

 Mr President, that process was not the end of the story. In  tabling the Committee's report in the Parliament on 3 June  this year, my predecessor, the Hon. Clyde Holding, announced  that there would be a period of three months for public .   evaluation of and comment on its findings;  an 

 interdepartmental committee was to be established to examine  its proposals and the immigration advisory body, the  National Population Council,  would be asked to advise on  certain aspects. Since the report was tabled, Working 

 Parties of the Council have undertaken detailed analysis and  examination of two crucial areas -to which I will return  later in my address. The Working Parties have made an  invaluable contribution and their advice has been crucial to

 our consideration of the report.  I am indebted to them for  their assistance.

 Mr President, the process for evaluating the report has in  many senses been as comprehensive as the process which  produced it. Twelve Government Departments participated in  the interdepartmental committee.  The National Population 

 Council has conducted in-depth research into selection  mechanisms and overseas qualification recognition.  Over 120  submissions from individuals and organisations, commenting  in detail on the Committee1s recommendations,  have been 

 received.  Substantial media and public comment was  monitored and analysed.  During September, I met with my  State and Territory counterparts to discuss the report and 

 visited the capital city of each State and Territory to hear  at first hand the views of ethnic, employer, union, legal,   welfare,  church, refugee and population group interests.

 The Committee's report has aroused considerable interest and  controversy. This is not surprising for an issue such as  immigration, which touches the lives of every Australian, 

 whether born here or not. Its central message - that  immigration should be for all Australians - has received  wide support. Its proposals for a sharper economic focus to  and through immigration have aroused apprehension among 

 ethnic communities,  while being welcomed by commercial and  other sectors of the wider community. Some query why we  have immigration at all and others call for substantial  program increases.

 Two areas of the report have aroused particular controversy:  multiculturalism and citizenship. The issue of  .  multicult iralism was not central to the report and the  subsequent attention afforded to it did nor add to the 

 community's understanding of the issue and was at some cost  to inforned debate on the core immigration issues in the  report.

 Multicultural policies play no part in immigrant selection.  As a quite separate domestic policy, multiculturalism seeks  to ensure that those bom' in Australia and those who  migrated to Australia,  are equally accorded their rights.   Multiculturalism also asks of migrants that they bring a 

 commitment to Australia and to its basic values and  institutions which attracted them to migrate.

 As a result of our non-discriminatory immigration policy we  live in an ethnically diverse community; we are already, in  a descriptive sense, a multicultural nation. Multiculturalism is premised on an overriding and unifying 

 commitment to Australia. It embraces basic issues of  .  individual expression, social justice and economic  efficiency.  We need multicultural policies precisely in  order to ensure that insecurity, disharmony, injustice and 

 inefficiency do not disfigure our society.

 Mr President, contrary to popular belief, the Committee did  not reject the concept of multiculturalism.  While reporting  widespread mistrust and misunderstanding of the term, it  endorsed the need for such a policy.  The Government is 

 aware of the misapprehension and confusion within the  community. We are currently developing the National Agenda  for a Multicultural Australia in order to give sharper , definition and direction to the' policy.

 The Committee rightly identified citizenship as the ultimate  expression of commitment to Australia,  but in the  Government's view proposed an inappropriate strategy for  encouraging its acquisition. A commitment stems from deeply 

 felt sentiments.  It cannot be developed by coercion or  punitive measures which deny benefits to non-citizens.  The  Government totally rejects such an approach,  which denies  the contribution that non citizen residents make to  Australia through working and through rearing their families 

 here. The Prime Minister's announcement of a 'Year of  Citizenship'  which he launched on 30 September is a positive  approach. Initiatives for the Year are designed to enhance  the concept of citizenship; to encourage all who are 

 eligible to acquire it to do so, and to promote awareness of  and pride in what being an Australian citizen means.

 At the outset of the Committee's work, the Government made  it clear that the principle of non-discrimination was not  negotiable. Indeed, the Committee found that anti-Asian  ^sentiment was not a major issue. It is regrettable that the 

 Opposition sought to exploit this issue during the course of  the Government's deliberations on the Committee's report. It is, however, a telling indictment that members of their  own ranks crossed the Floor of both Houses to vote with the  Government on our successful motion earlier this year to  uphold the principle of non-discrimination. We are already 

 feeling the effects of the so-called 'Asian Migration'   debate and our overseas posts have reported considerable  concern resulting from it. In order to ensure continued  interest in programs such as the Business Migration Program,  where Asia has been our largest source, there needs to be 

 convincing reassurance that Asians are welcome in Australia.

 Mr President,  this Government remains resolutely committed  to the principle of an immigration policy which does not  discriminate on the basis of race or ethnic origin.  The  events since the release of the Committee's report have 

 re-inforced that view. In that context I now state that  this Government believes that a return to a bi-partisan  policy is in the interests of all Australians.  I take this  opportunity to go on the record and say to' the Opposition 

 that should you accept the invitation I now extend to you to  return to a bi-partisan,  non-discriminatory policy, the  Government, for its part,  will applaud and in no way seek to  take political advantage of the fact that you have done so.

 4

 Mr President,  before turning to the Government's response to  the Committee's report,  I want to emphasise some important  general points about Australia's immigration program. Firstly, the size and composition of the program reflect  quite diverse, but equally important economic, social and 

 humanitarian goals.  Certain elements of the program have  been specifically tailored to our economic development  requirements - for example to attract business.migrants with  entrepreneurial skills, and to supply young, skilled, 

 educated and readily employable migrants. Some of these  migrants are selected for specific skills in short supply,  the demand for which cannot immediately be met by domestic  training and education programs.  These economic migrants, 

 through the skills, capital and expertise they bring,  actually create more jobs than they take and make a very  positive contribution to our economic development.

 In terms of social goals, Australia supports the concept of  the family as the natural and fundamental group unit of  society. The practice of permitting husband, wife and  dependent children to co-reside is also fundamental and  underlies our policy approach to the reunion of immediate 

 family members.

 In humanitarian terms,  Australia is a signatory to the  Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International  Covenant of Civil and Political Rights and the 1951  Convention on the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol.   As a responsible member of the international community,  Australia has an unrivalled record of finding solutions for 

 refugees from around the world and has accepted significant  numbers of refugees for resettlement:  470,000 in the last 40  years;  175,000 since 1975. Cur efforts have contributed to  the welfare of individual refugees, enhanced our high 

 international standing and strengthened our participation in  regional and international affairs.

 Mr President,  bearing this context in mind I now turn to the  Government's response to the Committee's report.  The  Committee made 73 separate recommendations for immigration  including a totally new package of legislation. The number  and complexity of the recommendations would require a 

 lengthy and detailed treatment which time does not permit. I propose instead to inform Honourable Senators of the broad  approach and principles which underpin rhe Government's  decisions.  The Government has adopted many of the themes of  the Committee's report and the substance of many of its 

 recommendations.  In some areas the Government supports the  underlying concepts,  although the approach adopted differs  in detail. In others, the Government's response diverges  significantly from the Committee's proposals. In essence,  many of its recommendations confirm current policy 

 directions.

 5

 No response on the complex question of immigration will ever  receive wholesale and unquestioning support from all  quarters of the Australian community, nor are there any  magic answers to meet the wishes of all. The Government's 

 task is to find the right balance to achieve outcomes in the  national interest and to accord due weight to the competing  and often conflicting demands placed upon immigration.

 Mr President,  the Government accepts the Committee's message  that immigration is for all Australians and that it should  be in the national interest. Consistent with these  principles,  we have decided on a responsible immigration  policy for the future which will balance economic, social 

 and humanitarian imperatives and which will assist in  national planning through immigration research and  management.  Central to this process is the Government's  acceptance of the Committee's recommendations for the 

 establishment of a Bureau of Immigration Research, to which  I will return later,  and Immigration Outlook Conferences,   which will enable us in future to indicate longer term  forecasts, and to foster national understanding of 

 immigration.

 In the meantime,  the migration program for the next two to  three years is to be maintained at 140,000 places,  comprising three main streams:  71,000 in a family category,  54,000 in an economic category and 14,000 in a humanitarian 

 category, plus a special eligibility category of 1,000  places. While bothy the level and composition of the program  are broadly consistent with the Committee's proposals, its  recommendation for 150,000 places is not regarded as 

 justified. The Committee also recommended alignment of the  Government's Grant of Resident Status Policies for temporary  residents wishing to stay in Australia and its migration  policies.  These are significantly aligned at present but  total alignment would create undesirable consequences,   particularly for management of the program. Instead, the  Government will continue to account for Grant of Resident 

 Status Approvals within the total planned migration program  but will assign them to their respective program elements.  The Government has also not accepted the Committee's  recommendation that there be a single 'Open Category'; this 

 is seen as too blunt an instrument for achieving program  objectives. Instead, the Economic and Family Categories  will respectively comprise elements of the present  Independent and Concessional Category, each with a different 

 points test to manage the demand for migration places.  This  will ensure that the overall program level set by the  Government is not exceeded.

 Mr President, the Government has adopted a new points system  which will be used to select certain categories of migrant  from 1 July 1989. The points system was developed by a  National Population Council Working Party under the 

 Chairmanship of Glen Withers, Professor of Economics at

 6

 Latrobe University. It followed extensive research and  model simulation,  together with consultation with peak  employer,  employee and community groups,  and took the  Committee's proposed system as the basis for development.  

 Under the points system, independent applicants will be '   numerically assessed against an employability factor which  awards points for skill,  age and language,  while extended  family migrants will be separately assessed on the basis of  points awarded, for employability (excluding language) and 

 attributes of the sponsor.

 Within the Family Migration Category ,  a 1  balance of family'   criterion will apply from tomorrow to parents applying for  migration overseas and for the grant of resident status  within Australia. Parents with more children in Australia 

 than in any single country or at least an equal number in  Australia as overseas,  will be selected as close family.  Those not meeting this criterion may be considered under the  points system for extended family. In recognition of rising 

 welfare costs the Government has revised the basis of the  Assurance of Support which currently is sought from sponsors  of parents who are within 10 years of retiring age. These  will continue to be required, but from April 1989 their 

 provisions will extend to the recovery of unemployment  benefit paid to the person assured and the Assurance itself  will have effect for 5 years.  In future, Assurances of  Support will be sought for all parents selected under the 

 balance of family criterion.

 The Government has also decided to examine ways of accepting  some family reunion applicants who are currently ineligible  because of social or medical factors which could result in  their becoming a charge on the Australian community. A  Parliamentary committee will be invited to consider the 

 existing scheme of Assurances of Support by sponsors and  whether a bonding system for such people can be .established  under which the Government's social and medical costs would  be m e t .  At the same time, the Committee will be asked to 

 examine the feasibility of giving bonus points under the  Points Test for applicants who undertake to meet their  English language training costs. The Committee would be  requested to report by the end of 1989.

 The Economic Migration Category will contain as base  elements the current Business Migration Program and people  nominated by Australian employers under tripartite  arrangements negotiated between the Government,  Unions and  Employers.  The current Occupational Shares System will 

 remain in place for the short-term but will be brought  together with the Independent sub-category in a  points-tested component designed to maximise economic  benefits.  These changes will apply from 1 July 1989.

 In 1989/90 the non-refugee base elements of the program will  be close Family Migrants (spouses, dependent children and

 7

 parents selected under the balance of family) in the Family  Category and skilled and business migrants in the Economic  Category.  Program allocations for these elements will  respond to demand for places. The two points-tested 

 components of the program will be independently adjusted up  or down according to demand in their respective base  elements and will be managed under a 'floating passmark1   which the Committee recommended to ensure that the best are 

 selected and that numbers in the overall program are not  exceeded.

 Mr President,  the Government's commitment to refugee issues  is strong and will be maintained. Given the sensitivity and  complexity of Refugee policy, I wish to announce that a  senior position within my Department has been assigned to  coordinate our response to refugee and international 

 immigration matters. The establishment of this position  will give further impetus to the Government's ability to  focus on and respond to international developments and to  people in distressing circumstances. It will also ensure 

 that our official consultations with other Governments and  interested Australian community groups are satisfactorily  conducted and will enhance our ability to achieve our  international immigration and humanitarian objectives.

 While noting that resettlement is the least preferred  response to refugee situations, the Committee rightly  regarded our refugee and humanitarian response as exemplary  and as a vital part of our overall immigration program. The  humanitarian category will be held to its current program 

 level of 14,000 comprising a 12,500 program for those  selected overseas under our Refugee and Special Humanitarian  Programs and those in Australia granted resident status on  refugee and humanitarian grounds,  together with a 

 contingency reserve of 1,500 places.  This response is a  realistic reflection of need and is similar to the progra'"  recommended by the Committee.

 Australia's commitment to finding durable solutions to the  13 year Indo-Chinese outflow has been demonstrated in a  number of ways, but probably in no better way than our  resettlement program.  We will not "disengage" from 

 Indo-Chinese refugee resettlement, as the Committee  suggested, but we will closely monitor the outflow from  Indo-China and respond to changes as and when they occur. We believe that a range of measures and responses is  required over and above resettlement, including improved  migration programs from the countries of Indo-China and 

 international initiatives to address the continuing outflow.  The Government is not attracted to the Committee's proposal  that program places be set aside for agency sponsorships,  but recognises that churches and voluntary agencies are 

 often well placed to identify specific cases in grave  emergency situations.  We will examine sympathetically how  such agencies can contribute to the speedy handling of such

 8

 emergency cases and to their support after arrival in  Australia.

 The Committee proposed in its Model Bill that an independent  Refugee Commissioner be appointed to hear on-shore refugee  claims in place of the Determination of Refugee Status  procedure which was introduced in 1978. The Government has 

 decided instead, to retain the existing determination  procedure and enhance it by allocating additional staff and  resources to improve and accelerate processing. The Model 

 Bill also proposes the abolition of the Migration Act  provisions which deem arrivals who have been refused entry,  not to have entered Australia. The Government believes this  would create a certain 'pull1  factor and could place  Australia in a situation faced in some countries where there 

 are tens of thousands of on-shore refugee claimants. The  Government has not been able to accept this proposal.   Arrangements will also be made for people determined  ineligible to remain, but who are without valid national 

 travel documents,  to be issued documentation to facilitate  their departure.

 Mr President, while a minor Special Eligibility Category is  to be retained for the migration program, its existing  provisions for the permanent entry of self-supporting  retirees will be abolished and no new applications will be 

 accepted from tomorrow. Provision will,  however,  exist for  temporary entry for extended stay for retirees who are in a  sound financial position. This approach will avaid demands  on our health and social welfare systems.

 Mr President, the Committee rightly identified problems  which exist in procedures for assessing and recognising  overseas qualifications. This issue was raised almost  without exception at every consultation I held throughout 

 Australia during September. The problems have been with us  for decades and despite some recent improvements and a  number of current initiatives, many of them remain.  The  National Population Council Working Party on overseas 

 qualifications under the Chairmanship of Professor Stephen  Castles, Director of the Centre for Multicultural Studies at  Wollongong University, has identified inefficiencies in  wasted skills and labour market rigidities, and inequities 

 in inconsistent administration and outcomes.  Taking into  account current Commonwealth and State initiatives it has  proposed a model for the recognition of overseas  qualifications. The Government values the contribution  made by the National Population Council Working Party. The 

 Prime Minister has already announced that the issue of  overseas qualifications has recently been referred to the  Structural Adjustment Committee of Cabinet.  The model  developed by the National Population Council,  together with 

 other related inquiries on the issue of skill accreditation  in Australia generally, has been added to the Committee's  agenda for micro-economic reform.

 9

 The Committee made a number of recommendations concerning  settlement services starting from the basis that my  Department should shift priority to those who have been in  Australia for less than two years.  Rather than being 

 prescriptive on a time frame,  the Government has agreed,  in  this spirit, that my Department should concentrate its  settlement programs on the needs-based provision of services  for immigrants,  with the aim of helping them to integrate 

 into the Australian community and to reach their potential.   Consistent with this aim my Department will refocus its  settlement activities.  It will pay particular attention to  the priority needs of annual migration intakes according to 

 the individual's circumstances.  Support for women  immigrants will continue to be given priority, as one of the  areas critical to the settlement process. My Department's  strategic role in settlement will be clarified by phasing  out duplication with other agencies where it exists,  having 

 regard to their access and equity commitments.

 Mr President, I referred earlier to the Bureau of  Immigration Research which the Committee recommended be  established. The Committee was critical of the lack of  policy-oriented research and statistical information 

 available to the Government and of the capacity to produce  it. I do not necessarily accept that as a criticism of my  Department, where priority is given to its very high volume  visa activity. The Government, however, readily accepts the  need that the Committee has identified and is to establish a  Bureau early next year. The Bureau will have an important 

 role in providing facts to combat ignorance and  misinformation about immigration and in improving the  climate in which immigration issues are considered.  The  Bureau will have the resources for predominantly 

 commissioned research and will undertake some in-house  research. It will undertake formal and informal  consultations,  including the Immigration Outlook Conferences 

 proposed by the Committee.  It will also make an important  contribution in .facilitating policy development elsewhere in  my Department.

 Mr President,  I now turn to the Committee's proposals for  new Immigration legislation. The Migration Act 1958 has  come under increasing scrutiny and attack in recent years.   Proposals for reform have been put forward by both the  Administrative Review Council and the former Human Rights 

 Commission.  The Committee proposed that the the Act be  replaced by a new piece of legislation and produced a Model  Bill for this purpose. The Model Bill is an innovative and  bold piece of work; it would make changes of the most 

 fundamental kind to existing migration law. But,  as bold  and innovative pieces of work often do, it carries with â–    certain, risks and uncertainties as to costs,  policy, and  management of the program. The Government has decided that 

 rather than trying to address all the legislative,  procedural and administrative changes in one move,  the

 10

 better course is to pursue reform of the existing Migration  Act 1958 and Migration Regulations incrementally.  This has  the aided advantage of allowing changes to commence more  quickly. Key amendments will be introduced in the Autumn 

 Session of Parliament,  and will lay the groundwork for  accountable and consistent decision-making in the  immigration jurisdiction.

 The major change will be the phased introduction of a  statutory two-tier system of review of immigration  decisions. The first tier will be statutory review bv  officers within my Department but independent of the primary 

 decision-making areas. It will not be subject to direction  as to how it should handle individual cases.  The second  tier of review will be formed by substantially restructuring  the Immigration Review Panels.  This restructured body will  be empowered by legislation to consider cases on their  merits and to make the final decision. It will be 

 independent in its operations and procedurally informal.  It  will have as its members persons whose background and  credentials will ensure high quality, professional  decision-making. The body will be represented in all States 

 and Territories. Fees will be charged for each tier of  review, with a lower fee at the first tier.

 Different classes of decision will be progressively referred  to this new review system. Concurrently, the wide  discretions within the Migration Act for these classes of  decision will be replaced by closely defined entitlements  and restrictions set out in Regulations.  The Secretary of  my Department will be designated as the decision-maker for  most classes of decision, although I shall retain the power 

 to determine several classes of decision, notably those  involving the deportation of criminals,  security matters and  refugee determinations.  I shall also retain a general  statutory power to override any decision of the review panel  which, while consistent with the regulations,  acts against 

 the interests of the applicant. I shall exercise this power  where I believe it to be in the community's interest and,  where this occurs I shall table my reasons in the  Parliament.  These changes are designed to ensure that 

 decision-making is fair, open and accountable,  and not  susceptible to casual and unrecorded intervention.

 The Committee!s Model Bill provided for many of the  enforcement functions relating to prohibited non-citizens to  be carried out through the state law enforcement and justice  systems. This so-called criminalisation of enforcement has  been widely opposed as harsh and out of step with criminal 

 law policy. It places a potentially heavy burden on the  state police, court and penal systems.  While the Government  will not be taking this course,  it is concerned to ensure  that the deportation process is both just and effective.

 The introduction of the new review system will ensure that a  person's claims to stay in Australia, temporarily or

 11

 permanently, will be rigorously and impartially tested. If  those claims are found to be wanting, then departure should  follow.  If the person fails to depart within the time  provided, deportation will be mandatory.

 I have highlighted certain areas where the Government*  1s  decisions do not precisely follow the Model Bill. I would  emphasise, however, that while the Bill will not be  introduced into Parliament in its recommended form, its 

 ideas and innovations will be drawn upon in reforming the  Migration Act 1958.

 Mr President,  the Government's decisions on the Committee's  report which I have announced represent an equitable and  balanced approach to immigration.  We have maintained our  commitment to social and humanitarian needs in a responsible 

 and responsive manner, while at the same time addressing an  economic focus to immigration.  The program size and  composition for the immediate future is a realistic response  to competing demands and priorities. It will continue to 

 provide for the reunion of close family. Extended family  will be specifically recognised through a separate  points-tested category within the Family Migration stream.  The economic focus will be achieved by enhanced selection 

 mechanisms under tripartite negotiated arrangements between  Government,  Unions and Employers,  and under a revised points  system for independent applicants stressing economic  qualities.  Humanitarian programs have been maintained and  procedures for the Determination of Refugee status in  Australia are to be enhanced.

 Improved management of the program under the Committee's i icommended 'floating passmark'  concept will ensure that  annual intakes are kept within planning figures and do not  simply respond to demand. The recommended new Bureau of 

 Immigration Research and under its aegis, the immigration  Outlook Conferences, will improve the climate of immigration  by providing necessary research and information for better  planning and understanding.  The Migration Act and 

 Regulations will be incrementally overhauled to ensure,  as  the Committee sought,  fairer, clearer and more accountable  decision-making in my portfolio.

 Mr President, the measures I have announced comprise major  reforms to immigration policy and administration. The  reforms,  together, are the most significant innovations in  Australia's migration policies to have occurred during the 

 last two decades.  The Government has attempted to strike a  responsible balance between the economic, social and  humanitarian objectives of the immigration program. We have  designed a system of program management which will deliver  the planned outcomes.  Through our emphasis on a strong  research base,  we will bring Immigration into the mainstream  of economic and social planning. Nor have we lost sight of  the individual. The changes to the legislative framework

 12 â™¦ W .

 will ensure that administration is demonstrably open,  consistent and equitable. The principle of equity is  fundamental to this entire package. It is about giving all  people a fair chance within the context of a program that 

 serves the interests of the Australian people. I am also  glad to announce that these reforms are expected to result  in a net reduction in Commonwealth expenditure in the long  term.

 I thank Honourable Senators for hearing me today on this  important package of decisions by the Government.

 I present the following.paper:  Government response to the  report of the Committee to Advise on Australia's Immigration  Policies - Ministerial Statement, 8 December 1988.

 Mr President, I also seek leave to table a Matrix which sets  out the Government's response to each of the 73  recommendations of the Committee to Advise on Australia's  Immigration Policies.

