---
title: "Minister launches new 'living in Australia' book"
date: "1988-10-17"
creators:
  - "Ray, Robert"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214057543
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08017540%22
---

 5S

 Minister for  Immigration  Local Government  and Ethnic Affairs

 Senator the Hon. Robert Ray

 OFFICES:

 Parliament House,  Canberra, ACT, 2600  Phone: (062) 77-7860  Fax: (062) 73-4144

 4 Treasury Place,  Melbourne, Vic. 3002  Phone: (03)650-4479  Fax: (03)650-9106

 MPS 113/88

 MINISTER LAUNCHES NEW 'LIVING IN AUSTRALIA' BOOK  COMMONWEALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY C. I. S.

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Senator Robert Ray, today launched an updated version of  the Immigration Department book "Living in Australia" —  a self­  help reference guide for migrants.

 The book provides information on a wide range of topics relating  to the rights and responsibilities of new and long-term settlers,  and the services available to them.

 Senator Ray said the book set out to meet the basic information  requirements of immigrants on matters such as accommodation,  health care, social security, the law, access to the labour  market, and communicating in English.

 "A change of country is always a traumatic and disorienting  experience for people, especially for families with children,"the  Minister said.

 "And often it is difficult to know how to handle situations in  the new environment as they arise —- what to do in emergencies or  how to cope with problems arising from matters as basic as work,  accommodation and income.

 " 'Living in Australia' gives a lead. It helps answer many of the  problems encountered by new settlers, and those who have been in  Australia for some time."

 Senator Ray said his Department had many settlement services in  place to enable newcomers, including refugees, to take their  place in Australian society and, eventually, to become citizens.

 "But access to these services is paramount, and this book points  the way," he said.

 "The updated 'Living in Australia' will be translated into 21  languages, and serve to enhance the fine work being done by non­ government community organisations." .

 Senator Ray said the book was free of charge to those applying  for migration at his Department's overseas posts, and was  available for purchase at Government bookshops throughout  Australia. '

 . . . / 2

 2.

 ,Î½Î½·

 "Settlers need time to adapt and learn about their new country  before they can make a contribution.  This book will be an  important part of that learning process," the Minister said.

 CANBERRA, 17 October 1988

 ;  MEDIA CONTACTS: Peter Cotton l  Minister's Office  (062) 77 7860

 Robyn Brick  DILGEA  (062) 64 2754

