---
title: "Democrats announce mini-budget proposals"
date: "1988-05-20"
creators:
  - "Haines, Janine"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214054525
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08016297%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE-L. AUSTRALIA -Î¯»»»Î¯!Î¯#

 f  COMMONWEALTH ;

 i UAMENTARY LIBRARY C. I. s.

 CANBERRA P.R. NO. 88/158 20 MAY, 1988

 DEMOCRATS ANNOUNCE MINI-BUDGET PROPOSALS

 The Australian Democrats will this week submit to the Government  a list of revenue and expenditure proposals for adoption in the  May Economic Statement.

 On the expenditure side, the Democrats have proposed increases  in:

 .  The tax-free threshold from $5,100 to $5,600. .  Road funding grants to local government. .  Soil conservation program. .  The Overseas Aid Budget and Refugee Program. .  ABC funding.

 .  The Family Allowance Supplement. .  Telephone concessions for pensioners and beneficiaries. .  Rental assistance for beneficiaries. .  Medical and dental services in Repatriation Hospitals.

 They have also sought funding for:

 .  A minimum child maintenance guarantee. .  Pensioner health benefit cards for long-term unemployed. .  Austudy for fifteen year olds in Year 11. .  Public television development.

 On the revenue side, the Democrats' proposals include:

 .  Taxing foreign exchange transactions. .  An end to negative gearing for overseas borrowings for 

 takeovers.

 .  Abolition of the tax exemption on gold mining. .  A sales tax on imported and luxury goods. !

 .  Abolition of tax deductibility of promotional advertising of  tobacco and alcohol products. .  Crackdown on transfer pricing and tax havens.

 They have also called for the scrapping of several revenue  measures which include:

 .  The $262 tertiary fee. .  The arrival fee.

 .  Sales tax on milk products,  fruit juices and soy milk. .  $240 review of status fee for migrants. .  Nursing care levy on T.P.I. pensioners in care.

 The Democrats' Leader, Senator Janine Haines, said the proposals,   if adopted, would reduce the hardship of many in the community,  create greater eguity and ensure that those who could best afford  to, paid their share of taxation.

 Senator Haines said "it would be inappropriate to talk about  reducing either corporate or personal tax rates until the review  of business tax is completed.  However, the modest increase in  the threshold would flow through to all PAYE taxpayers and also  avoid the need to raise the pensioner tax rebate. Certainly, if 

 the threshold is not raised, then the pensioner tax rebate must  rise from $250 to $400."

 "The revenue possibilities that we are endorsing amount to more  than $7 billion and far outstrip the cost of our proposals. This  is the opportunity for the Government to demonstrate that its  claimed concern for social justice is not empty rhetoric and to  show that it has truly been chastened by the clear message from  recent elections, not to forget the ordinary Australians who put  them in Government."

 "While this is not an exhaustive list and other matters, such as  ensuring equity in the superannuation system, need to be  addressed, it is an extensive set of proposals which the 

 Government should consider", Senator Haines concluded.

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT:

 SENATOR JANINE HAINES  GEORGE BUTMAN (062) 72 7150  (062) 72 7128

 AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS' EXPENDITURE PROPOSALS

 1. The basic tax-free threshold should be raised (to $5,600)

 - $400M.

 OR

 If this is not done, the pensioner tax rebate should be 

 increased to $400 - $140M.

 2. Amendment to1  allow for eligibility for Supporting Parents 

 Benefit to continue until youngest child completes 

 secondary school.

 3. Relaxation of eligibility criteria for Young Homeless 

 Allowance.

 4. Introduction of a Child Maintenance Guarantee payable to 

 all custodial parents entitled to receive Family Allowance 

 who do not receive maintenance above the level of the 

 guarantee - phased in beginning at $5 per week per child, 

 lifting to $15 by 1990 - $35M.

 5. Publicity on availability of Family Allowance Supplement 

 should be increased to improve take-up level (now only 

 about 50%).

 6. All 16-20 year olds who have had at least six months' 

 cumulative employment should be entitled from December 1988 

 to adult rates of unemployment benefit - $55M.

 7. All young people in receipt of Job Search Allowances who 

 have lived apart from their family for at least three 

 months should be entitled from June 1988 to receive a 

 supplement to the JSA which would be equivalent in value to 

 the Young Homeless Allowance - $4M.

 8. The $25 basic (i.e. not parental-income tested) component 

 of the Job Search Allowance should be indexed from June 

 1988, as should the parental income test for the remaining 

 portion of the Job Search Allowance - $4M.

 2 .

 9. Protect Social Security recipients from appropriation of 

 any Social Security payment directly deposited into a 

 financial institution for a period of eight weeks after 

 that direct deposit. (Since 1985, direct deposits have 

 become compulsory, and there are increasing instances of 

 appropriation by banks and other financial institutions - 

 in spite of State and Federal laws governing the collection 

 of debts which require that debts be proven in a court 

 before recovery action commences.)

 10. Return to protection of Family and Family Allowance 

 Supplement from debt recovery. Requirement for Department 

 of Social Security to independently prove that a debt is 

 owed before initiation of recovery action. Requirement for 

 capacity to repay to be the paramount consideration in a 

 recovery action - as is the case in civil debt recovery.

 11. Remove power to suspend or terminate Social Security 

 payments as penalty for failure to provide information.

 12. Remove power of Department of Social Security to divulge 

 information on classes of individuals.

 13. Restrict power of Department of Social Security to divulge 

 information about individuals to other Government 

 departments unless information about an offence has been 

 obtained. Legislation to cover guidelines for Departmental 

 Field Officers and other conducting investigations.

 14. The rate of rent assistance for beneficiaries without 

 children should be increased in June 1988 from $10 to $15 - 

 $35M.

 15. Long-term unemployed people (twelve months or over) should 

 be entitled from June 1988 to receive the Pensioner Health 

 Benefit Card - $74M.

 3 .

 16. For long-term unemployed people (twelve months or more), 

 the income test from June 1988 should include a free area 

 equivalent to the pensioner free area allowing earnings of 

 $40 per week for the single unemployed, $70 for married 

 couples and $12 per week for children.  As now, the taper 

 for the first $40 above the threshold should be 50 cents in 

 the dollar - $45M.

 17. Provide for a national community based enterprise 

 development scheme.

 18. Make Austudy available to those people who are studying to 

 gain Australian qualifications in areas where their 

 equivalent overseas qualifications are not recognised in 

 Australia - $2M.

 19. The Federal Government should commit itself, in conjunction 

 with State and Territory Governments to provide a total of 

 80,000 new child care places and 30,000 out-of-school-hours 

 places over the next ten years.

 In the meantime, the Government should commit itself to 

 creating a further 20,000 additional child care and 10,000 

 out-of-school-hours places over a three year period from 

 January 1989. This will require relatively small

 expenditure in 1988/89, because of the lengthy process 

 involved in organising the building of new child care 

 centres - $10M.

 20. Increase the point at which withdrawal of fee relief for

 child care commences from $225 to $300 per week in order to 

 align it with the upper limit of income for Family 

 Allowance Supplement, and should be indexed. The

 operational subsidy should not be reduced or abolished - 

 $10M.

 21. Increase the expenditure on community health programs by 

 20% in real terms - $7M.

 4 .

 22. Establish a well-resourced task force, including consumer 

 and provider representatives to develop methods for 

 preventing or discouraging over-servicing particularly in 

 the area of diagnostic testing - $0.5M.

 23. Establish a task force including both consumer and provider 

 representatives to develop a national drug policy, for 

 reducing the excessive prescription of pharmaceuticals - 

 $0.5M.

 24. Reduce the ceiling of the safety net program for 

 pharmaceutical benefits to $60 per year (i.e. six 

 prescription items) for families receiving the Family 

 Allowance Supplement who do not qualify for a Health Care 

 Card - $10M.

 25. Make available an additional $300 million to State 

 Governments through the Commonwealth State Housing 

 Agreement.

 The bulk of these funds should be allocated to the States 

 to be matched on a dollar-for-dollar basis, but some should 

 be specifically allocated as follows;

 .  $12 million to the Mortgage and Rent Relief Scheme, to

 be used significantly to increase the level of 

 mortgage assistance along the lines of the New South 

 Wales' scheme;

 .  $8 million to the Crisis Accommodation Program;

 .  $6 million to the Local Government and Community

 Housing Program.

 Each of these specific allocations would constitute a 50% 

 increase in expenditure on the particular program - $300M.

 5 .

 26. Fund six new Family Conciliation Centres, at least one in 

 each State - $1.5M.

 27. Fund the establishment of a national network of credit 

 counselling services - $6M.

 28. Remove the nursing care levy from 750 T.P.I. pensioners at 

 present in full-time nursing home care $4.5M.

 29. Return to equivalent level of benefits to those under the 

 old Guide - $8M.

 30. Provide compensation for exceptional disability 100% G.R. 

 pensioners who have retired from the workforce - $3.5M.

 31. War widows - restriction of Repatriation Pharmaceutical 

 Benefits 0.5 million D.S.H. loan in own right 0.75 million 

 - $1.5M.

 32. Extend and improve medical, dental and allied treatment 

 services in repatriation hospitals - $15M.

 33. Provide Government subsidies for the building and operation 

 of homes for the aged and disabled - $12M.

 34. Maintain the Veterans' Home Service Program - $8M.

 35. Provide free pharmaceuticals for those in receipt of the 

 Job Search Allowance.

 36. Establish a borrower insurance scheme for people paying off 

 a home loan in the event of a major drop in income 

 (resulting possibly from job loss, illness, accident). 

 This would provide finance for up to twelve months, during 

 which time, if there is little likelihood of a return to 

 the previous income level, new terms for the loan could be 

 negotiated.

 6 .

 37. Upgrade the frequency for radio for the print handicapped 

 (RPH) and extend its market.

 38. Drop plans to introduce commercial sponsorship on the ABC.

 39. Provide a grant for the development of public television to 

 be administered by the Public Broadcasting Association of 

 Australia.

 40. Stop the closure of country post offices.

 41. Drop plans to charge for telephone calls to Directory 

 Assistance.

 42. Fund the National Soil Conservation Program - five year 

 plan $100 million per annum for next five years - $100M.

 43. Guarantee Government funding for public plant breeding 

 sector (e.g. CSIRO, universities, State agriculture 

 departments).

 44. Provide $500,000 per year over five years for promotion of

 sustainable agriculture.  Includes establishment of

 Information Clearinghouse by National Association for 

 Sustainable Agriculture, demonstration farms - $0.5M.

 45. Federal Government to honour agreement with States for 10% 

 increase in Home and Community Care Program (HACC) funding.

 46. Provide for a set percentage of fuel excise going into road 

 funding along the lines of the two cents per litre 

 Bicentennial Roads Grants.

 47. Continue the Bicentennial Roads Funding Program.

 48. A Technologies Export Fund will be established to support 

 new export projects undertaken by MIC portfolio companies.  

 The fund will be administered by Austrade - $20M.

 7 . â– 

 49. A Target Export Fund, with an initial grant of $30 million 

 will provide assistance to agriculture,  mining and railway 

 goods and services exporters, new technology exporters and 

 companies in these industrial areas that previously have 

 not exported - $30M.

 49A. Establish a centre for the study of International Trade at 

 an Australian University.

 50. The Charter of the Australian Industry Development 

 Corporation (AIDC) will be amended so that the AIDC expands 

 its role in providing co-ordinated finance packages to the 

 capital goods export industry.

 51. Announce penalties for non-compliance of offset contract 

 obligations as part of a stricter approach to offsets.

 52. Announce that relevant defence and other authorities will 

 be required to identify that part of Government overseas 

 contracts which can be offset by equivalent technology 

 sales.  The DOFAT will have the responsibility for ensuring 

 that Australian manufacturers of other goods and services 

 have the chance of tendering for the remainder - $0.3M.

 53. Announce the establishment of a national computer network, 

 subscribed to by firms, and which will assist companies 

 identify potential overseas customers and provide export 

 market advice and information - $12M.

 54. Announce assistance to smaller exporters through the 

 National Development Fund to cover up to 50% of their 

 pre-production activities beyond the R&D stage where they 

 demonstrate to Austrade the opportunities for export 

 exploitation - $20M.

 8 .

 55. Announce that firms which demonstrate strong potential for 

 securing profitable export markets will be offered advice 

 on developing export plans while direct assistance will be 

 furnished for participation in trade displays and trade 

 missions - $8M.

 56. Acknowledge the inevitability of further funding for the

 U.S. E.E.P. and announce the expansion of the Congressional 

 Liaison Unit in Washington Embassy to enhance the quality 

 and breadth of our representation - $4M. .

 57. Announce a series of initiatives designed to improve export 

 finance and insurance. These include:

 .  improving the present insurance packages offered to

 exporters against the non-payment for goods and 

 services and against the unfair calling of bonds or 

 guarantees - $5M;

 .  ensuring that firms investing overseas in areas

 associated with political risks have access to 

 adequate insurance - $0.3M;

 .  a facility to exporters to compensate them during 

 periods when there are significant differences between 

 Australian and overseas interest and inflation rates - 

 $4 0M.

 58. Announce an end to tax concessions (presently 150%) to 

 companies which develop and then apply overseas the results 

 of R&D work funded by the Government.

 59. Announce that Australia will take steps to become a 

 signatory to the Standards Code of the General Agreement on 

 Tariffs and Trade which will assist Australian exporters 

 gain access to overseas markets - $0.1M.

 60. 60. Announce the establishment of guidelines and goals for 

 Australian representatives stationed1  at the OECD and UNCTAD 

 which will compliment and reinforce Australia's negotiating 

 stance at a bilateral and multilateral level.

 61. Accelerate implementation of the DFHA in Housing Defence 

 personnel - $50M.

 62. Accelerate the recommendations of the Hamilton Report in 

 relation to service families - $24M.

 63. Remove the arrival fee.

 64. Remove the $240 review of status fee for migrants.

 65. Increase the foreign aid allocation to 0.45% of GDP with 

 the aid level rising to 0.7% over three years - $330M.

 66. Raise total education spending to 2% GDP and higher 

 education spending to 1% GDP - $120M.

 67. Remove the tertiary education administration fee.

 68. Increase the allocation for refugee assistance (including 

 travel assistance) by 30%.

 10.

 AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS' REVENUE PROPOSALS

 1. Abolish negative gearing on company takeovers - $1.5b.

 2. Crackdown on transfer pricing/tax havens - $1.5b.

 3. Increase tax on luxury imports - $800m.

 4. Abolish accelerated depreciation allowance - $lb.

 5. Low rate tax of 5 cents per $100 on foreign exchange 

 transactions - $2.5b.

 6. Abolish gold tax exemption - $290m. (estimate of Taxation 

 Institute of Australia)

 7. Abolish tax deductibility of promotional advertising of 

 tobacco and alcohol products - $150m.

 TOTAL $7.740 BILLION

