---
title: "Australian emergency aid for Sudan"
date: "1988-11-22"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Industry, Technology and Commerce"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214058240
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08017356%22
---

 MINISTER FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND TRADE NEWS RELEASEp n i ^ V V V l  l l l - U b n w L ·

 No. 

 2 2  N o v e m b e r  1 9 8 8 

 M204 Date 

 Australian emergency aid for Sudan

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 Australia will provide emergency assistance worth $2 million to help  overcome the tragic effects of drought and civil unrest in Sudan, the  Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans announced  today.

 The emergency assistance package will be distributed through the World  Food Programme and Australian Non Government Organisations (NGOs).

 "The situation in Sudan has reached critical proportions due to a  combination of natural and man-made disasters," Senator Evans said.

 Sudan recently suffered one of its worst droughts, which was broken in parts  by disastrous floods in August. Locust plagues are afflicting parts of the  country and a long-running conflict continues in southern Sudan.

 Senator Evans said that Sudan faced a situation comparable to that which  existed in Ethiopia in 1983-84.

 "In the south of the country thousands of people are reported to have died of  starvation and a further two and a half million have been displaced as a result  of civil conflict. Sudan is also hosting over 750,000 refugees, mainly from  Ethiopia," he said.

 Under the Australian package, the World Food Programme will receive $1.4  million to purchase and freight approximately 4000 tonnes of Australian  wheat to feed refugees in eastern Sudan under the care of the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

 A further $600,000 will be provided to Australian NGOs operating in Sudan.  The contribution will be used to support a number of emergency food and  relief measures, including supplementary feeding programs for vulnerable  groups in south eastern Sudan and the provision of food aid, shelter and 

 blankets for displaced people in the west of the country.

 Australian emergency assistance to Sudan forms part of the Government's  humanitarian aid program administered by the Australian International  Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB), Canberra.

 CANBERRA . 

 For further information contact Billy Williams, Acting Director, AIDAB Public  Information. Tel: (062) 764960.

 m·

