---
title: ""Towards a Total Immigration Program""
date: "1988-02-12"
creators:
  - "Cadman, Alan"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214052653
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08015843%22
---

 HLPN CADMAN MR TEL No . 61 02 6862481 12,02,88 15:5? P.02

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  C. I. S.

 10

 PRESS RELEASE ALAN CA DM AN M .P .   SHADOW  M IN IS T E R  FOR   IM M IG R A T IO N  & E T H N IC   AFFAIRS

 "TOWARDS A TOTAL IMMIGRATION PROGRAM"

 In a major immigration speech today, Alan Cadman, the shadow  Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, slammed the govern­ ment's handling of this vital portfolio.

 "Australia's economic circumstances require the immediate introduction of a more relevant needs based immigration program  which takes into account the present and future socio economic  and national priorities of the whole country. Rather than the 

 Government's ad hoc program of confused goals which is aimed  solely at pleasing a reactionary labour movement.

 "The Accord between the ALP and the ACTU, signed when Mr Hawke  became Prime Minister, states clearly under "Agreed Policy  Details", Section 4(c):

 * that family reunion and refugee intake are of the highest  priority in determining migration criteria.

 "To please a backward union movement the Government put Austra­ lia's economy on the line for five years.

 "The figures speak for themselves $

 * in 1982/83 the immigrant intake was 93,177 of which 31,831  or 34.16% were skilled or business migrants

 * in 1986/87 the immigrant intake was 115,300 of which 22,100  or 19.1% were skilled or business migrants

 * and projections for 1987/88 are an immigrant intake of 120,000 [recent figures suggest 135,000] of which only 20,500 or 16.6% will bo skilled or business migrants.

 "These policy guidelines have been demonstrably implemented  during the last five years at gr*  *-‘  -ocio economic cost to all  Australians.

 "There is a desperate shortage of skilled labour in this country  as evidenced by the major employer groups' recent calls for  government action to alleviate the problem and boost our economic  performance and competitiveness.

 TEL No . b'l ijv  b y b v a y i  i  / , u z  , y y  l y - o y r . Î· o ||hLhN CADMAN MR

 "Yet the best the Government can do is commission Dr Fitzgerald's  C.A.A.I.P. inquiry.

 "Recently 900 young skilled Dutch applicants for immigration to  Australia were refused because they had no relatives living here.

 "Under the Hawke Government's independent immigration category  the point score is so tough that only the university educated are  practically the only ones allowed in.

 "Australia needs an expanded immigration program the aims of  which must be:

 * to attract immigrants who are young,  skilled, knowledgeable  or educated and employable

 * and to place special emphasis on migrants with financial  resources and entrepreneurial skills, who would create  employment and investment opportunities for other Austral­ ians. "

 Alan Cadman M.P.

 12 February 1988

 Contact number: (02) 639-5155

