---
title: "Balance between economic and social pressures"
date: "1988-05-18"
creators:
  - "Holding, Clyde"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214054458
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08017567%22
---

 NEWS[ _  ·  â– REMBARGOED TO 9pm, THURSDAY 18 MAYMRS 56/88BALANCE BETWEEN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL PRESSURESThe Minister for immigration,  Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs,  Mr Clyde Holding, said tonight that immigration was a  careful balance between competing economic and social pressures.In a speech delivered on his behalf to the Australian Chamber  of Manufactures in Melbourne tonight, Mr Holding said  immigration also had to be carefully balanced between long and  short term economic needs, the claims of new and older  established migrant communities, and between the interests of  the broader Australian community. '"To achieve this goal will require a much greater degree, of  involvement by business, unions and community groups,"Mr Holding said."The Government has progressively increased the intake,  effectively doubling the program in the past four years."There seems to be strong support that immigration should  benefit the economy and there are many who feel that the intake  should be dominated by young, educated people who would settle  well."Our economic needs are,  however, increasingly more  sophisticated. In a period of rapid structural and  technological change,  we have to target economic migrants more  carefully."Mr Holding said he was reassured by a consistent support for  family reunion and refugee resettlement. Lines had to be  drawn,  however, in social migration. ; ::a a :. v u l l a p  

 C. 1. s· ....

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, Î½ Î¯ .  X   LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 The Hon. Clyde Holding, M.P. â„¢

 Parliament House, Canberra

 2

 "If, as some advocates argue, family reunion rights are   extended to distant relatives, the consequences for chain   migration, explosion of numbers and budget costs are   unacceptable," he said.

 "Family reunion cannot be open-ended, particularly if this   results in a disproportionate number of migrants who are   ill-equipped with skills to contribute to Australia's   development.

 "Likewise, Our commitment to refugees must be conditional on   refugee status being genuine.

 "Acceptance of refugees who flee their countries because of   poverty undermines the integrity of the overall migration   program.â– 

 Mr Holding acknowledged that there was concern about the racial   mix of the intake.

 "The key is 'balance'," he said. "The community will accept a   balanced intake that maintains continuity from traditional   sources as well as enabling people to enter from new source ·   countries.

 "Fears that Australian-born people may become a minority in   their own land are unfounded.

 "A continuation of present immigration and population trends   would result in over 75 per cent of the population being   Australian-born in 2025, compared with the current 79 per cent.

 "The Government's current strategy is designed to provide a   balanced economic rationale on the one hand and maintaining   commitment to social and humanitarian needs on the other," Mr   Holding said.

 CANBERRA, 19 MAY 1988

 MEDIA CONTACTS: Peter Cotton Minister's Office  (062) 72 6751

 Eric Brookbanks  DILGEA (062) 64 2321

