---
title: "Comprehensive reform for Australian immigration"
date: "1988-12-08"
creators:
  - "Ray, Robert"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214058491
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08017520%22
---

 7 ^

 Minister for  Immigration  Local Government  and Ethnic Affairs

 Senator the Hon. R obert Ray

 A\et$OFFICES: Parliament House,  Canberra, ACT, 2600  Phone: (062) 77-7860  Fax: (062)73-4144

 4 Treasury Place,  Melbourne, Vic. 3002  Phone: (03) 650-4479  Fax: (03)650-9106

 MPS 141/88

 Overview

 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 COMPREHENSIVE REFORM FOR AUSTRALIAN IMMIGRATION

 The Government has unveiled the most comprehensive reform of  immigration policy undertaken in Australia in the past  twenty years.

 The new immigration system will affect every aspect of the  immigration portfolio.

 The package of measures is the Government's response to the  report earlier this year by the Committee to Advise on  Australia's Immigration Policies (CAAIP), headed by  Dr Stephen FitzGerald.

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Senator Robert Ray, said the Government's response  drew on the committee's wide-ranging enquiries, and his own  detailed consultations with state governments, interest 

 groups and individuals.

 "The process begun by Dr FitzGerald and his committee will  have an impact on Australia for many years to come", Senator  Ray said.

 "I thank all those involved i n 'the" CAAIP process for their  important contribution to the overhaul of Australia's  immigration policies.

 "It's been clear for some time that much of the legislation  regulating immigration is outmoded and some policies have  been unresponsive to changed circumstance.

 "This total reform of immigration legislation and policy  will give all interested groups clear-cut ground rules, and  some certainty for their future involvement with the  immigration process.

 "We have maintained our commitment to social and  humanitarian needs and also sharpened the economic focus of  our immigration programs," he said.

 The Government will introduce reforms in four areas:

 the immigration program will be divided into three main  streams - family, skill and humanitarian migration.

 The, Immigration Department will develop a research  capacity to bring' immigration into the mainstream of  economic and· social, planning;

 The—management·of immigration programs will be  redesigned to ensure that they do not exceed the  migration figures set by the Government;

 There will be a significant change in the machinery of  decision making to ensure that administration is  demonstrably open, consistent and fair.

 Senator Ray said the migration program for 1989/90 would be  140,000.

 "The size and composition of the program for the immediate  future is a realistic reflection of competing demands and  priorities.

 "The immigration of immediate family members will continue  without the imposition of a limit. Extended family members  may be admitted through a separate points-tested category  with a "floating" passmark, so that the remaining available 

 places in this stream can be allocated on merit.

 "Agreements negotiated between Government, unions and  employers will result in improved selection mechanisms for  desired employees. This will give a sharper economic focus  to the programs," the Minister said.

 "A revised points system, emphasising economic factors, will  be put in place for independent applicants. The size of  this points-tested component will also he managed globally  through a 'floating' passmark to reflect the demand for  program places.

 "The more open decision-making processes to be put in place  will ensure that there will be no bias or discrimination on  the-grounds. _of.-sex.

 "Australia's commitment to refugees and others through  Special Humanitarian Programs will be maintained, and the  Government will introduce special mechanisms to help persons

 who are in immediate danger of persecution in their own  country.

 "The Government has rejected CAAIP advice on a gradual  disengagement from the Indo-Chinese outflow, but it accepts  its advice to actively monitor the complex situation in that  region with a view to finding durable solutions," the  Minister said.

 "We believe that a range of measures and responses is  required over and above resettlement, including improved  migration programs from the countries of Indo-China and  international initiatives to address the continuing outflow.

 "We have already announced an estimated doubling of the  Vietnamese Family Migration Program for this year. In  addition Australia is taking a significant role in  developments leading to a major international conference to 

 be sponsored by the United Nations in 1989 on Indo-Chinese  Refugees."

 The Major elements of the Government's response to CAAIP

 A reaffirmation of the Government's commitment to a  non-discriminatory approach to migrant selection on a  global basis.

 The establishment of a Bureau of Immigration Research  to undertake major, systematic research and improve  public comprehension of immigration issues. The Bureau  will be coupled with upgraded consultative mechanisms 

 to include Immigration Outlook conferences.

 The immigration program of 140,000 for 1989/90 to be  divided; into three main streams - family migration  (71,000i), skilled migration (54,000), humanitarian  migration (14,000) plus a small special eligibility 

 category (1,000). Each of these streams will be  'capped' to ensure that the migration program does not  inadvertently overrun.

 The current Independent and Concessional category to be  split with Independents selected in the Skill stream  and Concessionals in the Extended Family category of  the Family stream. A different points test will apply  to each.

 A new points test under which:

 (a) independent applicants will be assessed on  employability, taking into account job skills, age  and English language ability;

 (b) extended family applicants to be assessed on  employability (including job skills and age but  not English language ability) together with

 their relationship to the sponsor, the sponsor's  citizenship status, settlement record and  location;

 (c) A 'floating passmark' will be introduced for both  points-tested groups to enable the limited places  in the program to be filled according to the  relative merits of the case.

 A new 'balance of family' criterion for parents.  Only  those with more of their children living in Australia  than any single other country, or at least an equal  number in Australia as overseas, will qualify as close 

 family without a points test being applied. Parents  not meeting this test will be able to apply under the  Extended Family provisions, including the points test.

 Assurances of Support lodged by sponsors to have effect  for 5 years, to be extended to enable Unemployment  Benefits to be recovered from the sponsor and to apply  to all parents sponsored as immediate family.

 The 'Self-supporting' retiree category will be  abolished. People wishing to retire here will be  considered for extended temporary entry permits.

 The Family migration stream will comprise:

 (a) immediate family - spouses, fiancees, dependent  children and parents with balance of family in  Australia; numbers will be subject to demand;

 (b) the balance comprised of the extended family -  siblings, non-dependent children, nieces and  nephews and parents without the balance of family  here (to be points-tested with a 'floating'  passmark to allocate remaining places in the 

 family component of the program).

 Skilled migration stream to be split between:

 (a) an employer/business element to include the  Business Migration Program, the Employer  Nomination Scheme, negotiated industry  arrangements and a 'special skills' group; numbers  will be subject to demand;

 lb.)..the .balance.-consisting—of -  a '  labour force enhancement' element to include Occupational  Shares System and Independent migrants (with a  points test and 'floating' passmark to allocate  the remaining places in the skills component of  the program).

 Future overseas recruitment of skilled labour, and the  recognition of overseas qualifications, will be

 referred to the Structural Adjustment Committee of  Cabinet for early consideration.

 .  A major change in the review of immigration decisions  through a statutory two tiered system of review.  The  first tier would involve statutory, and independent  review by a special unit in his Department. The  second tier would be reviewed a revamped Immigration  Review Panel. This new body will be set up under the  Migration Act. It will be an independent body and 

 empowered by legislation to consider cases on their  merits and to take determinative decisions.

 . To guarantee fairness and equity for immigration  decisions, to ensure that decisions are open to  scrutiny, and to remove the possibility of political  interference in the process in the future, the 

 Secretary of the Department of Immigration, Local  Government and Ethnic Affairs, rather than the Minister  will be the principal decision maker on most  immigration cases.

 . Changes in the laws governing the detention and deportation of people who are in Australia illegally.

 Announcing the reforms in the Senate, Senator Ray said  events since the release of the Committee's report had  reinforced the Government's commitment to an immigration  policy which did not discriminate on the basis of race or  ethnic origin.

 "I observed in the Senate and I now restate that this  Government believes that a return to a bi-partisan policy is  in the interests of all Australians," the Minster said.

 "Should the Opposition accept this invitation to return to a  bi-partisan non-discriminatory policy, the Government, for  its part, will applaud, and will in no way seek to take  political advantage of the fact that they have done so," he 

 said.

 CANBERRA, 6 December 1988

 MEDIA INQUIRIES: Peter Cotton Minister's Office  (062) 77 7860

 Tony Harris  DILGEA (062) 64 2522

