---
title: "Immigrants: screen the rich with the poor"
date: "1988-02-11"
creators:
  - "Jenkins, Jean"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214052615
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08016374%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 1 ___ _________________  '' THE SENATE _____

 COMMONW EALTH ""  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  C. I. S.

 PR 88-030 11 February 1988 Perth

 IMMIGRANTS: SCREEN THE RICH WITH THE POOR: DEMOCRATS

 Senator Jean Jenkins, Australian Democrats spokesperson on   Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, today expressed deep concern at   the implications of the Government's privatised 'business   migration1  scheme.

 "The Government's decision to privatise the scheme lays it wide   open to abuse", said Senator Jenkins, "and the privatisation of   the scheme would involve screening of prospective business   immigrants by registered private agents, who could approve or   disapprove a migrant's application for residency status. The   only criterion would be that the migrant have half a million   dollars for investment in Australia.

 "The Government has wilfully created a scenario for corruption,"   said Senator Jenkins. "Unscrupulous agents are almost invited to   take advantage of the unwary;  dishonest migrants are almost   invited to bend the law to their advantage by misdirecting their  

 investment funds into speculative ventures or even repatriating   the money once they have become residents."

 While not opposing the Business Migration Scheme per se, Senator Jenkins said that Australia's immigration programme   should be based on need: Australia's need for certain skills,   talents or gualifications; and the need of refugees or those  

 separated from their families and dependents.

 Senator Jenkins also rejected the call by the Business Council   of Australia and the Master Builders Federation for a big rise   in the number of skilled migrants, when according to the   W .A . Building Unions "hundreds of building workers are  

 unemployed" (West. Aust. 28.1.88).

 Like the B.L.F., the Australian Democrats support apprenticeship   and re-training courses for the unemployed, rather than bring in   migrants as short-term factory fodder," said Senator Jenkins.

 "We must take the longer view. We will not turn away those in   need, but we reject the out-dated concept of growth for growth's   sake. We seek a sustainable economy and a sustainable  

 population for Australia."

 Senator Jenkins said that the Australian Democrats welcomed   migrants from any language group or race, in the belief that   Australia is enriched by variety.

 More information from: Senator Jean Jenkins 09-3254714 Nick Goldie 062-727198

