---
title: "Immigration policy: time for a full debate"
date: "1988-05-15"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211174938
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1145608%22
---

 4•

 f iRRD CANBERRA .. TEL: 61-062-732113 16,05,88 9:29 No.002 F..'

 r

 7DER OF THE OPPOSIT ON

 News Release by b John Howard,MP

 L48/88

 IMMIGRATION POLICY t TIME FOR A FULL DEBATE

 The release in a few dogs of the FitzGerald Report on immigration policy should provide a trigger for a full and open debate on the direction of Australia's immigration policy.

 Such a debate is clearly needed. There is considerable concern in the Australian community about immigration policy. That concern will intensify unless there is an open and intelligent debate.

 Immigration policy has profound economic and social consequences.

 Any debate on the direction of Australia's immigration policy must be conducted in a rational and tolerant fashion. However, the inevitable sensitivities felt by some about the subject must not impede a frank debate. Rather it should impose a discipline on the participants in that debate to

 show understanding and respect for different points of view.

 The aim of any debate on immigration must be to produce the right policy.

 Policy quality should be supreme. It should not be sacrificed in a blind pursuit of bipartisanship.

 Bipartisanship can only be justified on this, or indeed any other issue, if the bipartisan agreement is about the right policy.

 Bipartisanship can never be an end in itself.

 It is extremely regrettable that the Prime Minister has already intervened to try and force a rewriting of some of the FitzGerald Report. Such prejudiced behaviour is the antithesis of the open debate which is needed. The last thing we want is prime ministerial sensitivity at any criticism of current policy.

 Immigration has been a constant and enduring part of the Australian achievement. We are one of the great immigrant nations of the modern world.

 Over the past 200 years immigration has not only increased our population, it has stimulated economic growth and strengthened national security.

 0

 JO! N HOWHKW CHN1 LKKH

 • I. LL bi-UbL- (JL113 lb , uD , t,b j • zj rvu . ULJL r . u.

 Particularly since World War II, immigration has diversified

 and enriched our cultural heritage.

 A soundly-planned, well-executed and balanced immigration program is essential to the future economic, social and national development of our country.

 In recent years Australia has demonstrated her capacity to administer immigration policy in an humane manner.

 Our willingness to receive so many refugees from war ravaged Indo-china was both humane and compassionate.

 However, despite past successes, there is ample evidence that the present pattern of immigration policy is seriously flawed.

 The migrant intake is unbalanced. There is too high a proportion of migrants under the family reunion category and too small a proportion of those within the skilled and business migration category.

 The following table illustrates this point.

 1$81182  1/82 . 1 /7

 Family Reunion 17.5% 50.4%.

 Skilled and Business 46.4% 17.0%

 Total Number of Migrants 118,700 113,309

 The Liberal and National Parties believe that Australia's immigration policy should reflect a number of fundamental considerations. They area

 1. Australia's national interest must always be the overriding consideration in deciding upon the level and composition of the migrant intake.

 2. The prime influence on all post-arrival policies must be that all Australians have a common destiny transcending other loyalties.

 3. The capacity of Australian society to accept and absorb change must be a factor determining our migrant intake.

 4. Continued high levels of migration are essential to sustained economic growth and expansion.

 S. As a member of the international community Australia has an obligation to play her part in the humanitarian resettlement of refugees.

 ^-f

 JOHN HOWARD CANBERRA TEL: 61-062-732113 16,05,88 929 No.002 P.04

 KIP

 The Liberal and National Parties believe that not only should Australia's migrant intake be significantly increased, but also that its composition should change so that it is more directly attuned to our economic needs.

 In choosing. additional migrants a premium should be placed on the direct and i mmediate contribution they are able to make to Australian society.

 Such an approach--will not end the admission of migrants under the family reunion category.

 However it will signifigaptly alter the balance within the total intake towards a greater number of migrants with skills and business capacity.

 The time has arrived for a total examination of the direction of our immigration policy. It is important to Australia's national interest that it now take place.

 SYDNEY 15 May 1988

