---
title: "Study shows positive role for community refugee settlement scheme"
date: "1988-02-22"
creators:
  - "Holding, Clyde"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214052831
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08017594%22
---

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs 

 The Hon. C LY D E  H O LD IN G , M.P.

 C O M M O N W E A L T H  

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 C. I .  s.

 MPS 10/88

 STUDY SHOWS POSITIVE ROLE FOR COMMUNITY REFUGEE SETTLEMENT   SCHEME

 A study of the Federal Government's Community Refugee   Settlement Scheme (CRSS) has confirmed the scheme's   importance in the settlement of refugees in Australia.

 Under the scheme, volunteer community groups help . ·  .  · â–   ,  .  , recently-arrived refugees witn basic necessities such as   housing, food and clothing and also,  through personal   contact, ensure they have access to all necessary   community services. .

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic   Affairs,  Mr Clyde Holding, said today the scheme was a true   reflection of the willingness of Australians to help those   in need whether they were newcomers or fourth generation  

 Aus tr alians.

 He said this was emphasised by the fact that groups   involved in the scheme come from all sections of society,   both country and city, and covered such diverse groups as   church associations,  resident action groups and ethnic   welfare societies.

 Mr Holding said his Department had commissioned a study by   Touche Ross Management Consultants to assess the   effectiveness of the scneme.

 Among the findings, the Minister said, was that   participants in the scheme regarded themselves as being   significantly better off during their early settlement   days than refugees without such support.

 The study demonstrated that CRSS had a positive role in   providing settlement assistance.

 2

 "The continuing commitment by community groups to help -  refugee families in this way is a vital part of  Australia's humanitarian response to the refugee problem,"  Mr Holding said.

 "Since CRSS was introduced in 1979, it has helped settle  nearly 35 000 refugees. In 1986-87 over 2500 refugees  were assisted by some 280 support groups which currently  participate.

 "The efforts of these groups are much appreciated by the  Federal Government and, as the study shows, by the refugee  recipients who are forever grateful for the help to settle  in this country," the Minister said.

 CANBERRA, 22 February 1988

 MEDIA CONTACTS: Peter Cotton Minister's Office  (062) 72 6751

 Trevor Rodgers  DILGEA (062) 64 2061

