---
title: "Australian emergency aid for refugees in Zambia"
date: "1989-07-03"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214060636
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09030505%22
---

 No. Date u . 

 Ml  1 6 3 J u l y  1 9 8 9

 Australian emergency aid for refugees in Zambia

 Malnourished Angolan and Mozambican refugee children in Zambia are to  benefit from a $170,000 grant from Australia to provide food aid, the  Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans announced  today.

 Australia's contribution, which will be channelled through the World Food  Programme (WFP), will provide more than 28,000 children with full  supplementary feeding for up to four months. By that time many of the  refugee families, who are being settled as fanners, will have established  food self-sufficiency

 "The Paris-based medical relief organisation, Medicins sans Frontiers, has  reported a rapid increase in child malnutrition among Angolan and  Mozambican refugees due to a carbohydrate-only diet," Senator Evans 

 said.

 Tests are being conducted in the two largest refugee camps on the  acceptability of a soy bean supplement which would provide a low-cost  protein supply.

 Senator Evans said the soy-bean supplement would be manufactured in  Zambia and delivered free by the WFP ensuring maximum impact of  Australian funds.

 Australian emergency assistance to Angolan and Mozambican refugees in  Zambia forms part of the Government's overseas aid program  administered by the Australian International Development Assistance  Bureau (AIDAB).

 CANBERRA

 For further information contact Annmaree O'Keeffe, Director, AIDAB  Public Information. Tel: (062) 764960.

