---
title: "Opposition's response to immigration issues"
date: "1989-06-08"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214060370
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08018480%22
---

 λ 

 %

 :t ν. 

 PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA 

 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE  CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600  TEL. 77 7111

 COMMONWEALTH

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH 

 PHILIP RUDDOCK. MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 P R E S S  S T A T E M E N T 8 JUNE 1989

 OPPOSITION'S RESPONSE TO IMMIGRATION ISSUES

 1) SERGIO BUSCHMANN

 The Government's approach to the continued presence in Australia of Mr  Sergio Buschmann has been responsible and appropriate.

 Neil Brown, MP, as Shadow Attorney-General, drew attention to the fact  that seeking to raise funds to buy arms, are calls for the  assassination of a current Head of State, are a breach of our law, and  are unacceptable.

 When visas for visitors to Australia are issued on the basis of false  and misleading statements about the purpose, it is certainly proper  for the visa issued, to be reviewed, and the appropriate provisions of  the. Immigration Act, which can include deportation to be implemented.

 I would certainly on the information available to me, have responded  in the same way.

 2) HONG KONG REFUGEES

 At this stage, there is no question that any claims by citizens of  Hong Kong, to be refugees, would need to be considered on their  merits.

 It is pertinent to note that the United Kingdom, whilst expressing its  utter revulsion and outrage at the recent events in China has,   nevertheless, refused any automatic right of resettlement in Britain,  of citizens from Hong Kong.

 The Opposition's view of immigration policy is that it should be  non-discriminatory, so far as nationality and race is concerned. Thus, applications for immigration from Hong Kong should be properly  considered under existing policy arrangments.

 If the numbers of applications, particularly in the business migration  area, skilled employees, or family reunion, increase substantially,  the Government should respond by ensuring that the administration in  Hong Kong is able to respond quickly and properly to all applications.

 3) CHINESE STUDENTS

 Ian Macphee has expressed the horror that the Opposition has  experienced as a result of the massacre of the peaceful demonstrators  in Beijing last week. The daily events reported now in our Australian  media, indicate that we are witnessing possibly one of the most 

 significant international events in our lifetime.

 >

 ■>e

 - 2-

 For those temporarily in Australia as students, great uncertainty must  exist in their minds.  Australia has always responded sympathetically  in such circumstances.

 Extension of visas while events unfold is appropriate. Case by case  processing of any application for refugee status, must be entertained  against internationally recognised criteria.

 4) OFFICE OF MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS SURVEY

 Reports that the Office of Multicultural Affairs has commissioned a  study of political attitudes of newly arrived migrants, is outrageous.

 I have not yet seen the study, but as it has been paid for by public  funds, I believe I am entitled to a copy, particularly as it seems to  have been made so widely available to the media, as well as informed  writers such as Mr Richard Farmer.

 The political significence of the attitudes surveyed of course is  dubious, as the new arrivals are unlikely to be enrolled voters. In  fact, amendments to the Citizenship Act, which exclude British  subjects, have probably reduced quite considerably that proportion.

 My principle concern is that by wasting public money in pursuit of a  political objective, the Government undermines the urgency and  legitimacy for the provision of funds for important multicultural and  settlement programmes.

 For further information: 062-77 4343; AH: 062-49 7749

