---
title: "Afghanistan: Australia's ignoble role"
date: "1989-02-15"
creators:
  - "Spender, John"
source: "Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214059236
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02001568%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE JOHN SPENDER QC MP P H O N E  062  3  Ί 4 / 6 3 / 02 9292969

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRSCOMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAHAFGHANISTAN: AUSTRALIA'S IGNOBLE ROLEMr. John Spender, Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, said today that all civilised people would welcome the final Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan. "The Afghan resistance deserves the world's warm congratulations for its heroic struggle", he said."But we must continue to support them until the chief obstacle to peace and self-determination for Afghanistan - the Najibullah regime - collapses or is removed. When this inevitably occurs, we urge the Mujahedin to show justice and restraint".What has Australia's role been in this long and bloody conflict? Labor, in part not to damage "normalised" relations with Moscow, in part blaming the Afghan issue for the loss of the 1980 Federal election, has done little more than pay lip-service support to the Afghan struggle. Some examples:.  In contrast to many other Western countries, the Government refused to contribute to a US and Intergovernmental Committee for Migration (ICM) scheme - which would have cost only a few tens of thousands of dollars - to treat Afghan war wounded, including civilians, in Australia. The Government claimed it cost too much..  But it did contribute $20,000 to a Kabul regime hospital..  In keeping with its generally soft line on Moscow'sinvolvement, it failed - again in contrast to other Western countries - to condemn the Soviet murder of several hundred Afghan villagers who were in the way of the evacuation.Mr. Spender said the United Nation's US$800 million programme to assist returning refugees, to which Australia had contributed, would be "a drop in the ocean considering the state of devastation the Soviets are leaving Afghanistan in. And Senator Evans is deluding himself if he persists with the idea that the refugees will return en masse to a peaceful Afghanistan in *  April." .For further information: 062 77 416515 February 1989

