---
title: "Minister Attends Migrant 40th Anniversary Reunion"
date: "1989-01-22"
creators:
  - "Ray, Robert"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214058953
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09030705%22
---

 OFFICES:

 Minister for  Immigration  Local Government  and Ethnic Affairs

 Parliament House.  Canberra, ACT, 2600  Phone: (062) 77-7860 

 Fax: (062) 73-4144

 Senator the Hon. Robert Ray

 4 Treasury Place,  Melbourne, Vic. 3002  Phone: (03) 650-4479  Fax: (03)650-9106

 MPS 9/89

 EMBARGOED UNTIL 8PM ON SUNDAY 22ND JANUARY 1989

 MINISTER ATTENDS MIGRANT 40TH ANNIVERSARY REUNION

 Immigrants and refugees who travelled on the French ship  Eridan in 1949 celebrated the 40th anniversary of their  arrival in Australia at a reunion in Melbourne this evening.

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Senator Robert Ray, was Guest-of-honour at the  reunion, the first to be held in Melbourne.

 The Eridan sailed from Marseilles, France, in 1948 with 761  passengers - 528 European displaced persons/refugees, and 60  British migrants. It arrived in Sydney two months later on  19 January 1949 after a long and uncomfortable journey  travelling via Panama and French-controlled islands in the  South Pacific.

 Senator Ray said: "Those who travelled on the Eridan came to  a new world, a new life, after years of hardship and  deprivation during the Second World War.

 "Your achievements are immense; your efforts and enthusiasm  helped Australia to become a successful and productive  country. Australia has not looked back since those early  days of immigration.

 "The Federal Government recognises the immeasurable  contributions migrants make to Australia."

 The Minister said that migration policies had evolved to  reflect the complex environment in which Australia operated  and must now fulfil a range of social, economic and  demographic objectives.

 "The current migration policy places a premium on young,  skilled migrants, who can readily make a contribution to our  economy. Yet it also affirms the social importance of  family reunion."

 "Functions like this reunion will help us remember our  origins and what has been achieved," the Minister said.

 MELBOURNE 22nd January 1989

