---
title: "Diplomatic appointment: Thailand"
date: "1989-01-08"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214058844
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09030472%22
---

 No. ¥)ate 

 8 J a n u a r y  1 9 8 9

 DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENT ; THAILAND  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade,  Kim  

 Beazley, today announced the appointment of Mr Richard Butler  

 as Australia's Ambassador to Thailand.  Mr Butler will succeed  

 Mr Richard Smith who has been Ambassador since 1985.

 In announcing Mr Butler's appointment, Mr Beazley  

 noted the strength and breadth of the bilateral relationship  

 between Australia and Thailand, which encompasses trade,  

 tourism, development assistance, defence and narcotics control.

 Mr Beazley also commented on cooperation between  

 Australia and Thailand on a range of regional and international  

 issues, including efforts to promote freer international trade  

 through the Cairns group of countries, management of the  

 refugee problem and the prohibition of chemical weapons.

 "Australia's and Thailand's work together reflects our  

 shared political and strategic interests as active and  

 constructive members of the region", Mr Beazley said.

 Mr Butler joined the then Department of External  

 Affairs in 1965 and has served in Vienna, New York, Singapore,  

 Bonn and Paris. In 1983 he was appointed as Australia's first  

 Ambassador for Disarmament.

 Mr Butler takes up his appointment in Bangkok in  

 January 1989 .  *

