---
title: "Jenkins: 'reject Migration Legislation Amendment Bill'"
date: "1989-05-01"
creators:
  - "Jenkins, Jean"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214059938
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03007246%22
---

 M b SENATOR JEAN JENKINS M ED IA RELEASE AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS SENATOR FOR WA THE SENATECOMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MIC AHPR 89-172 Canberra 1st May '89JENKINS: 'REJECT MIGRATION LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL'WA Democrat Senator Jean Jenkins will tomorrow urge her colleagues to vote in the Senate to reject the bulk of the Government's Migration Legislation Amendment Bill 1989. Senator Jenkins is the Democrat spokesperson on Immigration and Multicultural Affairs."The Government has done the community a disservice in proposing to amend yet again the ageing Migration Act," Senator Jenkins said today.  "This time the Government proposes no less than ninety pages of highly detailed and convoluted amendments."The Committee to Advise on Australia's Immigration Policy (CAAIP) recommended a completely new Act and went so far as to produce a draft.  It also recommended repeal of an accumulated mass of amending legislation."The need for a new Act does not in itself provide sufficient justification for the rejection of the Government's Bill," Senator Jenkins said."However, the Bill itself is badly flawed and has been the subject of a great deal of very valid criticism. This criticism has come not only from ethnic organisations but also from the Australian Council of Churches, the Law Council of Australia and the Senate Scrutiny of Bills Committee," Senator Jenkins said. "The floating points system is particularly obnoxious.""There is a desperate need to provide an effective and independent mechanism for the review of migration decisions. The Bill does not provide this, despite the Minister's protestations that it does. This compounds an already wretched situation. The charging of an illegal $240 fee for an unsatisfactory appeal system has been replaced by a situation in which currently there is no right to an appeal. The Government now proposes to introduce another patently unsatisfactory system and again to charge high fees," Senator Jenkins said."The approach of the Democrats is radically different to the positions of the Government and of the Opposition. We do not accept that we can go on for ever importing the skills we need. It is time we overhauled our education and training systems and ensured that they produce the skilled workers our economy requires."We need reduced immigration, with selection criteria focussed on family reunion and humanitarian considerations which also take into account our international obligations to refugees," Senator Jenkins said.Senator Jenkins called on the Liberal/National Senators to have the guts to keep the Government honest by blocking the bulk of the legislation, which is due to be debated in the Senate tomorrow.Further information: Senator Jenkins 062 773 640

