---
title: "Australian assistance to UNHCR program for voluntary repatriation to Vietnam"
date: "1989-01-18"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214058918
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09030467%22
---

 IV|IVIINISTER FOR  «FO R EIG N  AFFAIRS A ^ 9 ^ P E

 , AU STRALIA',!

 NEW S RELEASE

 No. M. 8 Date COMMONWEALTH  

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY   MICAH

 1 8  J a n u a r y ,  1 9 8 9

 Australian assistance to UNHCR program  for voluntary repatriation to Vietnam

 The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans, today announced  that Australia will contribute $100 000 towards a UNHCR* special program to assist  the voluntary return of Vietnamese from camps in Hong Kong and South East Asia  to Vietnam.

 Senator Evans said that Australia is one of the first countries to contribute to the  program, which is being organised by UNHCR. He said, "This program represents  an important humanitarian initiative to assist those Vietnamese who, having left  Vietnam in past years, have now elected to return."

 Some hundreds of Vietnamese in camps have expressed an interest in returning  home. Most of the returnees under the program are expected to come from camps  in Hong Kong, with others likely to come from camps throughout South East Asia.  Plans to assist an initial 500 people to return to Vietnam are now under way, 

 following the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between UNHCR and  the Government of Vietnam on 13 December 1988.

 The Memorandum of Understanding sets out the framework within which  voluntary returns are to take place. Under its terms, voluntary return to Vietnam  from countries of first asylum will take place in conditions of safety and dignity.  Returnees will not be prosecuted, and no punitive or discriminatory measures will  be taken against them. The Government of Vietnam will permit UNHCR to 

 exercise its traditional monitoring function by providing full access to the returnees.

 Senator Evans said, "Australia's contribution is in response to an appeal by UNHCR  for funds to cover the costs of transport, reception facilities and initial  accommodation for the returnees in Vietnam. It is appropriate that Australia  should play a significant role in supporting this process, particularly at this  important initial stage. We expect that UNHCR's program will assist current  multilateral efforts involving all the concerned governments to find durable  solutions to the present outflow of people from Vietnam."

 Australia's contribution to UNHCR forms part of the Government's program of  overseas development assistance, administered by the Australian International  Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB).

 *United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

 CANBERRA

 For further information contact Billy Williams, Acting Director, Public Information, AIDAB. Ph. (062) 76 4968

