---
title: "Australian soldiers for mine training"
date: "1989-07-14"
creators:
  - "Simmons, David"
source: "MINISTER FOR DEFENCE SCIENCE AND PERSONNEL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211176684
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1619706%22
---

 `Y 1 e 1 I

 A

 I !.

 FRIDAY. JULY 14, 1989

 News Release  No 139/89 co AC)INWEA+ Ti-^ l'1I

 t

 P t.Et^lY4ENIT 

 's . RY L',  [ i tC

 AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS FOR MINE TRAINING MICA J

 Nine Australian soldiers leave for Pakistan tomorrow to join a United

 Nations group training Afghan refugees in mine awareness techniques.

 The Minister for Defence Science and Personnel, Mr David Simmons said

 today Australia had been asked to provide the specialists for the United

 Nations Mine Clearing Training Team (UNMCTT).

 "This is a purely humanitarian program aimed at providing refugees with

 the information they need to avoid the dangers of mines and other

 unexploded ordnance as they return to their homes in a former war zone,"

 he said.

 He emphasised the soldiers would not be involved in mine clearance or

 peacekeeping activities and would not be operating in Afghanistan.

 Australia is sending two four-man teams and a contingent commander for

 a period of four months. The Australians will be based at Peshawar,

 260 km from Islamabad and 80 km from the Pakistan/Afghanistan border,

 where numerous refugee camps are located.

 More than 4.5 million mines of some 30 different types are estimated to

 have been laid in Afghanistan.

 2

 Specialists from the United States, France and Turkey developed an

 instruction program earlier this year to train at least one person from

 each village in mine awareness and basic mine clearance techniques.

 In March and April, teams from Norway, Canada and New Zealand joined the

 program.

 The UNMCTT is conducting the operation, 'Salam', under the auspices of the

 Office of the Co-ordinator for the United Nations Humanitarian and

 Economic Assistance Programs relating to Afghanistan.

 Mr Simmons said the Australians, all experienced mine-warfare

 instructors, would supplement their existing knowledge during a two-week training course in Pakistan before beginning the training of refugees.

 The refugee courses are likely to begin early next month and continue at

 about two a month.

 "Australia has a fine history of service with the UN," he said.

 "Australian soldiers are currently serving as observers in Iran and in

 Lebanon/Syria/Israel, while police officers in Cyprus and the 304-man

 engineer contingent in Namibia continue to enhance our international

 reputation."

 Further Information:

 Ministerial Rob Tonkin (b/h) (062) 777660

 (a/h) (062) 512959

 Departmental Lieutenant Colonel Ian Edwardson (b/h) (062) 654065

 (a/h) (062) 881908

