---
title: "Indo-Chinese Refugee Conference"
date: "1989-06-16"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214060463
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08018485%22
---

 PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA 

 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE  CANBERRA. A.C.T. 2600  TEL. 77 711 1

 PHILIP RUDDOCK. MP SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 INDO-CHINESE REFUGEE CONFERENCE

 P R E S S  S T A T E M E N T

 The issue of forced repatriation of Vietnamese displaced persons  and refugees was always the most contentious matter to be  addressed in Geneva. The draft comprehensive plan of action made  it clear that every effort should be made to encourage the  voluntary return of displaced people who are determined not to be 

 refugees.  The steps that follow however, to require return  within the framework of existing international practices have  clearly been seen for what they are - involuntary repatriation.

 Government representatives have obviously supported at the  International Conference involuntary repatriation, and argued  strongly for it.

 While the situation has changed over time, such that now many of  those leaving Vietnam can no longer be characterised as refugees  who are being genuinely persecuted for their political beliefs,  the Conference has declined to endorse coercive steps to enforce 

 return of any refugees.

 Australia has been spared the embarrassment that the adoption of  the comprehensive plan in its entirety may have brought about.

 The issue is not off the agenda. It is now to be re-examined in  October. The intervening time should be used positively to  implement the remaining elements of the comprehensive plan of  action and to examine methods in which the immediate and pressing  economic problems facing Vietnam are addressed.

 16 June 1989

 For further information contact: 77 4343.

