---
title: "Australia backs Commonwealth anti-propaganda measures against South Africa"
date: "1989-02-09"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214059152
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09030454%22
---

 ..MINISTER FOR MFOREIGN AFFAIRS FAND TRADE  AND TRADE NEWS RELEASE

 _ 9 February 1989  Dale

 CO.viMOiNWEA .T, i 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M ICAH

 AUSTRALIA BACKS COMMONWEALTH ANTI­ PROPAGANDA MEASURES AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA

 THE AUSTRALIAN MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE, SENATOR  GARETH EVANS, SAID TODAY AT THE COMMONWEALTH FOREIGN  MINISTE RS' MEETING IN HARARE THAT AUSTRALIA IS JOINING OTHER  COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENTS IN SUPPORTING THE TRAINING OF  SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNALISTS TO HELP COUNTERACT SOUTH AFRICAN 

 PROPAGANDA AND CENSORSHIP. HE NOTED THAT THE DEARTH OF  PROPERLY QUALIFIED JOURNALISTS, ESPECIALLY BLACK JOURNALISTS, IN SOUTH AFRICA L I M I T S  THE MEANS OF THE OPPONENTS OF APARTHEID 

 TO COUNTER SOUTH AFRICAN PROPAGANDA AND TO FA CILIT ATE BETTER  PUBLIC INFORMATION IN AND OUTSIDE SOUTH AFRICA.

 SENATOR EVANS SAID THAT AUSTRALIA'S ASSISTANCE TOTALLING  AU B $ 7 0 0 ,0 0 0  WOULD INCLUDE

 . A U 8 $ 3 0 0 , 0 0 0  FOR THREE-YEAR SCHOLARSHIPS FOR AUSTRALIAN FORMAL QUALIFICATIONS IN COMMUNICATIONS AND JOURNALISM, AS AN ADDITIONAL MEASURE IN THE GOVERNMENT'S SPECIAL  ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR SOUTH AFRICANS AND NAMIBIA 

 (SAPSAN) ·

 . A FURTHER AU B$ 4 0 0 ,0 0 0  UNDER THE SAPSAN PROGRAM TO PROVIDE  BURSARIES FOR STUDIES IN JOURNALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA ITSELF

 SENATOR EVANS ANNOUNCED THAT FUNDING FOR SAPSAN WILL RISE  FROM AUS$ 5  MILLION ORIGINALLY APPROVED IN 1986 TO OVER

 AU5$9 MIL LIO N BY 1 9 9 0 ,  IN RECOGNITION OF THE NEEDS OF PEOPLE  DISADVANTAGED BY APARTHEID. SAPSAN IS A PRACTICAL, POSITIVE  ELEMENT IN AUSTRALIA'S POLICIES AGAINST APARTHEID. ITS MAIN  AIM I S  TO PROVIDE EDUCATION AND TRAINING NOT OTHERWISE AVAILABLE 

 BECAUSE OF APARTHEID, FOR BLACK AND OTHER DISADVANTAGED PEOPLE.

 . IN 1 9 8 8 / 8 9  THE GOVERNMENT WILL PROVIDE AROUND  A U B $2 .3  M IL L IO N FOR SAPSAN.

 . LAST YEAR OVER 630 FULL AND PART SCHOLARSHIPS WERE PROVIDED  UNDER THE PROGRAM TO PEOPLE IN SOUTH AFRICA, IN NAMIBIA  AND1  W-REFUGEES IN THE AFRICAN FRONT LINE STATES, AND  15 AM6RDS IN AUSTRALIA.

 . OVER A U S $8 57,000 WAS MADE AVAILABLE FOR 25 PROJECTS RUN  BY AUSTRALIAN NON-GOVERNMENT AGENCIES, AND AUS$220,Q0G  TO INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS FOR EDUCATION AND  TRAINING AND FOR LEGAL ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS OF  DISCRIMINATORY SOUTH AFRICAN LEGISLATION.

 THE ASSISTANCE BEING GIVEN UNDER THE JOURNALIST I N I T I A T I V E  AND  SAPSAN FORMS PART OF AUSTRALIA'S OVERSEAS AID PROGRAM  ADMINISTERED BY THE AUSTRALIAN INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT  ASSISTANCE BUREAU.

 HARARE 8 FEBRUARY 1989

