---
title: "International conference on Indo-Chinese refugees"
date: "1989-06-13"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214060412
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09030367%22
---

 i h MINISTER FOR 

 FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND TRADE

 *

 .AUSTRALIA./.

 NEW SRELEA£EE

 Date 14 June 1989

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE 

 ON INDO-CHINESE REFUGEES

 STATEMENT BY THE AUSTRALIAN 

 DELEGATION

 ,  Delivered by

 '  Senator the Honourable Gareth Evans QC

 Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade

 ÎŠ

 ;  Geneva, 13 June 1989

 i

 i

 I . '· 

 1  *****

 V

 Statement by the Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs and 

 Trade, Senator Gareth Evans QC, to·the International Conference 

 on Indo-Chinese Refugees, Geneva, 13 June 1989

 Mr President, I would like to commence by congratulating you on 

 your election as President of this Conference. It is a 

 recognition both of your outstanding personal skills and of the 

 role Malaysia has played over the last decade as a major 

 country of first asylum and, more recently, as host of the 

 March Preparatory meeting which paved the way for this 

 Conference.

 It is now ten years since the international community first met 

 in an international conference to discuss ways of coping with 

 the pressing humanitarian problem of Indo-Chinese refugees. 

 Australia was an active participant at that Conference, as we 

 ;  have been active since 1975, in seeking to assist those who 

 |  have chosen to leave Indo-China. Our efforts have been 

 ,  directed at resettlement as well as providing financial

 assistance, ,

 Australia1s principal response has been in the area of 

 resettlement. Since 1975, Australia has accepted nearly 

 120,000 Indo-Chinese refugees. Although these new settlers to 

 1  our shores have undoubtedly made a major economic and social 

 I contribution to Australia, their arrival has not been costI  â– free. The coat to the Australian community has in fact been  .  some $700 million, in present day terms, for initial transport 

 and settlement expenses alone. The number we have resettled

 i

 2 .

 i

 represents some 9% of all those resettled In the West and, on a 

 per capita basis, is the highest of all resettlement 

 countries. Australia has also accepted another 13,600 persons 

 directly from Viet am under cur bilateral Vietnam Migration 

 Program. In addition, in the last four years alone Australia 

 has provided food and cash aid contributions amounting to $9 

 million for Indo-Chinese refugee programs.

 Thanks to the efforts of the international community - the 

 first asylum countries, countries of resettlement, the UNHCR 

 and non government organisations - much has been done in the 

 last decade to bring this humanitarian problem under control. 

 But despite these efforts, and despite the fact that it is now 

 14 years since the decades of war and suffering in Vietnam and 

 Laos came to an end, the outflow continues and the numbers of 

 asylum seekers have increased dramatically over the past few 

 years. Many thousands of people have chosen to leave their own 

 countries in life-threatening circumstances. Many have lost 

 their lives. The problem which has thus been created is tragic 

 in its human consequences and corrosive in its political 

 effects.

 At the same time, it is patently clear to my delegation and, we 

 believe, to the great majority of delegations assembled here 

 today, that the nature of the outflow from Indo-China has 

 changed. The resettlement strategy adopted ten years ago, 

 which was designed to provide a generous and humanitarian 

 response to genuine refugees, is no longer a complete 

 solution. Indeed, it has in a sense become part of the 

 problem. The belief in the ultimate inevitability of 

 resettlement has become the cause of departure of many persons 

 who are not refugees but whose motivation for leaving is 

 clearly economic - who are chasing a dream of a better life 

 elsewhere.

 The Australian Government believes that the recognition of the 

 change in the nature of the outflow has been at the centre of 

 the international community's endeavours to develop a

 3

 Comprehensive Plan of Action over the last twelve months. In 

 considering the Comprehensive Plan, one point needs to be 

 remembered: the inter*-relationship and interdependence of all

 aspects of the Comprehensive Plan is critical to its success. 

 All parties to the Comprehensive Plan of Action are making 

 undertakings to assist in one way or another. The nexus 

 between deterring unsafe and unnecessary departures, the 

 provision of first asylum, screening, resettlement, and 

 improved orderly departure, is vital if we are to ensure that 

 those in Vietnam wishing to depart will now carefully reflect 

 on the realities they will confront when choosing between 

 clandestine and safe orderly departure.

 Under the Comprehensive Plan those people who arrive in a first 

 asylum country can expect to receive just and humane 

 treatment. But those who leave without bona fide refugee 

 claims will no longer be offered the option of third country 

 resettlement. The Comprehensive Plan of Action makes it clear 

 that those new arrivals in South East Asia after 14 March 1989, 

 and Hong Kong after 16 June 1988, who do not meet the criteria 

 for refugee status, will be required to return to Vietnam.

 The Comprehensive Plan does not close the door on genuine 

 refugees. Far from it. What it does is ensure that persons 

 who are not refugees do not take advantage of programs intended 

 for refugees. For Australia an important principle is at 

 stake here. Each year we have to reject migration 

 applications from over one million people around the world.

 It is simply unfair to those applicants, and unfair to those 

 with genuine claims to refugee status, for persons who are not 

 genuine refugees to seek resettlement under refugee programs.

 We will not accept a situation where resettlement rather than 

 return of non-refugees is contemplated.

 Australia however considers it essential that those who must 

 return do so under conditions of safety and dignity, and

 without being made the subject of Recriminatory or retaliatory 

 action. For its part Australia will join others in ensuring 

 that return takes place under these conditions, whether by way 

 of bilaterally negotiated arrangements, monitoring by 

 appropriate international organisations or some combination of 

 the two.

 There are those who remain sceptical as to whether such 

 conditions can ever be satisfied. But to take this view is to 

 fail to appreciate the significant changes which have occurred 

 in South Bast Asia and Vietnam over the last several years.

 Progress towards a Cambodian settlement with Vietnam's 

 commitment to withdraw its troops by September; the growing 

 rapprochement between Vietnam and the ASEAN States; Vietnamese 

 interest in economic reform; and the increasing numbers of 

 Vietnamese who are already returning to Vietnam as visitors, 

 all herald a move towards the normalisation of relationships in 

 the region and the full acceptance of Vietnam into the 

 international community.

 The Australian Government believes we have now come to a 

 critical point in addressing the continuing humanitarian 

 problem of people leaving Vietnam by boat. It believes the 

 Comprehensive Plan of Action which we will be considering over 

 the next two days has the capacity, provided it is accompanied 

 by effective implementation measures, to provide the right mix 

 of measures in order to achieve a realistic and humane response 

 to the outflow from Vietnam.

 In recent months departures by boat have again reached record 

 levels with, in May alone, nearly 10,000 people arriving in 

 Hong Kong and creating a problem of crisis proportions for the 

 authorities there. And other countries of first asylum are 

 again feeling, as they did ten years ago, an inability to cope 

 with the size and nature of the continuing inflow. Through the

 <  ·

 5.

 Comprehensive Plan, we can reassures them of the international 

 community's willingness to assist in dealing with this major 

 problem. Countries willing to provide resettlement have an 

 important role to play in relieving the pressure on the 

 countries who have provided first asylum. Likewise, the i introduction of screening has a pivotal role to play in that it 

 will lead to an early, durable solution for those who arrive 

 with a genuine refugee claim.

 At the same time the inevitability of return to Vietnam of 

 those people who do not have valid refugee claims is no less 

 important to a durable solution. Indeed for Australia it is 

 crucial. Although the issue is not as comprehensively 

 addressed in the Plan document itself as we would prefer, it is 

 an essential element of the Comprehensive Plan of Action.

 In commending the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan of Action 

 to this conference, I wish to reinforce to the international 

 community that we cannot just selectively agree to one or two 

 of its components, without fully agreeing to all its other 

 parts. In the lead-up to this conference there have been some 

 differences of view over certain issues, but particularly the '  

 issue of return and how it is to be achieved. I wish to state 

 firmly on the record that the Comprehensive Plan will not work 

 unless return is quickly implemented for those who have been 

 screened out under agreed screening procedures and acceptable 

 conditions.

 The reality that we must all acknowledge is that there are many 

 Vietnamese who will simply not be willing to wait in the 

 Orderly Departure queue, and who will go on chasing the dream 

 of a life elsewhere so long as the prospect of ultimate 

 resettlement has not been absolutely excluded. And until we 

 clearly draw that line, so as to make it clear that return of 

 those trying to jump the queue is inevitable, that dream will 

 remain a nightmare for the countries of the region who have to 

 cope with the consequences.

 6

 U

 y

 It is important to appreciate in ail of this that the process 

 of return I am talking about involves no departure from present 

 international law or practice. Where people arrive at a border 

 without documentation or a credible claim to refugee status 

 they must return to their homeland. For this to be the case in 

 the future for those leaving Indo-China involves no new 

 principle and no new practice: it is international practice.

 And provided the return takes place, as I have already said, 

 under conditions of safety and dignity, nor does it involve any 

 breach of internationally accepted human rights standards.

 Another essential part of the Comprehensive Plan of Action is 

 that countries of first asylum should no longer have to bear 

 the burden of the existing camp populations. As part of its 

 contribution to the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan of 

 Action Australia will over three years take up to 11,000 of 

 those people already in camps prior to the 16 June 1988 (Hong 

 Kong) and 14 March 1989 (ASEAN) cut-off dates. Australia will 

 also continue to accept a generous proportion of those people 

 who seek first asylum and are properly determined to be

 refugees. We do not expect the latter numbers to be large. .1 *

 This commitment by Australia to take up to 20% of the 

 pre-cut-off date population is, however, conditional upon all 

 other parties to the comprehensive plan doing their fair 

 share. This undertaking has been deliberately set at a 

 generous level,proportionately well above our historical 

 resettlement levels (generous as they in turn have been), in 

 order to demonstrate Australia's commitment to the 

 Comprehensive Plan of Action. The Australian Government will 

 regularly review countries' undertakings under the 

 Comprehensive Plan and will re-evaluate its responses 

 accordingly.

 There is a further important component of the Plan: safe 

 alternative means of departure. The Australian Government

 7

 believes that people in Vietnam who meet third country 

 immigration criteria should be allowed to leave. We have been 

 pleased with Vietnam's willingness over the last two years to 

 improve the processing of such people with family in 

 ,Australia. But still more needs to be done. The Plan provides 

 a framework for improved# accelerated and expanded regular 

 departure procedures. ·

 in accordance with this, Australia will be proposing a further 

 round of bilateral discussions with the Government of Vietnam 

 to find further ways to solve the outstanding problems. We 

 believe that a total monthly departure figure from Vietnam to 

 all countries of 6,000 people is realistic, and that achieving 

 this objective would do much to encourage people still in 

 Vietnam to wait for emigration rather than risk a dangerous 

 voyage only to be returned to Vietnam. _

 Another question that needs detailed consideration is the 

 equitable burden sharing of the very significant costs which 

 are involved in the return of persons to their country of 

 origin and in the resettlement of persons who arrived in camps 

 before the cut-off dates. The cost of resettlement of the 

 eligible 55,000 currently in camps would itself be likely to 

 exceed $250 million, taking into account only basic 

 pre-embarkation, transport and initial settlement expenses. 

 There are also significant costs which will be incurred for 

 those who will be returning to their country of origin. To 

 date, the international community has only been asked to 

 contribute a small fraction of these costs. Accordingly 

 Australia proposes the establishment of an international fund 

 which would be available to meet a larger proportion of these 

 various costs than are currently addressed. We would expect 

 that those countries which find themselves unable to 

 participate in equitable burden sharing under other elements of 

 the plan would contribute fairly to this fund. If such a fund 

 were to be established, Australia would of course be prepared 

 to contribute its fair share.

 I would like to conclude by lending Australia's support to 

 several other proposals which have been canvassed Informally. I 

 would like to urge the development of a comprehensive 

 Chairman's statement on the outcome of this Conference. We 

 ,  already have an agreed agenda which includes a proposal to 

 adopt the Comprehensive Plan of Action. But, in Australia's 

 view, we need to go further: to develop and implement a

 timetable which brings together in an appropriate way all the 

 obligations and commitments under the Comprehensive Plan of 

 Action, as considered during the Third Co-ordinating Committee 

 Meeting held in Geneva on 26 May 1989.

 Another issue which we hope your statement will address is the 

 importance of harmonizing with the Plan arrangements 

 established for those rescued at sea, in respect to which I 

 understand that there have also been promising discussions.

 We also hope that your statement will make clear your 

 understanding of the role of the Steering Committee that is to 

 be established under the Plan. In our view the Steering 

 Committee has a quite crucial role in carrying forward the ,  

 implementation of the Plan, and in that context addressing all 

 the issues I have referred to as requiring attention.

 We do the plight of refugees no service, nor do we advance the 

 prospects of resettlement for those genuinely fleeing 

 persecution, if our programs for return and resettlement are 

 open to abuse. The. Comprehensive Plan of Action, properly and 

 gfieCtlYely injplfimflnfpfl 1n the way T have indicated, is net a 

 program which sacrifices humanitarianism to convenience. It 

 represents a co-ordinated response by the international 

 community which seeks to meet - quickly and generously - the 

 humanitarian needs of genuine refugees. It deserves the 

 support of all of us. _

