---
title: "7000 New Citizens for Australia"
date: "1989-01-25"
creators:
  - "Ray, Robert"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214058988
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09030703%22
---

 Minister for  Immigration  Local Government  and Ethnic Affairs

 Senator the Hon. Robert Ray

 Parliament House,  Canberra, ACT, 2600  Phone: (062) 77-7860 

 Fax: (062)73-4144

 4 Treasury Place,  Melbourne, Vic. 3002  Phone: (03) 650-4479  Fax: (03)650-9106

 MPS 1 0 / 8 9

 7000 NEW CITIZENS FOR AUSTRALIA

 There w ill be another 7000 new c itiz e n s  in A u s tra lia  by the   end of the A u s tra lia  Day weekend, the M in iste r fo r   Im m igration, Local Government and Ethnic A ffa irs  announced  today.

 C itize n s h ip  ceremonies w ill take place a ll over A u s tra lia ,   s ta rtin g  to n ig h t (25th January) w ith a number of tw ilig h t   ceremonies and culm inating w ith several ceremonies on Monday  (the o f f i c ia l  public holiday in most S ta te s ).

 N a tio n a lly  there w ill be some 200 c itiz e n s h ip  ceremonies,  from small p riv a te  ceremonies fo r in d iv id u a ls , to community  events including fla g -r a is in g  ceremonies, C itiz e n  of the   Year awards, and breakfasts and barbecues.

 "We sh all now have another 7000 new A ustralians from  countries a ll over the world showing th e ir  en th u siastic   commitment to  A u s tra lia " , the M in is te r said today. "Well  over 50 d iffe r e n t n a tio n a litie s  w ill now be united as 

 A u stralian s.

 "Becoming a c itiz e n  of the country you have chosen to liv e   in is  always a s ig n ific a n t and special event; to take the  

 pledge of alle g ia n c e  on our n atio n al day makes i t  even more  memorable. I  congratulate them on th e ir  choice and welcome  them as c itiz e n s .

 Around the States:

 . On Saibai Island -  a dot on the map strad d lin g  the  

 Papua New G uinea/A ustralian border, a stone’ s throw  from PNG -  the Island Chairman w ill o f f ic ia t e  a t a 

 ceremony tomorrow fo r ju s t one new c itiz e n  -  a Papua  New Guinean woman who came to  A u s tra lia  ten years ago.

 . In Western A u s tra lia  tomorrow, my Department’ s State D ire c to r David J o lly  w ill conduct a p riv a te  ceremony a t   a Perth home fo r an e ld e r ly , bedridden women from New  Zealand. This follow s to n ig h t’ s ceremony a t the It a lia n   Club of WA fo r 39 new c itiz e n s  in the presence of the   Premier, and other d ig n a to ries including Mr Kim Beazley  Snr.

 . in South A u s tra lia  50 members of the F a ir fie ld  

 Gardens Community Club -  49 B ritis h -b o rn  and one  Ita lia n -b o rn  member -  w ill pledge th e ir  alleg ian ce

 to g eth er. Across the S ta te , over 1000 people from 49  n a tio n a litie s  w ill become c itiz e n s .

 . In Brisbane, 88 year old Mrs Gladys Burgess, her son Mr 

 John Burgess and her daughter Mrs Pamela Shaw, who  a rriv e d  in A u s tra lia  in 1952, are among the candidates,  as are a Vietnamese refugee fam ily of f iv e . Queensland  w ill welcome some 1500 candidates in 30 ceremonies, 

 including Mt Is a  and Caboolture.

 . In Tamworth, New South Wales, the Prime M in is te r w ill attend a ceremony tomorrow during the  annual Country Music F e s tiv a l. Another notable   ceremony w ill be held a t The Rocks in Sydney, and  around the S tate more than 1500 w ill swear th e ir   alle g ia n c e  in some 50 ceremonies.

 . At an open-air ceremony in the A .C .T ., the

 G overnal-G eneral, S ir Ninian Stephen, w ill present  c e r tific a te s  to  a 118 new A u stralian s, including twin   s is te rs  and several fam ily groups. There w ill be seven  ceremonies involving n early 200 candidates in the  

 re g io n .

 . in V ic to ria  n early 2000 people from some 35 

 n a tio n a litie s  w ill take the oath or swear an 

 a ffirm a tio n .

 . In Tasmania the 8 year old Vietnamese-born adopted daughter of former Deputy Prime M in iste r Lance Barnard  w ill be among the candidates. At le a s t fiv e  ceremonies  w ill be held over the weekend.

 . in the Northern T e rr ito ry  th ere w ill be ten ceremonies 

 fo r 160 new c itiz e n s , including A lice Springs, Jabiru,  and Groote Eylandt. The biggest w ill be in Darwin,  where over 100 candidates w ill attend.

 "This weekend w ill see A u stralian s celeb ratin g  th e ir   n atio n al day as one united group -  a national fa m ily . What 

 more f i t t i n g  occasion could there be to welcome new c itiz e n s   to  the fa m ily .

 " I hope a l l  the other migrants who are already e lig ib le  to  

 apply fo r c itiz e n s h ip  w i l l be encouraged to jo in  the fam ily   to o ."

 MELBOURNE, 25 JANUARY 1988

 Media contacts: Andrew Hockley M in is te r’ s o ffic e  03 650 4479

 Jenny Hoskin  DILGEA 062 64 2176

