---
title: "Australian Aid for Vietnamese boat people in Hong Kong"
date: "1989-06-06"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214060358
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09030374%22
---

 No. M " D a te  June 1989 7 3

 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MIC AH

 Australian aid for Vietnamese boat people in Hong Kong

 Vietnamese boat people in Hong Kong are to benefit from a $49,000  Australian aid grant, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator  Gareth Evans, announced today.

 More than 32,500 Vietnamese boat people are accommodated in camps  in Hong Kong and their numbers continue to grow. So far this year  Vietnamese boat people have been arriving in Hong Kong at well over  double the rate of the same period last year and the numbers are 

 accelerating.

 During his visit to Hong Kong in February, Senator Evans had the  opportunity to see the camps first hand. He expressed concern at the  difficult conditions and meagre facilities which were evident in the  camps.

 "I understand the gravity of the problem posed for the Hong Kong  authorities by the huge number of people arriving from Vietnam.  However, I am particularly concerned at the well-being of the many  families and children in the camps," Senator Evans said.

 Senator Evans noted that Australia's contribution will be channelled  through the Quaker Service Australia and will be used to improve  facilities for the 2900 people in the Tuen Mun camp.

 The funds will be used for humanitarian purposes, including the  purchase of a bus for transportation, library books, publishing  equipment for Vietnamese language materials, warm clothing and other  essential items.

 Australian emergency assistance for Vietnamese boat people in Hong  Korig forms part of the Government's overseas aid program  administered by the Australian International Development Assistance  Bureau (AIDAB).

 CANBERRA

 For further information contact Annmaree O'Keeffe, Director, AIDAB  Public Information. Tel: (062) 764960.

