---
title: "China brings new poignancy to Refugee Week"
date: "1989-06-16"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214060472
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08018483%22
---

 7 PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA 

 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE  CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600  TEL. 77 71 1 1

 lx

 PHILIP RUDDOCK". MP SHADOW MIMSTERX FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 ?^ v r l  --- CHINA BRINGS NEW POIGNANCY TO REFUGEE WEEK

 Already 12 million people are refugees. The troops in Tiananmen  Square have killed thousands; but tens of thousands around the world  who remain in fear of China's oppressive policies will now seek the  world's compassion.

 National Refugee Week reminds us that already many displaced people  live in squalid refugee camps with little future.

 Compassion fatigue is a term frequently raised in relation to  Indo-Chinese refugees. The.reality can be seen in the approach of the  British and Thai Governments at the recent conference in Geneva on  Vietnamese refugees in particular.

 Threats are made that large scale movements from Vietnam will be met  by force.

 The events in China have highlighted the totalitarian propensity of  Communist regimes. An almost schizophrenia approach is developing  vis-a-vis Indo-China and with Chinese refugees.

 Compassion fatigue is one obvious explanation. Examination of  individual claims, case by case, is the only way to deal with claims  for refugee status in a just way.

 Thus National Refugee Week is an important time for all Australians to  consider who are refugees. It is appropriate to remember people who  have or are suffering persecution and violation of their rights, in  their own country, and who are unable to control their lives.

 In recent years, the plight of many refugees have become widely known,  especially from those who suffered in Cambodia under Pol Pot.  Australia should still lend its support to people who are subjected to  such brutality, fear and persecution, and whose continued residence in 

 their country would put their lives at risk.

 Refugees who have come to Australia have made a great contribution to  our society. Future generations of these first refugees will continue  to add to our society.

 National Refugee Week is a time to increase the wider community's  knowledge, and broaden their perception on the plight of refugees.

 16 June 1989

