---
title: "Meeting with a delegation from Aust's Chinese community"
date: "1989-06-16"
creators:
  - "Hawke, Bob"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214060473
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02000547%22
---

 C O M M O N W EA LTH  

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M IC  AH

 PRIME MINISTER

 FOR MEDIA 16 JUNE 1989

 I welcomed the opportunity this morning to meet a delegation of  representatives of Australia's Chinese community and to hear their  views about the problems facing the community, and their relations  and friends in China, as a result of the current tragic situation 

 there.

 I used the opportunity provided by this meeting to announce a range  of important new Government initiatives designed to help ameliorate  some of these problems.

 The Government has now decided to extend all temporary entry  permits on application for a further 12 months (i.e. until July 31  1990), for all PRC nationals legally in Australia on June 4 this  year. In order to help them financially the students will be  entitled to work for up to 20 hours per week and will be allowed to  work full time should their courses finish during the 12 month 

 period.

 The Government appreciates the financial and other problems which  could face some Chinese nationals in Australia who do not have  access to social security, or Medicare. We are therefore looking 

 at ways in which these people's needs can be assisted by access to  the "special benefits" program administered by the Minister for  Social Security.

 I warmly applaud the fund raising efforts of Australia's Chinese  community. To help further these efforts the Government has now  given in-principle agreement to a $100,000 grant to provide  humanitarian assistance in China. That grant is on top of the  $200,000 already put aside for use in a possible Red Cross Appeal.

 I told the delegation that while visa processing, including of  student applications, is currently suspended, we hope that  processing will be resumed as soon as visa-issuing staff can safely  return to China. Arrangements are being made in the meantime for  abbreviated visa processing for urgent migrant cases involving 

 immediate family of Australian citizens and permanent residents.

 A Cabinet Submission is now being developed as a priority matter,  to deal with all aspects of PRC nationals in Australia (including  refugee status, grant of residence permit on humanitarian grounds,  family reunion issues and the possibility of refugee resettlement  for some PRC nationals overseas). There is a number of complex  matters that need to be addressed and these require Cabinet's  deliberation.

 The Government will continue to monitor developments in China and  their implications for our bilateral relationship carefully, and to  assess the possibility of further appropriate action, particularly  in regard to the human rights situation.

 74 43

