---
title: "Australian Aid for worldwide programs of UNHCR"
date: "1989-06-13"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214060409
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09030369%22
---

 No. M103 Date 13 June 1989

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 AUSTRALIAN AID FOR WORLDWIDE PROGRAMS OF UNHCR

 Australia will bring forward a contribution of $2.1 million to  the general program of the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees (UNHCR), the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade,  Senator Gareth Evans, announced in Geneva today.

 The funds are a part advance of Australia's annual core  contribution*  * *  *  *  * * * * *  to UNHCR. This follows an urgent appeal from  UNHCR for donations to meet a shortfall in funding of at least  US $20m, brought about by increased refugee and returnee needs.

 "The funds will assist UNHCR to continue with basic programs  for refugees which are at present under threat because of  insufficient funds," Senator Evans said. "Australia has a duty  and a responsibility to support UNHCR in its humanitarian  endeavours".

 Senator Evans also said that the contribution was an initial  response to the UNHCR appeal. Consideration of further  assistance will be given in the light of a continuing  '  assessment of UNHCR's funding situation.

 :  Australian assistance to the UNHCR forms part of the  Government's overseas aid program administered by the  ,  Australian International Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB).

 *In January 1989, Australia paid a core contribution to UNHCR of $4.9 million for its refugee activities in 1989. The present $2.1 million contribution is an advance of the payment due in January 1990.

 CANBERRA

 For further information, contact Annmaree O'Keeffe, Director,  Public Information, AIDAB, tel: (062) 76 4960.

 *****

