---
title: "Australian development cooperation with Indonesia and the Philippines to total $140 million in 1990/91"
date: "1990-09-27"
creators:
  - "Blewett, Neal"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214093448
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021573%22
---

 MINISTER FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE NEWS RELEASE

 V  #

 M l 6 3  2 7  S e p t e m b e r  1 9 9 0

 Australian development cooperation with Indonesia and the  Philippines to total $140 million in 1990/91

 Australian development cooperation activities in Indonesia and the  Philippines will total more than $140 million in 1990/91, the Acting  Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Neal Blewett, announced today.

 Dr Blewett's announcement followed recent consultations in Canberra  between officials from Australia, Indonesia and the Philippines which  discussed key development needs and ongoing and new projects.

 Dr Blewett said that Australia had allocated more than $100m for  development cooperation with Indonesia and approximately $40m for  the Philippines.

 "According to OECD figures on bilateral development donors, Australia  now ranks fourth in Indonesia and third in the Philippines," Dr Blewett  said.

 "The significant levels of development cooperation demonstrate the  growing importance of Australia's regional role and relationships.

 "These development relationships have significant benefits for  Indonesia and the Philippines as well as Australian suppliers of goods  and services."

 All three governments agreed that the principles of sustainable  development and environmental protection were essential to the  development process.

 A major challenge was the alleviation of poverty. Priorities would  include the development of human resources and enhancing the role of  women, based on evidence that education was one of the most effective  factors in improving the quality of life in developing countries.

 Dr Blewett said Australian development cooperation activities would  have an important focus on Eastern Indonesia, including East Timor. The  assistance was being provided in line with Indonesia's current five year  development plan.

 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 Development activities would include the Eastern Universities Project,  two Technical-and Vocational Education Projects and forestry,  sanitation anoL water supply projects.

 Australian funds were also being provided for scholarships, agricultural  research, refugee programs and volunteer agencies.

 In the Philippines, Australia would work with the Philippines  Environmental Management Bureau to strengthen environmental impact  assessment procedures, reflecting concern at problems of  environmental degragation.

 Other activities in the Philippines with Australian involvement  included: a water supply and sanitation project with an emphasis on  community health in the Central Visayas region ($15 million);  agricultural extension services in farming and fishing in Luzon and 

 Northern Mindanao ($9 million over five years); scholarships;  agricultural research; earthquake relief; and community development  activities through non-government organisations.

 Future development cooperation with the Philippines would emphasise  activities in community development, health, agriculture and energy  sectors.

 Australian development cooperation activities in the region are  managed by the Australian International Development Assistance Bureau  (AIDAB).

 CANBERRA

 For further information contact Ali Gillies, Director of AIDAB Public  Information on (06) 276 4960.

 v

