---
title: "Federal budget hurts migrants and ethnic communities - Powell"
date: "1990-09-08"
creators:
  - "Powell, Janet"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214093106
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04009006%22
---

 6y

 MEDIA RELEASE SENATOR JANET POW ELL LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS PA R L IA M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L IA  · T H E  S E N A T E Embargoed for release at 7 PM, Saturday 8 September 1990

 FEDERAL BUDGET HURTS MIGRANTS AND ETHNIC COMMUNITIES - POWELL

 Australian Democrats Leader, Senator Janet Powell, has strongly criticised the Federal  Government over its lack of funding for assistance programmes for migrants and ethnic  communities.

 Addressing the Annual Conference of Federated Ethnic Communities Councils· in Darwin  tonight, Senator Powell said: "The Hawke Government has turned away from the ideal of a multicultural society, and has succumbed to penny-pinching ad-hockery. Last month’s  budget represents a turning away from the Government's commitment to the recognition  of the challenges arising from a multicultural society through the maintenance of  languages and culture, and a watering down of its ‘National Agenda for a Multicultural  Australia’."

 "The ad hoc approach is exemplified in its questionable decision on the Chinese  students in Australia. The Democrats believe it would have been better to process  these people on a case by case basis to establish genuine refugee status, rather than 

 creating a class which includes people who do not meet refugee criteria, and excludes  others who do."

 Senator Powell said: "This discriminatory approach is also apparent in the regulations  which allow foreign pilots to by-pass the usual requirements for employees from  overseas, giving them permanent residential status. This action was taken in the midst 

 of a court hearing, and seems to have been an attempt to circumvent the possibility of  an adverse decision. Such interference with the judicial process is unacceptable, and  the Democrats arc likely to take action on this issue in the Parliament."

 "The Government's inconsistency is starkly revealed in the case of the Cambodia boat  people. They have risked their lives to reach Australia and wish to remain here until  their homeland is more peaceful. Yet, the Prime Minister has labelled them ‘Economic  Refugees’, and there is evidence of a secret deal between the Australian and Cambodian 

 Governments to forcibly repatriate them. There are considerable numbers of Burmese in  Australia who suffer under similar circumstances."

 "Over recent years, both Labor and Liberal Governments have failed to adequately  address the issue of illegal immigrants. Recent estimates put their numbers at between  90,000 and 150,000. Finally, the Government is increasing funding for immigration 

 compliance, a move which will safeguard the integrity of the Australian Immigration  Programme, and one which is welcomed by the Democrats," Senator Powell said.

 "Cutting back social justice policies to resuscitate Mr. Keating’s failed economic  policies, causing a squeeze on government programmes and resources, is not the answer.  Ethnic communities now realise that the Australian Democrats are the only effective  opposition to the Government's market orientated abdication of responsibility. Our  priorities are directed to achieving a just and fair society, a sustainable  environment and economic responsibility," Senator Powell concluded

 Further comment: Senator Janet Powell (089) 819 200  Senator Sid Spindler, Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Spokcspcrsoi  (03) 614-3791 (W) (03) 848-5546 (II>

 COMMONWEALTH 

 P A R L I A M E N T A R Y  L I B R A R Y   MICAH

