---
title: "Cambodian boat people are not pawns"
date: "1990-07-16"
creators:
  - "Spindler, Sid"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214092026
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04009076%22
---

 SENATOR SID SPINDLER  AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRAT 

 SENATOR FOR VICTORIA 

 M E D IA  RELEASE

 PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA · THE SENATE

 16 July, 1990 PR 90/273

 CAMBODIAN BOAT PEOPLE ARE NOT FAWNS

 "Mr Hewson's suggestion that the Cambodian boat-people currently  in Australia be sent back as a means of controlling the flow of  refugees is cynical politics at its worst,M Democrat Senator Sid  Spindler, spokesperson on Immigration and Ethnic Affairs said  today.

 "Cambodian boat people who do not meet the criteria of refugee  should be given temporary asylum until the situation in Cambodia  can be clearly assessed." Senator Spindler said.

 "It is unlikely that these people who have risked their lives  to reach Australia will agree to return to Cambodia and therefore  would have to be forcibly repatriated to Cambodia where civil  war is raging and the future is uncertain. It would be contrary 

 to all standards of international justice and just plain decency  to compel these people to return when their lives would be at  risk," Senator Spindler said.

 "The immigration Department is already facing problems over its  strict interpretation of the definition of "refugee" and  "humanitarian" cases.  Their approach has been challenged by the  Courts and there have been a substantial number of successful 

 appeals. These challenges are likely to continue while the  guidelines are being developed."

 "Meanwhile the Cambodian boat people should get the same  humanitarian treatment the Chinese students received and should  not be used as tools for international negotiations, or as  scapegoats for departmental bungling," Senator Spindler  concluded.

 For further information:

 Senator Sid Spindler (03) 614 3791 (W)

 AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRAT SPOKESPERSON O N : TREASURY. FINANCE. TRADE: IMMIGRATION 6  ETHNIC AFFAIRS; ATTORNEY-GENERAL & JUSTICE

 (03) 848 5546 (H)

