---
title: "Press edicts on migration are a mixed brew"
date: "1990-06-28"
creators:
  - "Jenkins, Jean"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091713
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04008806%22
---

 (1

 MEDIA RELEASE

 SENATOR JEAN JENKINS

 1 H t  S E N A T E

 A U S T R A L I A N  D E M O C R A T S   S E N A T O R  F O R  WA

 P R 9 0 - FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 

 Perth, 2g June, 1990

 PRESS EDICTS ON MIGRATION ARE A MIXED BREW

 The Australian Democrats’ deputy leader and spokesperson  on immigration, Senator Jean Jenkins, made a wary and  lukewarm response to the Government’s latest changes to 

 its proposals for Chinese nationals and intake levels.

 ’’While not opposing a decrease of 14,000 in immigrant  numbers, I am most disappointed that the Government  intends to slash current family reunion and refugee  programs by 7,000 and 3,000 respectively while 

 continuing with an excessive intake of business and  skilled migrants.

 "Continuing to solicit for skilled migrants is simply  not in the interests of unemployed workers or the wider  community at present," Senator Jenkins said.

 "However, in the Prime Minister’s edict on the future of  Chinese nationals, there are some indications that the  Government realises it must ’bite the bullet’ in respect  to treatment of refugee and humanitarian migration.

 "Both the Government and the Coalition Opposition  refused to discuss such matters only a year ago when I  sought extensive amendments to the draconian legislation  to which they had both agreed," Senator Jenkins said.

 "It now seems that, because of the Tienanmen Square  incident and recent court victories by refugee appellants  the Government is going to modify the insensitive,  gung-ho stance of former Minister Robert Ray," she said.

 more 

 COMMONWEALTH parliam entary  library  MiCAH

 -  2 -

 ’’While we have yet to see and approve Mr Hawke’s new  refugee legislation, today’s press release is a step in  the right direction. However, it is wrong to create a  special category for Chinese nationals when, for  instance, there is a handful of visitors from Myanmar 

 (Burma) who also justly fear for their lives if they are  returned to their homeland,” Senator Jenkins said.

 She added that the Democrats will be watching carefully  to ensure that the legislation in no way falls short of  the standards set by international conventions.

 ”1 am particularly gratified by the Government’s flagged  intention to abandon an absurd procedure of which I have  been strongly critical--gazetting countries as the basis  for acceptance of immigrants on a humanitarian basis.

 "The consideration of immediate temporary residence for  four years on refugee or humanitarian grounds as against  permanent residence was predictable, as I said earlier.

 "In spreading the suggestion that Chinese who arrived  after 20 June 1989 will not be eligible for his "special  4-year permit”, Mr Hawke seems to forget that those  Chinese will be able to apply for Mr Hand’s "humanitarian  4-year permit"," Senator Jenkins said.

 ENDS

 CONTACT: Jean Jenkins, 09 321 2110, a.h. 09 447 5882

