---
title: "Australia provides $250,000 to assist refugees in Jordan"
date: "1990-08-31"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214092973
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021586%22
---

 MINISTER FOR j f g f r 

 FOREIGN AFFAIRS v m w *

 AND TRADE NEWS RELEASE

 N ° ' m 1 4 9  . D a t e " '  ' 3 1  A u g u s t l 9 9 0

 Australia provides $250,000 to assist refugees in Jordan

 The Australian Government will provide $250,000 to assist Jordan to cope  with masses of foreign guest workers who have fled from Kuwait and Iraq,  the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans, 

 announced today. The funds will be channelled through the International  Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).

 "More than 220,000 people of various nationalities have crossed into Jordan,  propelled by the fear of open conflict in Kuwait and Iraq. They need food,  water and medicine, which Jordan cannot supply in such large quantities at  such short notice. Through ICRC, the Australian funds will help reduce the  strain, both for the refugees themselves, and for the Jordanian  Government," Senator Evans said.

 After consultation with the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies  (LRCRCS), ICRC is concentrating activities on three places near the  Jordan/Iraq border (Trabil, Ruweyshed and Azrak) and the general border  area itself. LRCRCS will concentrate on providing support for Jordanian  Red Crescent activities in the rest of the country.

 The ICRC relief effort will initially focus on provision of water, sanitation  facilities, first aid and medicine and food and other supplies. Two reception  posts with medical facilities have already been set up, and people are being  treated, mainly for dehydration. The ICRC is transporting water and has  erected several large tents for shelter from the blazing sun. Food parcels  may also be provided.

 Senator Evans explained "Australia's contribution has to be seen as part of a  broad international response to the crisis in the Gulf, focusing in this  instance on the repercussions for Jordan, with whom Australia has long 

 had a friendly relationship."

 Australian support for the ICRC programs for refugees in Jordan is part of  the Government's emergency aid program, administered by the Australian  international Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB).

 * * * * * *

 CANBERRA For further information, contact Annmaree O'Keeffe, Director, Refugees  and Disaster Coordination Section, AIDAB on (06) 276 4965 (w) 

 or (06) 281 3941 (h). .. -

 ' COMMONWEALTH .   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY   MICAH

