---
title: "Minister to visit camps in South-East Asia"
date: "1990-08-22"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214092792
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021894%22
---

 M e d ia  Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra. ACT 2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MINISTER TO VISIT CAMPS IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, will next week begin a visit to South­ East and East Asia to familiarise himself with the camps for  asylum seekers and hold discussions with senior officials on a 

 range of matters relating to Australia’s refugee program.

 Mr Hand leaves Australia at the weekend and will visit Indonesia,   Malaysia, Thailand and Hong Kong.

 Australia is a major resettlement country for refugees from the  camps in each of these countries.

 The Minister will also be holding discussions with UNHCR  representatives as well as relevant national Ministers and  officials.

 He will also be keen to inspect conditions and operating  procedures at the camps,  especially in the light of concerns  raised with him by Vietnamese community representatives in  Australia.

 The Minister's visit to the camps follows recent changes by the  Government to Australians refugee and humanitarian programs. Those changes ensure that people waiting in the camps for  resettlement in Australia are not disadvantaged by pressures from 

 on-shore asylum claimants.

 CANBERRA  August 22, 1990

 Media contact: Sharon O'Neill  (06) 277 7860

 Ilf) 7

 COMMONWEALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

