---
title: "Refugee determination"
date: "1990-06-20"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091582
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08020082%22
---

 P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A  

 H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S

 OFFICE OF PHILIP RUDDOCK, M.P. MEMBER FOR DUNDAS SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 SUITE 302 PARLIAMENT HOUSE

 EASTWOOD CENTRE CANBERRA. A.C.T. 2600 I 60 ROWE STREET TEL. C062) 777111

 EASTWOOD. N.S.W. 2122

 TEL. 858 1011 

 FAX. 804 6739

 PRESS STATEMENT

 REFUGEE DETERMINATION

 Proposals of the Government to legislate to clarify the role of  the Courts in reviewing the determination of refugee status will  be considered by the Opposition on their merits when available.

 It is well known that the Courts after Chan's case and other more  recent litigation have been more than willing to intervene in  what was primarily an administrative procedure.

 The result of this process could impact in a number of ways  including, encouragement to some to mount questionable cases for  refugee status.

 What is more apparent however is how ludicrous now it was for the  Prime Minister to speak about refugee matters in the uninformed  way he did last week, and how improper were his specific comments  about who was and who was not a genuine refugee.

 Now we have the Government trying to restore some sanity to the  discussion by way of the judicious leak or selective background  briefing.

 It is interesting that these matters are being canvassed in this  way while the practice of detailed briefing and consultation with  the Opposition wanes.

 20th June 1990

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

