---
title: "Major hurdles remain to Cambodia settlement"
date: "1990-10-02"
creators:
  - "Hill, Robert"
source: "Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214093498
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08019939%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE TMC SCNATt SENATOR ROBERT HILL 

 leader o f t h e  o p p o s it io n  in  t h e senate

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 Tuesday, October 2 Adelaide 58/90

 MAJOR HURDLES REMAIN TO CAMBODIA SETTLEMENT: HTT.T,

 The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Robert Hill,  today said Australia should be under no illusions that huge and  expensive hurdles do not remain to a comprehensive settlement in 

 C a m b o d i a .

 Senator Hill was speaking after discussions in New York with the  United Nations Under Secretary-General, Mr Rafeeuddin Ahmed, who  is the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on  Cambodia.

 "The mandate being set for the UN on Cambodia is unprecedented,"  Senator Hill said.

 "The UN itself has only a sketch of the military and 

 administrative dimensions which lie ahead.

 "Under an agreement of the Five Permanent Members of the Security  Council, a UN force would contain and disarm the Khmer factions.

 "But the scope of this challenge is still to be assessed because  no faction has been prepared to give force details to the UN.

 "A further exploratory mission by UN military advisers will be  necessary when the parties are prepared to give the required  information.

 "Major development of infrastructure - ports, roads, airfields,  communications - must take place before the military function can  start. .

 "About 300,000 refugees and displaced persons will have to be  returned and resettled.

 "Much of the country will first have to be cleared of mines, and  safety and security will need to be ensured.

 "The UN administration will be required to take over functions  of government, including internal security (which will involve  a large international police force), communications, finance,  foreign affairs and defence.

 "Finance will require the provision of the usual financial  structures of a nation state.

 '*·â–  V  /--v,;

 V 

 V

 2.

 "Nothing like this has ever been attempted before by the UN,

 "The administrative arm of the UN will also have to devise an  electoral system, supervise the registration of parties and  voters, provide an electoral commission, and conduct, supervise  and ensure free and fair elections.

 "Whether the UN can succeed will depend on the good faith and co­ operation of the four Khmer factions.

 "The factions could demonstrate the necessary new spirit by now  agreeing to a ceasefire.

 "The Khmer Rouge refused to take part in the most recent attempt  at a ceasefire during the Tokyo talks.

 "For those of us who remain sceptical about the Khmer Rouge's  intentions, a ceasefire would start the slow process of 

 confidence-building.

 "As Australia has played a positive role in the previous Paris  talks and in further developing the Secretary-General's plan, it  will be expected to make a significant contribution to the UN  military and administrative role and in the subsequent 

 reconstruction of Cambodia."

 Senator Hill congratulated the under Secretary-General and his  team on their efforts and perseverance on Cambodia.

 (ends)

 Further enquiries: Mark Batistich on (08) 237 7920

