---
title: "Cabinet should overrule Hawke on Chinese - democrat"
date: "1990-06-07"
creators:
  - "Jenkins, Jean"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091365
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04008799%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE________________________________________________  THE SENATE PR90-SENATORJEAN JENKINS

 AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS 

 SENATOR FOR WA

 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE   Perth, 7 June, 1990

 CABINET SHOULD OVERRULE HAWKE ON CHINESE— DEMOCRAT

 Prime Minister Hawke is guilty of making an irresponsible blanket   commitment to over 20,000 Chinese student visitors while seeming to   dismiss the claims of Cambodians to refugee status.

 This is the response of Australian Democrats deputy leader and   spokesperson on immigration to yesterday's statements by Mr Hawke.

 "I agree that it would be wrong for any of the Chinese to be sent   back against their will at the present time," Senator Jenkins said.

 "However, I expect that many of them will want to go back when the   current dictatorial Chinese regime is ousted or its senile leaders   die off. I do not think they will have very long to wait.

 "It would be sensible for Cabinet to ig more Mr Hawke's promises and  simply extend the visas of Chinese studlents who want that.

 "Those who seek refugee status would be best advised to apply for it   and be investigated on an individual basis in the normal way— the   same procedure being undergone by the Cambodian boat people.

 "By the same token, it is quite out of court for Mr Hawke or anyone   else to pre-empt the inquiries which are being made to determine   whether Cambodian boat people are political refugees or back-door   economic migrants," Senator Jenkins said.

 "This makes a complete mockery of the Government's pious statements   about removing immigration procedures from the realm of political   influence and ensuring decisions are based on rational criteria,"   Senator Jenkins said. _ _ _ _ _

 ends COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 Contact: JEAN JENKINS 09 321 2110 ah 09 447 5882

