---
title: "Australian wheat to help Afghan refugees in Pakistan"
date: "1990-12-12"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214094805
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021617%22
---

 No. < m215 Date .1 2  D e c e m b e r  1990 .

 Australian wheat to help Afghan refugees in Pakistan

 Australia is to supply over $3 million worth of wheat to the World Food  Programme (WFP) to assist Afghan refugees in Pakistan, the Minister  for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans, announced today.

 According to WFP statistics, there are currently over three million  Afghan refugees living in Pakistan. Senator Evans said that there is  still a substantial need for food aid to help the Afghan refugee  community.

 Australia has provided assistance to Afghan refugees in Pakistan since  1980, mainly in the form of food aid. To date, this assistance totals  approximately $55 million. The total amount of wheat that will be ~  needed next year is estimated at 480,000 tonnes, of which more than *  three-quarters is expected to be provided by international donors.  Australia’s present consignment amounts to 20,000 tonnes of wheat. 

 Freight costs will bring the total value of Australia's contribution to  about $4 million. ·

 "The level of Australia's support to the WFP program for Afghan  refugees in Pakistan is equal to the levels of aid we provided in the  three years to mid-1989," Senator Evans said. "It constitutes a  substantial contribution to the program."

 "Australia's support for this program is a clear demonstration of our  sympathy for the plight of the Afghan refugees, and of our appreciation  of the continuing burden they place on the Pakistan economy," Senator  Evans said.

 Australia's assistance to the WFP forms part of the Government's  overseas aid program administered by the Australian International  Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB).

 For further information contact Ali Gillies, Director, Public Information, AIDAB  Phone (06) 276 4960

 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

