---
title: "Australia's role in the new world order"
date: "1990-11-28"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214094534
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021628%22
---

 No. M205 Date: 28 November 1990

 AUSTRALIA'S ROLE IN THE NEW WORLD ORDER

 The following is the text of an address by the Minister for 

 Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans, to Melbourne 

 High School Speech Night, to be delivered at 8.00pm this 

 evening in Melbourne.

 EMBARGOED UNTIL 8.00PM

 *  *  *

 COMMONWEALTH   p a r l ia m e n t a r y  LIBRARY  MICA! I

 Address by Senator Gareth Evans, Minister for Foreign Affairs 

 and Trade, to Melbourne High School Speech Night, Melbourne, 

 28 November 1990.

 AUSTRALIA'S ROLE IN THE NEW WORLD ORDER

 My memory of these things is getting a little hazy after 

 thirty years, but the enduring image I retain of Speech Night 

 guests during my years at Melbourne High is of a procession of 

 silver-haired old boys, of varying degrees of notoriety, 

 proclaiming, with varying degrees of piety, that their school 

 days at Forrest Hill were the best days of their lives. Now 

 that kind of statement, when you think about it, is a pretty 

 implausible proposition for anyone to utter, and a confession 

 that X certainly don't propose to make: it implies that one's 

 career, not to mention one's personal life, has gone downhill 

 ever since!

 While that may well have been true, for all I know, of some of 

 the orators in question, a kinder diagnosis is that this kind 

 of familiar speech night rhetoric is simply a reflection of 

 the impact that good schools and good teachers do have on 

 people's lives, and the way in which that impact keeps on 

 echoing down the years. Certainly in my own case, I remain 

 immensely grateful for the way in which not just a succession 

 of Cadet Under-Officers gave me an early insight into the 

 mysteries of the military mind, but for the way in which a 

 series of first class teachers opened my eyes, in and out of 

 school hours, to a series of worlds I had barely imagined 

 before I came to Melbourne High: the worlds of history, 

 politics, philosophy, literature and the arts. Not least am I 

 grateful for the way in which I was encouraged to set my 

 sights on going on to University, something that no-one in my 

 family had until then remotely contemplated.

 XXIII/90

 2

 Melbourne High School in the late 50s and early 60s really was 

 full of larger than life personalities with splendid 

 idiosyncrasies of one kind or another - people like Norton 

 Hobson, Ben Munday, David Niven, Graham Worrall, Alan Inch, 

 Gerry Smart and Roy Barlow - who I am sure will be remembered 

 with affection by a lot of those here tonight who taught with 

 them, or were taught by them. I was tempted for a moment to 

 add Neville Drohan's name to that list, but - now that he has 

 become, to the delight of us all who care for the place, 

 School Principal - it would hardly be appropriate to concede 

 that he has ever had any idiosyncrasies at all!

 Not that I think your current Principal should be tempted to 

 follow a cult of non-personality to quite the same extent as 

 his predecessor in my time. Although an able and charming 

 man, W M Woodfull was utterly determined to ensure that no-one 

 should ever breathe mention that he had been, in an earlier 

 incarnation, one of Australia's greatest batsmen and Test 

 cricket captains, and indeed, with his leadership in the 

 bodyline series, a genuine national hero. Modesty is all very 

 well when one has something to be modest about - although I 

 don't think even that would be accepted in my own profession! 

 - but I think in Bill Woodfull's case it may have been just a 

 little overdone.

 * * *

 Rather than descend any further into my anecdotage, I thought 

 it might be better and safer for all of us if I were to talk 

 to you tonight, wearing my present hat as Australia's Minister 

 for Foreign Affairs and Trade, about the kind of world we are 

 now living in as we move into the last decade of the 20th 

 Century, and Australia's place in that world. These are 

 questions that I am constantly wrestling with, and there has 

 perhaps never been a more fascinating time to address them.

 They were questions which allowed a fairly straightforward set 

 of answers when I was a student at Melbourne High from 1958 to 

 1961. The developed world was divided into two armed camps, 

 led respectively by the United States and the Soviet Union:

 3

 the nuclear arms race was in full swing, the USSR had 

 established its complete dominance over Eastern Europe (most 

 recently in Hungary) and the Cold War was at its height. The 

 Berlin Wall, which symbolised more than anything else the 

 intensity and apparent permanence of that conflict, was in 

 fact built in 1961, when I was in Sixth Form. The countries 

 of Asia didn't count for a great deal in the global scheme of 

 things - although Japan was very much beginning to make its 

 economic presence felt. The line against communism had been 

 held in the Korean War, and the Vietnam War was still in the 

 future. The Third World generally didn't count at all. All 

 of the Pacific and nearly all of Africa still consisted of 

 European colonies, and the system of apartheid had become 

 completely entrenched in South Africa: the Sharpeville 

 massacre, which sent out the first real world-wide shockwaves 

 about the iniquities of that system, happened in 1960 when I 

 was in Fifth Form.

 Australia's place in the world, as defined by the Menzies 

 Government - which had already been in office longer than the 

 Hawke Government has been now when I arrived at Melbourne High 

 - was also straightforward. For the Prime Minister, we were 

 acolytes of the United States by defence necessity, but in 

 every other respects a country still "British to our 

 bootstraps". Our location in the Asia Pacific region was an 

 historical aberration: we were a cultural misfit trapped by 

 our geography. The White Australia immigration policy was 

 still in full swing, Papua New Guinea was our colony and 

 expected to remain so at least until the turn of the century, 

 and Asia was, at best, what you had to travel past to get to 

 Europe and, at worst, the source of dark and evil forces 

 putting Australia's whole future at risk.

 Australian diplomacy - which had reached a high point a decade 

 earlier when we played, through Dr Evatt, a major role in the 

 founding of the United Nations - had lapsed back into a 

 mixture of sycophancy and irrelevance. What mattered most was 

 not winning the respect of our region or the wider world, but

 4

 rather retaining the affection of our great and powerful 

 friends: only then could we be protected against the downward 

 thrust of Asian communism.

 The picture I have been sketching is one that is now almost 

 completely unrecognisable. It is well to remember, however, 

 just how much of the big change has been concentrated into the 

 last few years, and in particular the last two years - during 

 the time, in fact, that most students here tonight have been 

 at Melbourne High. The collapse of the USSR under the weight 

 of its own accumulated contradictions, the liberation of 

 Eastern Europe, the tearing down of the Berlin Wall, the 

 reunification of Germany and the end of the whole Cold War, 

 have all come with breathtaking speed. So too has the 

 imminent collapse of the apartheid system in South Africa, 

 under the weight of its own contradictions and injustices and 

 the impact of international pressure.

 So too, at breathtaking speed, has come the resurgence of the 

 role and authority of the United Nations, for decades reduced 

 to impotence by the effect of Cold War driven Security Council 

 vetoes, and now liberated from that constraint. That new 

 authority has been, of course, almost immediately put to 

 traumatic test by Iraq's invasion of Kuwait - the first great 

 test of post Cold War crisis management, and a test that may 

 well determine the course of world history for decades to 

 c o m e .

 Other changes have been occurring over a longer timeframe, but 

 their cumulative impact has been no less fundamental. A whole 

 new agenda of international issues - unrecognisable as such 

 thirty, twenty or even ten years ago - has come to occupy the 

 attention of Foreign Ministers and diplomats: the global 

 environment, international health issues like AIDS, 

 unregulated population flows, the drug trade. Communist 

 ideology, and communism as a threat, has for all practical 

 purposes had its day not only in Europe but in Asia and the 

 rest of the developing world as well - although a number of

 5

 internal developments still have to take their course in 

 China, North Korea and elsewhere. Britain, although still a 

 significant economic and political player, is rapidly becoming 

 merged into the new single Europe (more rapidly still with the 

 departure of Mrs Thatcher!), and it simply would not occur to 

 any Australian politician these days to think, as did Menzies, 

 of Britain's and our interests as indistinguishable. The 

 United States, while still unquestionably a superpower in its 

 own right, has less relative authority as other big nations, 

 and groups of nations, grow and develop, and is for this and 

 other reasons rethinking and reshaping its world-wide military 

 role, not least in our own Asia Pacific region. Japan is now 

 firmly established as the world's second most important 

 economic power, and the Asia-Pacific region as a whole is 

 becoming the centre of gravity of world production and trade: 

 Australia is no longer, geographically, on the outer fringes 

 of the developed world, but near the centre of one of its most 

 dynamic areas.

 As these tumultuous event unfold in the world around us, and 

 as the various certainties that have sustained us for the last 

 generation or more evaporate one by one, how should we in 

 Australia define our place in this new world? What kind of 

 role should we be playing over the next decade and beyond, as 

 the students here tonight leave school, choose careers, grow 

 to maturity and make their own contribution to the nation and 

 the world?

 To some extent the process of adjusting Australian foreign 

 policy to a new order of reality has been a continuing process 

 since the Whitlam Government began the task of sweeping away 

 the cobwebs in the early 1970s. But, with things moving as 

 fast as they have in recent years, particular responsibility 

 has fallen upon the shoulders of the Hawke Government to 

 define and articulate where we should be going.

 6

 Every country necessarily has to shape its foreign policy on 

 the basis of what is in its own national interest, and 

 Australia is no exception. That does not mean our foreign 

 policy has to be narrowly nationalistic or selfish in 

 character. It is in every country's national interest these 

 days to recognise the forces of internationalism that are at 

 work, and to respond creatively and effectively to them; and I 

 will also be suggesting that there is a very real place for 

 selflessness - or, if you like, for idealism - in the conduct 

 of international relations. In my view Australia has three 

 broad areas of national interest which we should be 

 simultaneously pursuing in our external relations, and I want 

 to say something about each in turn.

 The first such area is the protection of our own security. 

 That means acting in a. variety of ways to maintain a positive 

 security and strategic environment in our own Asia-Pacific 

 region, and also doing what we can to contribute to global 

 security.

 Security involves of course much more than military 

 preparedness, although the new policy of defence self-reliance 

 developed by Kim Beazley when Minister for Defence puts us in 

 much better shape in that respect than we have ever been - 

 much better able to look after ourselves without having to 

 rely on great and powerful friends. Security in a regional 

 context is best guaranteed when military capability is backed 

 by effective diplomacy and trade and other contacts - building 

 up a set of relationships, and networks of interdependence,  

 that will minimise the likelihood of conflict ever breaking 

 out. Our efforts, so far very successful, to get our 

 previously very volatile relationship with Indonesia back on 

 an even keel, can be seen, among other things, in that light. 

 Regional security also involves working to solve apparently 

 intractable regional problems - and our major effort over the 

 last year or so to solve the tragic conflict in Cambodia, an 

 effort which has been acknowledged world-wide for the

 7

 creativity - and stamina - with which we have pursued it, is a 

 major example of how Australia can help here.

 The contribution Australia can make, as a middle-sized power, 

 to global security is necessarily somewhat limited. But the 

 great issues of arms control and disarmament cannot be left 

 just to the superpowers to resolve, and Australia is nowadays 

 one of the most active countries in the world in pursuing - 

 through the United Nations and other negotiating forums - a 

 treaty completely outlawing the possession or use of chemical 

 weapons, the effective implementation of nuclear non­

 proliferation, and a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty. 

 Even though the Cold War is over, we still live in a world 

 where there are 50,000 nuclear warheads in existence, with a 

 destructive capacity of 800,000 Hiroshimas - or putting it 

 another way, 3.3 tonnes of TNT for every person on earth (not 

 insignificant when you think it would take less than half a 

 ton to blow up the whole of Melbourne High School - maybe even 

 less than that if the building is still in the state of repair 

 it was in my time!).

 Nobody needs to be reminded about the implications of chemical 

 weapons with the threat of war upon us in the Gulf. In acting 

 as we have done in response to the invasion of Kuwait - 

 sending naval ships to enforce the blockade, and giving every 

 support to the United Nations and the international community 

 as it struggles to bring Iraq to its senses (we all hope by 

 peaceful means, but by appropriate military action if that 

 does eventually become necessary), Australia is acting 

 squarely in defence of both global security and our long-term 

 regional security. The Gulf crisis is important, from our 

 perspective, not so much because of the interests of the Gulf 

 states immediately concerned, or the implications of the 

 crisis for world energy supplies, but simply because it does 

 represent - as I have already said - the first post-Cold War 

 test of crisis management. Regional bullies guilty of naked 

 territorial aggression simply have to be stopped by the 

 combined weight of United Nations and international reaction:

 8

 if they can get away with it in this case, no part of the 

 world will be safe from such bullying in the future.

 Australia's second major interest is in developing trade, 

 investment and economic cooperation. We have all become 

 conscious in recent years of the fragility of our external 

 account and the need to dramatically expand Australian exports 

 by improving our competitiveness (through domestic policy) and 

 improving the access of our goods to other countries (through 

 international trade diplomacy). Foreign policy and trade 

 policy are inextricably mixed together these days, and that 

 reality is now recognised by the amalgamation of the old 

 Departments of Foreign Affairs and Trade into a single new 

 ministry.

 Australia has embarked upon two very high profile 

 international initiatives in this area. One of them has won 

 us very real influence world-wide - our inauguration and 

 chairmanship of the "Cairns Group" of 14 agricultural 

 countries who push the banner of fair trade in policy battles 

 with the EC, United States and Japan. The second, which has 

 won us a good deal of respect in our own region, has been our 

 initiation last year of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation 

 (APEC) process. This is an idea about which people had been 

 making speeches for two and a half decades, but which 

 Australia brought to actual fruition, bringing together as we 

 did the twelve major trading countries of the region 

 (including the United States and Japan) to work together on 

 freeing up trade policy world-wide, freeing up trade within 

 the region, and working together on major cooperative projects 

 in areas like energy, transport and human resource 

 development.

 The remaining area of national interest which we pursue is 

 what I call, simply, Australia's interest in being, and being 

 seen to be, a good international citizen. There is, as I have 

 said, a whole new emerging area of international relations - a 

 "third agenda", to add to the familiar political and economic

 9

 ones - based on the growing realisation that there are a 

 series of major problems which countries cannot really solve 

 by themselves, because they are problems which need 

 cooperative international solution. Protection of the global 

 environment is the clearest example, and the one that has 

 captured the most popular imagination world-wide: everyone is 

 now conscious, in a way that simply was not the case a few 

 years ago, of the threats to the global climate from C02 and 

 other greenhouse gasses, and the danger of destruction of the 

 ozone layer. Australia is rapidly rising to prominence as a 

 very active country in promoting international solutions to 

 environmental problems, and not just on climate-related 

 issues. We have been a leader in the Pacific nations' fight 

 against driftnet, or "wall of death", fishing methods. And we 

 have been, with France, the world leader in promoting the move 

 to ban altogether mining and drilling activity in Antarctica, 

 that uniquely fragile and irreplaceable wilderness continent.

 Wearing our good international citizenship hat, we also work 

 directly, and in cooperation with other sympathetic nations, 

 to alleviate poverty in developing nations, to help resolve 

 the human tragedy of massive flows of refugees and displaced 

 persons, to try and grapple with international drug and health 

 problems, and to advance the cause of human rights in pursuit 

 of the values enshrined in the United Nations Charter and 

 Covenants.

 Australia is probably, in fact, the most active country in the 

 world in pursuing human rights issues on a bilateral basis: 

 for example in the last year (1989/90) alone we made direct 

 representations at ministerial or official level in relation 

 to 443 different groups or individuals in 87 different 

 countries. This kind of activity, together with the policy 

 positions we take in the United Nations, the leadership role 

 we have continued to take in the struggle against apartheid 

 (particularly within the Commonwealth, and particularly in 

 areas like sports boycotts and financial sanctions), and the 

 way in which we have shaped our relations with countries like

 10

 China after Tienanmen, all win us a great deal of credibility 

 and respect from the international community. But it is also 

 the kind of activity that most often causes diplomatic 

 difficulties and dilemmas for us: in human rights matters one 

 is always walking a tightrope between saying and doing too 

 much, and too little.

 The conduct of foreign affairs is about responding 

 realistically to the world as you find it: you cannot always 

 make, or remake, the world as you would like it to be. You 

 have to have trade relations with many regimes of which you 

 disapprove. You have to have working relations with many 

 forms of government that you think less than ideal. You have 

 to balance, as an Age editorial put it very nicely a few weeks 

 ago in the context of Australian policy on Fiji, the 

 "champion(ing) of international morality" against the 

 "pragmatic acceptance of irreversible fact". You sometimes 

 have to have a multi-track policy, seeking to send two or more 

 different signals at once: to adapt the immortal words of 

 Lyndon Baines Johnson, in this business you have to be able to 

 walk and chew gum at the same time! In international 

 relations the luxury of absolutism is denied to its 

 practitioners:  that luxury is available only to those who 

 write and talk about us - in the press, the universities (dare 

 I say schools as well?) and elsewhere.

 For Australia to be wrestling with these kinds of dilemmas is 

 in itself something fairly new. For most of our previous 

 history we haven’t chosen to play a particularly activist role 

 in regional or world affairs, and if we had nobody would have 

 taken a great deal of notice. But we are in the process now 

 of evolving a foreign policy that is not only independent and 

 assured, but relevant - in both its global and regional 

 dimensions - to the kind of world that is evolving around us.

 The kind of foreign policy Australia is capable of pursuing, 

 and should be pursuing, in the years ahead is I think very 

 well illustrated by the half-dozen high-profile Australian

 11

 initiatives of recent times that I have specifically mentioned

 - Cambodia, Chemical Weapons, APEC, the Cairns Group, 

 Antarctica, and aspects of the fight against Apartheid. There 

 have been a number common characteristics running through them

 - careful identification of opportunities for action by a 

 middle-sized power; creative imagination in devising 

 solutions; a focus on coalition building strategies; and the 

 application of professional diplomatic skill and sheer basic 

 energy in seeing the issue through.

 Our recent higher-profile foreign policy has won us a good 

 deal of favourable attention internationally, and the Cambodia 

 and APEC initiatives in particular have constituted something 

 of a watershed in our relations with our own region. Although 

 we are never likely to be perceived as an Asian country in the 

 fullest sense of the word, there is no doubt that we are now 

 being increasingly seen within this region as a genuinely 

 participating and contributing partner, rather than as a 

 perennial outsider - or as someone nicely put it recently, no 

 longer the "odd man out" in Asia but the "odd man in".

 Ours is also now a foreign policy - and this is the note on 

 which I would like to conclude - that very much marries 

 realism with idealism. The world cannot be changed overnight, 

 but it can be changed - gradually - for the better. Nation 

 states and peoples should be allowed to develop their own 

 distinctive capacity and individual personality. Their 

 systems of government and economic management should not be 

 such as to deny fundamental political, economic or social 

 rights to their own peoples. Those great liberating ideas of 

 the 1960s, racial equality, the 1970s, sexual equality, and 

 the 1980s, protection of the environment - all have their 

 place in international affairs. The rules of international 

 behaviour should not be different from those governing every 

 other kind of human behaviour. And problems abroad as well as 

 at home are best resolved by consultation and cooperation 

 rather than confrontation.

 12

 f 

 r

 This is the kind of vision to which I and the present 

 Australian Government are committed as we continue to shape 

 ,yn policy priorities in a world that never ceases to 

 change around us. And at this pivotal period in world history 

 - when opportunities really do seem to be present for some 

 fundamental new approaches to the conduct of international 

 affairs - I believe it is a vision which stands an excellent 

 chance of becoming a world-wide reality. It will be very much 

 the task not just of my generation, but yours, to ensure that 

 it does become so.

 * * *

