---
title: "Government surveys immigration prospects in Eastern Europe"
date: "1990-02-14"
creators:
  - "Ray, Robert"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214061777
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021866%22
---

 lb·

 Local Government  and Ethnic Affairs Senator the Hon. Robert Ray

 Minister for  Immigration

 4 Treasury Place,  Melbourne, Vic. 3002  Phone: (03) 650-4479  Fax: (03) 650-9106

 OFFICES:

 Parliament House,  Canberra, ACT, 2600  Phone: (062) 77-7860  Fax: (062) 73-4144

 MPS 3 3 / 9 0  .

 GOVERNMENT SURVEYS IM M IG RATIO N PR O SPE C T S I N  E A STER N  EUROPE

 A senior Immigration Department officer will visit Eastern  Europe next month to survey the need for migration services  in the region.

 The Overseas Operations Branch Assistant Secretary, Mr Keith  Owen, will visit Moscow, Warsaw, Vienna, Budapest and  Belgrade. .  .

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs,  Senator.Robert Ray, said the visit would ensure his  department's operations kept pace with the rapid political  and social changes occurring in Eastern Europe.

 "To date, migration movement from Eastern Europe has been  almost exclusively confined to refugees," he said.

 "Now, there is the prospect of a free flow of people, some  wanting to join relatives in Australia, others trying to  better their economic prospects through migration.

 "My department is gearing up to deal with the changed  circumstances."

 Senator Ray said that to date, there had been no surge of  people inquiring about migration, apart from in the Soviet  Union where considerable preliminary interest had been .   shown.

 Elsewhere, people appeared preoccupied with the sudden rush  towards democracy. .

 "When the present turbulence settles down, citizens of these  countries will be able to make judgements about where they  want to live and work," he said. ,

 "In addition to deciding on the best locations for new  migration offices, arrangements will have to be developed  for the processing of applicants.

 2 .

 "This will involve identifying additional reliable medical  and radiological facilities for screening prospective  migrants,  and developing procedures for assessing and  evaluating Eastern European education and employment 

 qualifications."

 Senator Ray said suggestions that migration to Australia  from the region had been hampered by a lack of staff to  process cases were clearly wrong.

 The Department had resources in Germany, Austria and Italy  which had effectively met the Eastern European refugee  demand to date. Within the Eastern region itself, the  department was represented in Moscow, Warsaw and Belgrade.

 "We expect a decreasing need for Australian migration  resources in the traditional Western European countries of  first asylum," the Minister said.

 "Instead, we will be investigating the placement of : additional resources in some Eastern European countries to  handle migration inquiries and applications at the source.

 "We want to normalise our migration operations in the  region." '  .  ;  ·

 Senator Ray emphasised that priority, in migration processing  would continue to be given to those seeking reunion with  close family members in Australia.

 "There have been long delays in many cases in countries such  as Romania because the local authorities refused to grant  passports or exit permits," he said. .  .

 "We will be doing everything we can to expedite the entry of  people who qualify under the family migration category, just  as soon as they are allowed to leave."

 The Minister said nearly 1400 Romanians were currently  seeking migrant visas through the Australian Embassy in  Belgrade.. '

 Over 400 of them had been approved to come to Australia and  could be granted visas as soon as they were able to present  a passport. .

 CANBERRA, 14 February 1990

 MEDIA INQUIRIES: Peter Cotton Minister's Office  (062) 77 7860

 Allan Rice  DILGEA (062) 64 2382

 t

