---
title: "Hawke Runs for Cover on Status of Chinese Students"
date: "1990-06-14"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091468
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08020601%22
---

 //

 John Hewson Leader of the Opposition  M edia R elease 60/90

 14 June 1990

 HAWKE RUNS FOR COVER ON STATUS OF CHINESE STUDENTS

 The Prime Minister's inept handling of the status of Chinese  students in Australia has now reached a new low. To add to  all the unnecessary confusion he has created and all his  blustering about not changing his position when it is  obvious to everyone that he has, we now have the  extraordinary situation where members of the Prime  Minister's staff are making "clarifications" on vitally 

 important aspects of this issue.

 The Prime Minister himself is obviously deeply bruised by  the criticism he has received from the Opposition, his own  Ministers, the media, ethnic groups and many others since he  made his ill-informed and ill-considered.statement on 6 

 June.

 Every time the P^rime Minister has tried to "clarify" his  position, he hap^only succeeded in adding to the confusion  and revealing his own lack of understanding of the issues  involved.

 Fearful of getting things wrong yet again, the Prime  Minister now seems to have given up and handed over the task  of "clarification" to his staff. '

 The result is that today's media reports that "a spokesman  for the Prime Minister's Office" has tried to clarify the  confusing statements made by the Prime Minister on whether  the Chinese students who arrived before 20 June 1989 would  be allowed to apply for permanent residency during the  period of their temporary stay (6 months to 10 years) and  whether they could be forcibly repatriated to China at the 

 end of that period.

 The spokesman is quoted as saying with regard to those  students who want to stay in Australia at the end of their  temporary period that

 "they could then apply for permanent residency and the  expectation would be that they would be granted it".

 Like the Prime Minister himself, his staff have only added  to the confusion and uncertainty.

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M IC AH

 .  Are we back to the position where all Chinese students  here before 20 June can stay in Australia permanently if  they want to?

 .  Can those students who arrived after 20 June have their  claims for refugee status processed as soon as possible  while those who arrived before 20 June will have to wait  until the end of their "temporary" period?

 The Prime Minister must simply come out from behind the  cover and be man enough himself to set the record straight.

 What is required of the Prime Minister is quite simple. It  is what the Opposition has been insisting that he do all  along - namely, recognise that all Chinese students and any  other applicants for permanent residence have a right to  have their claims heard fully and as expeditiously as  possible on a case-by-case basis.

 Until the Prime Minister is prepared to do that, neither  genuine compassion nor consistency in this matter will be  achieved.

 * * * *

 For further information contacts 06/2774022

