---
title: "Prime Minister's decision on Chinese students emotional irresponsible and wrong"
date: "1990-06-07"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Office of MACKELLAR, MICHAEL, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091373
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08024649%22
---

 H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S

 P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A S U IT E  1 2a 

 P A C IF I C P O I N T   4 - 1 0  S Y D N E Y  R O A D  i 

 M A N L Y .  N .S .W . 2 0 9 5  

 T E L .  ( 0 2 ) 9 7 7 6 4 1  1

 T H E  H O N .  M .  J. R . M a c j^ E L L A R .  M -P .

 M E M B E R  F O R  W A R R IN G A H

 PRIME MINISTER'S DECISION ON CHINESE STUDENTS 

 EMOTIONAL IRRESPONSIBITE AND WRONG

 As a former Minister for Immigration I strongly support the  right of people to establish their refugee status - and  Australia's record in granting such refugees a haven, the  Member for Warringah, Michael MacKellar said today.

 But the Prime Minister's decision on Chinese students goes  far beyond this. It is emotional and irresponsible.

 There is a well established procedure in Australia to  determine the authenticity of claims for refugee status.  However, the Prime Minister has assumed, without any  knowledge of individual circumstances, that every one of the 

 Chinese students of whom he speaks has a "well founded fear  of persecution".

 He has not even begun to think through the consequences of  his decision. It is not only the 40,000 or more students  directly involved in this ill-considered decision, but also  their families - perhaps 150,000 or more people - who will 

 have a legal claim to settlement in Australia under current  family reunion criteria.

 This single decision represents numbers well in excess of a  whole year's total migrant intake.

 I can understand why the Prime Minister has made this  decision. A year ago he wept for the students, but for the  past year he has left them in limbo, worried as to their  future. He would not even allow their cases to be considered  by the DORS (Determination of Refugee Status Committee). Now 

 in an act of penitence he has gone to the other extreme.

 Having embarked on this path the Prime Minister has  effectively committed Australia to treating all other  students from all other countries no less favourably.

 The decision is wrong - and any claim that the Government  has a well thought through immigration program is shown to  be a sham.

 Further information: Michael MacKellar (02) 9776411  Thursday 7 June 1990

