---
title: "One billion poor: Australia's response to world poverty"
date: "1990-08-12"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214092537
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021600%22
---

 MINISTER FOR Jgx

 FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE NEWS RELEASE

 No·  M139 Date: 13 August 1990

 ONE BILLION POOR: AUSTRALIA'S RESPONSE TO WORLD POVERTY

 The following is the text of an address by the Minister for Foreign   Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans, at the opening of the  

 World Development Debate, Canberra, 13 August 1990.

 Opening address by Senator Gareth Evans,  Minister for Foreign 

 Affairs and Trade, to the World Development Debate, Canberra, 

 13 August 1990

 The theme of this conference, the fifth in AIDAS's annual 

 World Development Debate series, is world poverty. This is a 

 topic which goes to the very heart of any consideration of 

 development assistance policies and programs.

 However much the pessimists - or the self-consciously tough- 

 minded - may insist that the "poor are always with us", world 

 poverty is not an issue about which we can afford to be blase. 

 The consequences, in humanitarian, social, economic and 

 political terms are just too immense. The struggle against 

 poverty must be sustained as vigorously as possible. 

 Certainly it has been a long struggle - as old as mankind 

 itself - punctuated with both successes and failures. But the 

 longer it goes, the more we learn about the nature of poverty 

 - how it impacts upon individuals and societies, and, most 

 importantly, how to tackle its root causes.

 In opening up this debate, then, I want to do three things: 

 describe, in outline, what we know about the extent, nature 

 and implications of world poverty; describe what I believe to 

 be the emerging international consensus as how best to tackle 

 the problem; and describe what we as a Government are doing 

 to incorporate anti-poverty objectives into the Australian aid 

 program.

 The Nature and Extent of World Poverty

 When talking about the extent of world poverty, the numbers of 

 people living in poverty or absolute poverty, it is unhappily 

 the case that talk of millions, billions and percentages tends

 XIII/90

 2

 to transform the grim reality into safe abstract packages,  

 still remote from tangible comprehension.  The material  

 advertising this conference uses one of these statistics:  

 "One billion people live in absolute poverty",  the brochure  

 says.  But what this number means is that one in five people  

 in the world today live in such poverty.  And in the 

 developing world the figure is one in every three.

 What do we mean when we talk about "absolute poverty"? Can we 

 attach a useful meaning to the term? The World Bank sets the 

 poverty line on purely economic criteria:  the income below

 which it is not possible to meet basic needs of nutrition,  

 clothing and shelter - assessed at around $US370 per person  

 per year.

 Useful as the World Bank definition is, it does not tell us 

 enough about the immediate impact of absolute poverty on the 

 quality of life. James Ingram, Executive Director of the 

 World Food Program - who I am delighted to welcome to this 

 Conference - puts it starkly when he describes absolute  

 poverty as constant,  chronic hunger:  when you wake up each

 morning worrying not about what to eat, but whether you will  

 eat.

 But even this focus needs broadening, to capture all the 

 dimensions involved: not only thei economic basics, but also

 the impact on longevity, child mortality, school enrolments

 and the like. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 

 has recently come up with a new Human Development Index which  

 takes three particular elements - life expectancy, literacy  

 and income purchasing power - into account.  These indicators,  

 although themselves still abstract and impersonal,  can 

 nonetheless give us a glimmer of what the experience of

 'absolute poverty'  means for real people.  For instance:

 .  Every year in developing countries fourteen million

 children - virtually the equivalent of Australia's

 population - die before they reach five.

 3

 .  If you are born in a developing country, you will be

 lucky to live longer than 62 years.

 .  Nearly 900 million adults - particularly women - never

 learn to read and write.

 .  Around 100 million people - men, women, children - are

 without homes, without decent shelter.

 .  About 800 million people will go to bed tonight without  

 having eaten adequately.

 .  For every single Australian, there are ten children in

 the developing world under five who suffer malnutrition.

 Contrary to the popular assumption that poverty is

 concentrated mostly in Africa, as AIDAB's Working Paper on  

 Poverty shows, about half the developing world's poor - 520 

 million - live in South Asia, mainly in India and Bangladesh,  

 while a further 280 million live in East Asia, mainly in 

 China. These people are especially concentrated in rural  

 areas with high population densities. In fact, only about 180 

 million of the world's poor live in Sub-Saharan Africa. Here  

 again, the poor are mostly found in rural areas. But while it 

 is the case that three quarters of the developing world's poor  

 currently live in rural areas, there is also a disturbing  

 trend towards the urbanisation of poverty, with urban slums  

 and squatter settlements estimated to be expanding by about 7 

 per cent a year.

 In Africa, as in South Asia, about half the population live in 

 poverty. Elsewhere in the developing world, the proportion is 

 as low as 20 per cent.

 At first glance, the countries of the South Pacific seem to 

 have escaped the problems of absolute poverty. Yet pockets of 

 real need exist in the South Pacific as well. Papua New

 4

 Guinea, Vanuatu and Western Samoa are not widely regarded as 

 nations with this kind of problem, but their social indicators  

 reveal areas of real concern. In these countries, or 

 more of every hundred children born die before reaching the  

 age of one.  The comparable figure for Australia is one in 

 every hundred.  Average life expectancy in Papua New Guinea is 

 only 54 years - about the same as it was in England in 

 Shakespeare's time.  Today in Australia we can expect to live  

 to around 76 years of age.

 A further unhappy characteristic of world poverty is that it 

 has a pronounced gender bias. A large proportion of the poor  

 households across the world are headed by women.  Indeed, one  

 international agency has recently emphasised this by preparing  

 a report entitled the "Feminization of Poverty".  The 

 situation of women in many cultures makes them particularly  

 vulnerable to poverty. To be successful anti-poverty strategy  

 must give special attention to the needs and effective  

 participation of women. Otherwise women and children are 

 likely to be marginalised by the processes of economic growth.

 One effect of this huge world poverty problem, often  

 overlooked, is its impact on the environment.  Unhappily, the  

 capacity of the environment to sustain increasing levels of  

 human activity is threatened not only by industrial processes. 

 In many countries,  lack of development, and in particular  

 widespread poverty and concomitant rapid population growth,  

 pose serious environmental risks.

 In poverty-stricken rural areas environmental awareness is 

 simply not an option. There, the struggle to obtain  

 sufficient food,  warmth and shelter to stay alive forces  

 people to destroy the very land on which their longer-term  

 survival depends.  The UNDP estimates that three quarters of 

 the poor in the developing world live in "ecologically fragile  

 areas" which are being degraded at an increasing rate.

 The problem, moreover, is going to get worse with the likely

 5

 impact of population increase in coming decades. The UN 

 estimates that about 90 per cent of future population increase  

 will occur in developing countries. Most of the increase will  

 occur among the poor.  Poverty alleviation programs are 

 therefore central to efforts to stem the devastation of vast  

 areas in developing countries.

 Tackling World Poverty: Growth with EquLty

 It is easier to find acceptable definitions of poverty than to 

 agree upon strategies for alleviating it. The nub' of the  

 debate is reflected in the title of this conference:  "Ending  

 Poverty:  Grassroots or Growth?". I think the answer lies in 

 a proper mix of policies which emphasises the importance of 

 both growth and equity. Finding this mix is often easier said  

 than done.  In practice, it is often a process of trial and  

 error in development policy.

 We now know that growth alone - measured as the rate of 

 increase in GDP - dees not guarantee substantial benefits for  

 the poor, but we were not always so wise. The "growth first"  

 philosophy pervaded many of our policies in the 1950s and  

 1960s.  In those days aid was mainly directed to supplementing  

 domestic savings and supporting investments in infrastructure  

 and capital intensive projects. The benefits of resulting  

 growth were meant to trickle down to the poor - too often they  

 failed.

 We now understand that there is no automatic link between  

 economic growth and human progress.  The UN argues that,  taken  

 by itself, the economist's measure of income is an inadequate  

 yardstick of development.

 Economic growth is essential for human development and poverty  

 alleviation. But to exploit the opportunities for improved  

 well-being that growth offers, the development process must be  

 properly managed.  Some developing countries, especially in 

 Southeast Asia, have been very successful in managing their

 6

 growth to reduce poverty, others less so. Far from being  

 automatic, then, the link between GNP growth and human  

 development is a matter of both good economic management and  

 targeted social spending.

 If we apply the UNDP's Human Development Index to different  

 countries we see that there is considerable variation in the  

 way in which economic growth has been translated into human  

 development. The contrast is clearest in rankings of 

 developing countries by the human development index and their  

 GNP per capita. Some countries - such as China, Tanzania and  

 Thailand - do far better in human development terms than on an  

 income measure, showing they have directed a good share of 

 their economic resources towards human progress.  Other  

 countries - such as Saudia Arabia, Algeria and Mauritania - do  

 considerably worse.

 With the benefit of hindsight, I think we can say that during  

 the 1970s the international community tried to compensate for 

 earlier zeal in promoting growth by targeting the poor. 

 Greater emphasis was placed on employment and redistribution  

 through the so called "Basic Human Needs" approach. Popular  

 programs included integrated rural development projects, the 

 targeting of public services on poor groups,  and reform of 

 fiscal systems and land ownership to redistribute resources to 

 poorer people.

 However the Basic Human Needs approach fell far short of 

 expectations.  "Targeting the poor" proved to be a deceptively  

 simple phrase masking the difficulties which underlie attempts  

 to focus on the poor.  Like growth, targeting alone will not 

 provide long term benefits for the poor, although it can 

 provide immediate relief from the worst deficiencies in 

 health, nutrition and basic education.  Targeting will not 

 offer sustained improvements in living standards unless there  

 exists a sustainable economic environment in which people can  

 participate.  There are policies and programs which must be 

 implemented in all areas of government administration which

 7

 ensure that administrative systems support social and economic  

 development.

 This year's World Development Report from the World Bank  

 argues that rapid and politically sustainable progress on  

 poverty has been achieved by pursuing a strategy that both  

 promotes economic growth and provides basic social services to 

 the poor. I think this is sensible.  The returns on social  

 investments can be surprisingly high.  One World Bank study  

 has shown that private returns to primary education are as 

 high as 43 per cent in Africa and 31 per cent in Asia.  Social  

 returns from female literacy (reflected in reduced infant  

 mortality, improved family nutrition, and lowered population  

 growth) are even higher.  The UNDP estimates that an 

 additional investment now of $5 billion per year would see  

 universal primary school education available across the 

 developing world by the year 2000. In the longer term, the 

 social and economic benefits from such investment would be 

 very high indeed.

 Most budgets could, moreover, accommodate substantial  

 additional spending on human development and poverty relief by  

 a reallocation of priorities to reflect genuine development  

 needs. In too many developing countries more than half the 

 spending by governments goes to the military. When debt  

 repayments,  inefficient state enterprises,  and mistargeted  

 social subsidies are added, little remains for effective  

 development.  A shifting of the priorities, so as to balance  

 economic and social spending, should be at the top of the 

 policy agenda in developing countries in the 1990s.

 As far as our own approach is concerned, it seems to me clear  

 enough that the goal of poverty alleviation sits squarely  

 within the broadest humanitarian objectives of the Australian  

 program. I see no need to debate this point. But while the 

 goal of poverty alleviation is of major importance for the aid

 8

 program, it is not the only goal.  As I have made clear on 

 other occasions, the Australian development cooperation  

 program is hoih altruistic and in our own interests. Our 

 program, as is the case with most such government programs in 

 most countries throughout the world, serves a multiplicity of 

 objectives. The promotion of equitable development - which I 

 regard as simply an alternative way of talking about the 

 elimination of poverty - is the most important goal, but other  

 goals include political and strategic objectives, and the 

 promotion of Australia's economic interests overseas. The  

 important point is that these various objectives can be 

 implemented in a way that involves complementarity rather than  

 conflict between them. â–   In the development field there is so 

 much that needs to be done that it is easy in practice to find  

 worthwhile activities that bring mutual benefits.

 In the practice of delivering Australian aid, our approach to 

 poverty alleviation is broadly consistent with the 

 international consensus on anti-poverty strategies. That  

 consensus is based primarily on the promotion of the economic  

 growth, participation by the poor themselves in the 

 development process, and the achievement of environmentally  

 sustainable outcomes. Attention to all these parameters is 

 necessary to ensure a comprehensive approach to poverty  

 alleviation.

 The promotion of economic growth helps to eliminate the 

 structural factors that keep people poor. These factors  

 include, for example, inadequate physical infrastructure, low  

 levels of human resource development, and weak government  

 institutions. These considerations are at the heart of many  

 of our country and sector programs. Good examples include the  

 major river improvement and irrigation project at Bah Bolon in 

 North Sumatra, or the Integrated Rural Development project in 

 Northern Samar in the Philippines.

 Another example is a steel bridging project which we are  

 supporting in Indonesia. This project shows how

 9

 infrastructure projects, while not necessarily providing  

 immediate and direct benefits to poor people, can have  

 important indirect effects on poverty. Improved road 

 transport in Indonesia is crucial for growth, because better  

 roads mean that farmers have better access to markets.  

 Reliable studies have shown that the new and improved bridges  

 provided by Australia have reduced travel times, led to lower  

 bus fares, opened up markets for farmers, and increased labour  

 mobility. All of these things have brought substantial  

 benefits for millions of ordinary people in Java - and in 

 other parts of Indonesia as well. And I might add that the  

 Australian steel industry has not done too badly either!

 The second element of our anti-poverty strategy is the 

 emphasis on participation by the poor in the development  

 process through specifically targeted projects. This is often  

 easier said than done. Nevertheless, it is important because,  

 first, experience demonstrates that development programs are  

 likely to fail unless there is good community involvement in 

 the design of the programs, and second, it hardly makes sense  

 to talk about effective development unless there is a human  

 resource development dimension involved, with the people who  

 are affected being genuinely involved in the development  

 process.

 One example of how this approach works in practice is the 

 Australian Rural Water Supply project on the island of Lombok  

 in Indonesia. In 1985 AIDAB began the first phase of a $3 

 million rural water supply and sanitation project in central  

 Lombok. To ensure a sense of ownership of the facilities,  

 community participation was actively encouraged in the 

 project. Indonesian community organisers, trained and 

 supervised by an Indonesian non-government organisation, lived  

 in rural areas to help villagers plan the installation of new  

 water facilities. A health education scheme was an integral  

 part of the project as well.

 The Lombok project was a success. Safe drinking water was

 10

 supplied to over 100,000 people. Improved sanitation and 

 bathing facilities were built with the full involvement of 

 people in village areas.  This project is a good example of 

 how "bottom up" development co-operation can work.  As a 

 result of the original success, the project has been carried  

 through to a second phase.  We expect that similar facilities  

 will be provided to around 175,000 people in other parts of 

 Lombok.

 Both economic growth and participation must be complemented by  

 an environmentally sustainable approach to development.  In 

 Papua New Guinea and Indonesia in particular - the Australian  

 aid program is now working closely to the principle of 

 sustainability. In Papua New Guinea, we are giving strong  

 support to the management and conservation of that country's  

 forests through the implementation of the Tropical Forestry  

 Action Plan. And in Indonesia, the second phase of the Lombok  

 water supply project will cover all six districts of West Nusa  

 Tenggara, overcoming environmental degradation caused by the  

 disposal of human wastes. It will also curb the loss of water  

 which is currently being wasted or illegally tapped.

 If environmentally sustainable development is to be achieved,  

 there are few more important elements in poverty alleviation  

 strategy than bringing population growth under control.  I 

 have developed this theme on other occasions, and will say no  

 more here than that family planning programs will rank  

 increasingly high in Australia's development co-operation  

 priorities.

 There are some other dimensions to our aid program which I 

 should refer to in the present context. One is the provision  

 of direct assistance - direct transfers to the poor - when  

 there is an acute need for immediate help. Such assistance - 

 although only a small part of Australia's overall development  

 co-operation program - can be crucial in not only the timely  

 alleviation of human suffering but also, in this context, in 

 poverty prevention. Dealing with natural disasters - such as

 11

 the recent earthquakes in Iran and the Philippines, and the  

 regular cyclones which sweep across small Pacific countries  

 such as Western Samoa, the Solomon Islands and Tonga - is an  

 unhappily recurring necessity.

 Refugees and displaced people also present similarly acute and  

 immediate problems. Overall, a total of about $55 million was  

 spent on feeding, doctoring and housing refugees last  

 financial year. I think it was money well spent - a modest  

 but worthwhile contribution that provided direct assistance to  

 some of the poorest and most needy people on our planet.

 Another dimension of our development co-operation program with  

 a particular impact on poverty alleviation is the support we  

 give to the activities of non-government organisations in 

 developing countries. Both Australian NGOs, and indigenous  

 NGOs within developing countries have achieved a good deal of  

 success in implementing anti-poverty programs in developing  

 countries. NGOs have the advantage of being small, flexible,  

 and cost-effective. They show empathy in their dealings with  

 individuals and communities. They are effective in 

 encouraging genuine participation in development. They have  

 excelled in many activities, particularly in delivering adult  

 education and family planning practices. My own hope is that  

 during the next few years, it will be possible to increase the  

 amounts of our aid which are spent through these indigenous  

 NGOs within the developing countries.

 I also want to draw your attention, finally, to the Australian  

 food aid program. In recent years, around 10% of the 

 Australian aid program has been spent on food aid. Food aid  

 is a very effective anti-poverty mechanism. A small part of  

 our food aid is given for direct relief purposes, such as for  

 the provision of emergency food supplies in Ethiopia. But the  

 main part of our food aid is used for so-called "development  

 food aid", which consists of activities such as Food For Work  

 schemes which create jobs in developing countries for people  

 to work on projects such as rural roads and irrigation canals.

 12

 These activities combat poverty in two ways: directly, by

 creating jobs, and indirectly by stimulating investment in 

 much-needed development schemes.

 I hope I have said enough about the Australian development co­

 operation program to show that poverty alleviation is already  

 a central goal of our efforts.  The record of the Australian  

 aid program is delivering benefits to the poor is manifestly  

 good. But we need to do more where we can.  To encourage  

 wider discussion, AIDAB has prepared a paper for this 

 conference which provides a useful detailed survey of the 

 impact of the Australian program on poverty.

 For the benefit of the lingering few who continue to believe  

 that our approach just reflects middle class values of the  

 "warm inner glow" variety, I should make my own position  

 absolutely clear.  I am interested in aid not as charity but  

 as development co-operation, which should be undertaken in 

 pursuit of serious political and economic policy objectives  

 which are shared by developing countries and ourselves.  In 

 fact, I think we should use the phrase "development co­

 operation" a lot more, and "aid" and "development assistance"  

 a lot less. This is consistent with other elements in the  

 Government's foreign policy, particularly in our immediate  

 region.

 We need to remember that Australia and New Zealand are unique  

 amongst OECD nations in that we are located amongst developing  

 countries.  A good many of these have political and economic  

 institutional structures which are still fragile. Their  

 internal stability is often threatened by the very demands of 

 having to deal with poverty.  We have a basic stake, in terms  

 of Australia's national interests, in their stability and 

 successful development.

 Although many lessons have been learnt about development,

 13

 world poverty remains an enormous problem, especially in our 

 region.  Ultimately the battle must be fought and won by 

 developing countries themselves.  But development co-operation 

 can help. The major challenge for countries like Australia in 

 the 1990s is to ensure that our co-operation programs maximise 

 our contribution towards the alleviation of poverty. Our 

 programs must reinforce the broad and equitable participation 

 of the poor in the development process.  And they must support 

 national policies in developing countries which are aimed at 

 integrating economic, social and environmental objectives into 

 comprehensive strategies for sustainable development.

 * * * *

