---
title: "Chinese student claims"
date: "1990-06-12"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091424
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08020086%22
---

 P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A

 H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S

 OFFICE OF PHILIP RUDDOCK, M.P. MEMBER FOR DUN DAS SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 PRESS RELEASE

 SUITE 302 ' PARLIAMENT HOUSE

 EASTWOOD CENTRE CANBERRA. A.C.T. 2600 160 ROWE STREET TEL. (0 62 ) 77 71 1 1

 EASTWOOD. N.S.W. 2122

 TEL. 858 1011 

 FAX. 804 6739

 CHINESE STUDENT CLAIMS

 The Prime Minister has today only compounded his previous  errors.

 It is clear he has little comprehension of the way Australia has  over many years dealt with refugee and humanitarian claims.  Our  approach has always been compassionate and consistent. As he now  tries to clarify his statements, PRC Nationals in Australia are 

 left in limbo. Instead of giving them certainly he has created  ambiguity.

 Case-by-case determination can adequately establish who have  valid claims.

 To date Australia has disadvantaged Chinese Nationals  (pre Tiananmen Square)  by refusing to process claims for refugee  status and grant of residence status on family, compassionate or  humanitarian grounds.

 Access to grant of residence status on employment grounds has  been specifically excluded.  In any humane system that processing  would have already commenced. Now students who obtain an  extension of time to await clarification of events in China are 

 to be denied rights available to those who came to Australia post  Tiananmen Square.

 Any claim that administrative difficulties demand this approach  fail when it is considered that the number of students here  after the 20th June 1989, who may still access our refugee  program could exceed those in Australia before the 20th June 

 1989. If they all make claims, no matter how tenuous processing  will be delayed for years or will require more adequate  resources.

 Undoubtedly, the Prime Minister should have heeded my advice of  yesterday and awaited Cabinet deliberations to settle the  Government's policy.

 Nobody has challenged the right of Australia to determine its  immigration policy. It must however be lucid, certain and  unambiguous. With the day by day re-interpretation, first with  Cambodian rights to seek asylum and now with Chinese students,  

 the Hawke Government's approach fails this test.

 12 June 1990 

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

