---
title: "Hill says government must give more help to key UN aid body"
date: "1990-10-10"
creators:
  - "Hill, Robert"
source: "Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214093637
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08019937%22
---

 £s~

 SENATOR ROBERT HILL LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHA DO W  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 T H E  S E N A T E 

 MEDIA RELEASE

 Wednesday, October 10  Canberra 60/90

 HTT.T. SAYS GOVERNMENT MOST GIVE MORE HELP TO KEY UN AID BODY

 The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Robert Hill,  today said the Hawke Government should give additional help to  a United Nations body which provides vital aid to Palestinians  living in refugee camps in the Middle East.

 Senator Hill said the Gulf crisis had increased the need for  Australia to contribute to emergency funds for the United Nations  Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees (UNRWA).

 "The plight of Palestinian.refugees has deteriorated as a result  of the dislocation created by Iraq's invasion of Kuwait," Senator  Hill said.

 "The tensions created by the difficult circumstances in which the  Palestinians live can erupt into violence, as they did this week  in Jerusalem's Old City.

 "The Government had no hesitations about finding the funds to  respond to the military crisis in the Gulf.

 "It should now act just as decisively on the aid front to meet  human needs in the crisis.

 "Australia's contribution of emergency funds to UNRWA which could  be used for the Gulf crisis has up to now been a token amount.

 "UNRWA would welcome contributions in kind, such as wheat or  flour.

 "It may be possible for Australia to give sheep which would  otherwise be slaughtered by Australian farmers as a result of our  rural crisis.

 "Some farmers have offered their sheep free if the Government  would cover transport and processing costs."

 Senator Hill made his comments after meeting Mr Giorgio 

 Giacomelli, the Commissioner-General of UNRWA, who is visiting  Australia seeking extra funds to meet the emergency.

 Further enquiries: Senator Hill or Mark Batistich on (06) 277  3170

 (ends)

