---
title: "Launch of ALP Policy on Immigration, Ethnic Affairs and Multiculturalism"
date: "1990-03-15"
creators:
  - "Hawke, Bob"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214067741
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08014005%22
---

 PR IM E M IN IS T E R

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

 SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER  LAUNCH OF ALP POLICY ON IMMIGRATION, ETHNIC AFFAIRS AND MULTICULTURALISM  MELBOURNE - 15 MARCH 1990

 Friends

 It gives me enormous satisfaction to stand before you today  and to welcome you, as my Government has always welcomed  you, as "fellow Australians".

 Satisfaction that, in those two words, is summed up the  vision of a genuinely multicultural Australia to which all  our people - no matter what their birthplace or their  colour, their religion or first language - can feel  committed.  ,

 Satisfaction - and also pride. Because if there is one  thing that our seven years of Government will have proved to  our ethnic communities, and which they will bear in mind as  they cast their vote on March 24, it is that the Labor  Government delivers.

 My Government does not indulge in hollow rhetoric and smooth  slogans. It delivers substance, realistic policies and real  answers.

 It does not look back with misplaced nostalgia to a  supposedly uniform Australia that has never existed. It  looks forward to a vibrant and diverse Australia in which  all our people live and work together as equals, in harmony.

 It does not remember its ethnic communities only when there  is an election on. It consults with them, with their  representatives, with their media, as part of the routine of  Government.

 Friends

 If you think back over the last term of my Government, and  when you examine our achievements in the area of immigration  policy, ethnic affairs and multiculturalism, you will  recognise one unarguable truth. We do not, nor will we  ever, sell out our principles for short-term political 

 advantage.

 COMMONWEALTH

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 2.

 On that you have my word.

 We will not, explicitly or implicitly, seek to return to an  immigration policy which discriminates between people on the  basis of ethnic origin.

 We will not, by the sly wink or discreet nudge, treat some  Australians as more Australian than others.

 We will not, by carefully avoiding the word, seek to water  down our vision of a multicultural Australia offering equal  opportunity for all.

 In 1983 I gave my word.

 I outlined a vision of an Australia bound together by  co-operation and consensus, rather than torn and divided by  confrontation. I promised to lead Australia to a future  free of prejudice and discrimination and offering equal  opportunity for all our people.

 In the policy I launch today is set out the record of my  Governments since 1983 in the area of immigration, ethnic  and multicultural affairs.

 I am very happy to stand before you on this record.

 It lays the foundations for the future.

 It lies at the very heart of the program that I delivered at  the ALP policy launch in Brisbane just over a week ago.

 At that launch I presented a comprehensive, realistic,  responsible and achievable plan for Australia's future.

 I set forward an agenda for a fair society with opportunity  open to all Australians wherever they were born, whatever  their background.

 Those of you who watched the launch will have been moved, as  all of us present were, at the stirring rendition given to  our national anthem by a young Australian, Clare Gormley,  who can trace her roots to Ireland, Germany and Papua New  Guinea. Her talent and self-confidence symbolized the  changing face of Australia. As her voice rang out, it bore  testimony to the way in which Australia has welcomed  migrants to our great nation from all corners of the globe  and, by accepting their diverse cultures, ensured their  commitment to Australian institutions.

 Friends

 Never have you had a clearer choice.

 Never have you fa:ced a starker contrast.

 The Liberal/National Coalition seeks to deny opportunity and  entrench privilege.

 3.

 The Labor Party will continue to enlarge equality of  opportunity for all.

 Look at our record.

 Three years ago I gave my word that the Australian  Government would adopt Australia's first National Policy on  Languages. We did, and the achievements speak for  themselves.

 Migrants, both kids at school and their parents, have  benefitted from greatly increased expenditure. Today it  stands at $162 million, up more than 50 per cent on the last  year of the Liberal Government.

 We have expanded our financial help for teaching community  languages to your children. We have provided some $23  million over the last 3 years for a Second language Learning  Program, set up the Languages Institute of Australia, and ·  

 increased funding for ethnic schools. Spending on community  languages has increased fivefold under my Government.

 Three years ago I gave my word that we would present a  National Agenda for a Multicultural Australia. I know that  many people were sceptical whether we would deliver. We  did.

 Last July my Government committed $89 million to a series of  concrete initiatives. As a result:

 .  SBS television is being progressively extended

 . the barriers to the recognition of overseas skills and  qualifications, of which many of you have had  unfortunate experience, are coming down

 . a major campaign to improve community relations is being set in place - in spite, I am saddened to say, of  criticism from the Liberals and Nationals.

 Three years ago I gave my word that an Access and Equity  policy would be pursued with vigour to ensure that the  Government's programs and services would be equally  available to all. We have fulfilled that pledge -

 -J m m  .  in 1989/90, the budget on settlement services provided  by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs is  $127.5 million, more than 50 percent greater than in 

 1983/84

 . an extra $3 million has been set aside to ensure 

 migrants get equal access to community and health  services, local government, and consumer education

 . $65 million has been earmarked for residential care for ethnic older people

 4.

 . employment and training programs have been targetted to  non-English speaking migrants, so that they have  benefitted equally from our record levels of employment  growth. It is a matter of fact that 1.6 million jobs  have been created under my Labor Government: it is a matter of pride that a quarter of those jobs have gone 

 to migrant workers.

 Three years ago I gave my word that we would review our  immigration policy and overhaul our outdated Migration Act.

 We have.

 It is a complex business, and the new regulations are at  times confusing. It is for that reason that my colleague,  Robert Ray, who has worked assiduously and with great  integrity in the Immigration portfolio, has recently  announced grants to Migrant Resource Centres to provide free  advice on migration matters - to stop migrants being ripped  off by unscrupulous profit-making migration agents.

 I do not claim that our new regulations are yet perfect.  Robert has made clear that some of the criticism has been  fair. But he has also said, and I agree totally, that  clearly defined and publicly available rules for decision­ making will introduce more certainty, consistency and 

 fairness to the operation of migration policy.

 And I say also, loudly and clearly, that the hallmark of the  Hawke Government is a willingness to listen to ethnic  communities and - where necessary - to act. If there remain  unintended consequences to some of the new regulations you  have my word that we will change them.

 Friends

 Contained in the document before you today is a remarkable  record. It sets out a path to a fair and tolerant Australia  along which we will continue to stride undeterred by those 

 who seek to change our direction.

 In my next term as your Prime Minister, my Government will:

 . continue to develop further the National Policy on  Languages

 7"* support a balanced program of second language learning  for all, including for the languages of our ethnic and  Aboriginal communities

 . establish a National Bureau of Language Services to provide better interpreter and language services across  the nation

 . continue its high level of commitment to English  language teaching

 5.

 . open up greater opportunities for overseas-trained  migrants

 . give the Special Broadcasting Service its own legislative base and charter, and further extend the  reach of SBS TV

 . provide traineeships for non-English speaking  background Australians in the ABC and SBS

 . ensure equality of opportunity in education by  expanding the Disadvantaged Schools Program

 . provide extra funding for special child care services  to meet the needs of migrant children

 .  maintain the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity  Commission as an independent statutory body

 .  and keep the Office of Multicultural Affairs within my  own portfolio.

 I am also delighted to announce today a bold, new initiative  - the creation of a nationally networked ethnic radio news  and current affairs service.

 SBS Radio already produces excellent community language  programs on 3EA in Melbourne and 2EA in Sydney. Public  broadcasting stations - such as the newly established 3ZZZ  in this city, 5EBI in Adelaide, 4EB in Brisbane and 6EBA in  Perth - ensure that ethnic communities have access to the  airwaves. Now, through the Public Broadcasting Foundation,  SBS will be funded to produce objective, professional news  and community information programs in at least fifteen 

 languages and air-time will be bought from public stations  to broadcast them.

 In this way both the SBS and public broadcasters will  benefit from additional funding of $3.4 million over a three  year period. More importantly, ethnic communities around  Australia will be able to receive on a regular basis high  quality programs in their first language.

 It is not only the ethnic communities in our cities that  will benefit from this measure. Communities - such as the  Greeks, Italians, Turks and Vietnamese who are making such a  valuable contribution in our rural areas - will now, some of 

 them for the first time, be able to listen to radio programs  in the language that they speak at home.

 This is multiculturalism at work.

 And what does the Liberal/National Party Coalition offer? 

 First, it offers funding cuts.

 6.

 Already the Coalition has announced that it will slash $20  million from the budget of the Department of Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs - $20 million that might otherwise go on  settlement services for migrants - $20 million removed from  the Immigration budget at the very moment the Coalition  plans a significant increase in the intake of economic 

 migrants.

 And that, my friends, is only the beginning. As they  themselves now admit, there would have to be draconian cuts  in the second and third year to finance their pitch to the  rich.

 Second, the Coalition offers division.

 Their policy proposes to treat some migrants differently  from others. It would deny migrants access to our social  security benefits for at least their first twelve months in  Australia. No matter that they have chosen Australia as 

 their home. No matter that they are subject to Australian  taxes from their first day here. If they are not a refugee,  then they would not be entitled to sickness benefits, not  entitled to an invalid pension, not entitled to unemployment  benefits.

 At the same time, the Coalition intends to reduce the  proportion of migrants allowed to come and join their  families in Australia. Well may they talk of "the harsh  reality". It is they who seek to create it.

 And finally, the Coalition offers fear.

 It fears ethnic communities. It is for that reason that it  has attacked us for ensuring that our policies are presented  in the ethnic press. While the Australian Labor Party is  holding a special launch of its ethnic affairs policy, as it  has in each of the last 3 elections, the Liberal Party has  expunged the word "ethnic" from their election policy 

 statement of last week.

 You, my friends in the ethnic communities, are presumably  not part of the Liberal 'Answer'.

 It is perhaps fear too which explains why the Coalition  seeks to make it harder for migrants to become Australian  zens.

 I see that in an interview with SBS radio last week  Mr Peacock sought to deny this was Liberal Party policy. I  suggest that he take a break from glib sloganeering and  actually read the Immigration Policy document of his own  Party.

 There it states, unequivocally, that under a Coalition  Government, migrants would have to live in Australia for  four years before being eligible for citizenship: four  years, my friends, not two as is the case now.

 7.

 In stark contrast, I was proud to launch in 1988 The Year of  Citizenship. As I participated in ceremonies across our  land, and as migrants came forward in record numbers to make  their ultimate commitment to our nation, it was impossible  not to feel elation. Here were people from 140 countries  around the world, choosing Australia as their home. And,  having chosen, participating - as you are participating - in  our democratic traditions.

 Friends - fellow Australians

 The choice on March 24 could not be plainer.

 Over the last few years the Australian Labor Party has stood  by our ethnic communities when the going was at its  toughest.

 We will continue to fight discrimination and intolerance in  any of their invidious forms.

 We will continue to hold firm to our belief in multicultural  policies to manage Australia's growing diversity.

 We will continue to ensure that our programs and services  are equally available to all.

 We will continue to listen to the voice of our great ethnic  communities.

 We will always do so, no matter what the political cost. On  that you have my solemn word.

 Together, during my fourth term as Prime Minister, we will  work together to build a fair, just and tolerant Australia  for our children and grandchildren.

 ************************

