---
title: "Underhand deal on Cambodian refugees"
date: "1990-09-04"
creators:
  - "Spindler, Sid"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214093031
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04009095%22
---

 (Nthzjr

 SENATOR SID SP1NDLER  AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRAT  SENATOR FOR VICTORIA 

 M E D IA  RELEASE

 PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA · THE SENATE

 September 4, 1990 PR 90/402

 UNDERHAND DEAL ON CAMBODIAN REFUGEES

 "The Australian Government is so desperate to rid themselves of  the Cambodian boat-people it is making secret deals with a  Government they do not even formally recognise," Democrat Senator  Sid Spindler, spokesperson on Immigration and Ethnic Affairs said 

 today.  He was commenting on reports that the Australian and  Cambodian governments have reached agreement on the forced return  of the Cambodian refugees now in Australia.

 Senator Spindler said; "The Democrats totally reject any secret  deals which involve forcible repatriation. To qualify as a  refugee do people have to return to their homeland, be shot,  tortured or imprisoned before we will accept their claim to be  legitimate refugees?"

 "Cambodian boat people who do not meet the criteria of refugee  should be given temporary asylum until the situation in Cambodia  can be clearly assessed." Senator Spindler said.

 "It is unlikely that these people who have risked their lives  to reach Australia will agree to return to Cambodia and therefore  would have to be forcibly repatriated to a homeland where civil  war is raging and the future is uncertain. It would be contrary 

 to all standards of international justice and just plain decency  to compel these people to return when their lives would be at  risk," Senator Spindler said.

 "Obviously the Department is aware of their basic humanitarian  obligation "to Cambodians and is keeping the negotiations secret,"  said Senator Spindler.

 "The Immigration Department is already facing problems over its  strict interpretation of the definition of "refugee" and  "humanitarian" cases. Guidelines need to be developed to make  the definitions less onerous."

 "Meanwhile the Cambodian boat people should get the same  humanitarian treatment the Chinese students received and should  not be used as scapegoats for departmental bungling," Senator  Spindler concluded.

 Senator Sid Spindler (06) 277 3222 (W)

 (06) 241 8333 (H)

 For further information:

 AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRAT SPOKESPERSON O N : TREASURY, FINANCE, TRADE; IMMIGRATION & ETHNIC AFFAIRS; ATTORNEY-GENERAL & JUSTICE

