---
title: "U.S. movement welcome"
date: "1990-01-25"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214061411
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08020145%22
---

 P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A  

 H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S

 OFFICE OF PHILIP RUDDOCK, M.P. MEMBER FOR DUN DAS SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 P R E S S  R E L E A S E

 SUITE 302 PARLIAMENT HOUSE

 EASTWOOD CENTRE CANBERRA. A.C.T. 2600 160 ROWE STREET TEL. (062) 77 71 11

 EASTWOOD. N.S.W. 2122

 TEL. Θ58 101 1   FAX. 804 6739

 PHILIP RUDDOCK

 Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 U.S. MOVEMENT WELCOME

 Philip Ruddock, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs has welcomed the revised approach of the U.S.A. on  Vietnamese refugees.

 "The announcement in Geneva included a willingness to consider  mandatory deportation after a 12 month moratorium before any  compulsory return of asylum seekers is undertaken, particularly  from Hong Kong."

 Mr Ruddock said he was disappointed that the British Government  appeared to have rejected this compromise. "There is a  requirement to give the voluntary repatriation arrrangements a  proper chance to work.

 To date Vietnam appears able to handle well the number of  returnees who have voluntered, but there is doubt about its'  ability to intergrate the greater numbers Britain and other Asian  countries would want to send back. There is a grave risk that  arrangements that fail to ensure the protection of returnees from  possible reprisals, could put both the mandatory and voluntary 

 schemes at risk.

 Successful arrangements to return asylum seekers will play a most  important role in detering those whose claims for refugee status  are of doubtful validity from attempting t„o leave the country.

 As it seems this is the primary objective of the Comprehensive  Plan of Action agreed to by first asylum countries, resettlement  countries and Vietnam, and the importance of achieving a  negotiated result between Britain and the United States is  readily apparent.

 It was therefore disappointing that today such discussions have  concluded without result.

 There is a positive roll for Australia in achieving this agreed  outcome."

 F o r  further i n f o r mation contact Vanessa Meyer - (062) 77 4343

 25th J a n u a r y  1990 C OM M ONW EALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M IC A H

