---
title: "Hawke government policies affecting Australia's standing in Asia"
date: "1990-06-08"
creators:
  - "Teague, Baden"
source: "Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091379
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08019974%22
---

 Senator Baden Teague Senator for South Australia

 8 June 1990

 HAWKE GOVERNMENT POLICIES AFFECTING AUSTRALIA'S STANDING IN ASIA

 The Acting Shadow Foreign Minister, Senator Baden Teague, today  blasted the Hawke Government's handling of the status of Chinese  students in Australia.

 "Australia's image, already tarnished by the Hawke Government's  inept handling of changes to ELICOS guidelines last year that  resulted in the internationally embarrassing spectacle of violent  demonstrations in front of the Australian missions in China,  cannot but be further blackened by the contradiction and  confusion of the last few days.

 "We have seen the Prime Minister uttering words to the effect  that the 20,000 Chinese students in Australia will be allowed to  stay, regardless of individual circumstances or merit. Others,  like Cambodian refugees, he deemed on no rational ground to be  not political refugees but rather economic refugees.

 "We have now also witnessed the Prime Minister's unilateral  declaration blur under a deluge of qualifications and outright  contradictions by his own Ministers.

 "What conclusion can Governments in Asia draw other than that, if  this is the way important Australian Government policies are  made, Australians must be an inept and incompetent bunch?

 "Mr Hawke's ill-advised announcement sends disturbing signals to  countries in our own region:

 . The integrity of our immigration program is cast aside.

 .  The priority of our overseas student program to enable  students to serve their own countries is undermined.

 .  The soundness of Australian Government decision-making is  reduced to emotional ad hocery and confusion.

 "Giving a blanket guarantee to all 20,000 Chinese students  represents a cop out on a massive scale.

 "Not all of these students are in danger or in fear of 

 persecution.  While there are students genuinely fearful of  persecution on return to China, there are those who never  intended to return, 40% of ELICOS overstayers being consistently  from the PRC. ‘

 PRESS RELEASE T H E  S E N A T E

 COMMONWEALTH

 P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  LIBRARY  M IC A H

 . >

 -  2 -

 "It should have been clear to the Government that there was no  alternative to examination of applications on individual merit if  the principles of fairness and equity were to be observed. The  Opposition has clearly and firmly advocated a case by case  approach to the Chinese students' applications.

 "The Government appears to believe that it is too hard to do it  the fair and equitable way. If in the next few weeks Cabinet  modifies the Prime Minister's unilateral announcement, there will  be further reversals and uncertainties.  Unfortunately Mr Hawke's 

 premature and ill-advised comments can only further hurt  Australia's international image.

 Contacts Senator Teague (08) 294 9299

