---
title: "The Big Backdown on Hawke's Refugee Blunder Begins"
date: "1990-06-07"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091360
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08020607%22
---

 John Hewson Leader of the Opposition M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 51/90 7 June 1990

 THE BIG BACKDOWN ON HAWKE'S REFUGEE BLUNDER BEGINS

 The Prime Minister's incompetence has got the Government  into a hopeless mess over the refugee status of Chinese  students and Cambodian boat people in Australia. Ministers  are surprised, confused and divided by the Prime Minister's  decision to pre-empt Cabinet consideration of the matter.

 In an attempt to cover up for the Prime Minister's mistakes,  the big backdown has begun.

 On the status of the Cambodian boat people, the Minister for  Trade Negotiations, Dr Blewett, has flatly contradicted the  Prime Minister. Speaking in Bangkok today, Dr Blewett  stated that each of the Cambodian boat people in Australia  would be assessed on a case-by-case basis to see if any  would be granted asylum as refugees. He said that it 

 "would be premature to make a judgement on individual  cases". Yet last night the Prime Minister pre-empted this  process by categorically declaring that "these people are  not political refugees". Who is to be believed?

 On the status of the Chinese students, the backdown from the  Prime Minister's rush to judgement is also starting. The  Government is now backgrounding journalists about the idea  of "protective residence" visas for the students that will  not provide the full rights available to permanent  residents. But details are sketchy and the whole situation 

 is confused as the attempt goes on to cover up for the Prime  Minister's disastrous intervention.

 In all this confusion, the responsible Minister, Mr Hand,  maintains an embarrassed silence.

 By contrast to the Government's ineptitude and confusion on  this issue, the Coalition's position is clear and  consistent.

 The Coalition is not opposed to granting refugee status to  anyone - be they Chinese students dr Cambodian refugees or  whoever - provided they fulfil the internationally  recognised requirements for such status,

 One essential requirement is a well-founded fear of  persecution if persons are returned to the country from  which they fled.

 2

 There are clear and long established procedures in Australia  for determining if such requirements are fulfilled in  particular cases.

 Australia has a long and proud record of providing genuine  refugees with a safe haven. That record is one based on  compassion and consistency.

 But we are very critical of the Prime Minister's decision  because it leads to inconsistency and unfairness by making  blanket judegments about categories of people applying for  refugee status.

 Some Chinese students certainly are likely to be subjected  to victimisation if they were to return to China; but it is  far from clear that all students fall into this category.

 Some of the Cambodian boat people certainly are economic  refugees; but it is far from clear that all boat people  fall into this category.

 The only way that justice, fairness and compassion can be  served in these cases is by individual assessments.

 This takes time and resources but the alternative is  unacceptable.

 There are two particular aspects of the Prime Minister's  decision that are irresponsible.

 How the decision was made

 The Prime Minister's announcement of such a major foreign  policy decision on a nightly current affairs program was  totally unsatisfactory and inadequate. Cabinet was not  consulted. The Foreign Minister was not even in the  country.

 The Immigration Department was not properly advised (the  very same day that the Prime Minister categorically declared  that the Cambodian boat people "are not political refugees",  a Departmental spokesperson was reassuring the media that a  case-by-case assessment of their refugee status would be  undertaken).

 Only two conclusions are possible about the Prime Minister's  performancei he either stumbled into his announcement  without intending to do so or he chose the issue to try and  re-assert his hold on the leadership<

 Either way his conduct was reprehensible.

 3

 The implications of the decision

 Mr Hawke's announcement raised more questions than it  answered. That fact is now evident in the opposition or  uncertainty with which it has been greeted by ethnic  community leaders and by refugee and human rights  organisations.

 Mr Hawke must finish the job he started by answering the  following questions:

 Will the total immigration intake be increased as a result  of this decision? If not, where will the cuts occur: in family reunions, skilled migration, other refugees?

 What will the 'multiplier effect' of the decision be (in  terms of the family reunion rights of the Chinese students)?

 What will happen to those Chinese students in Australia  before 20 June 1989 but who had illegally over-stayed their  visas?

 Mr Hawke's ill-considered intervention in this matter has  created many more problems than it has solved. He has no  alternative now but to address the consequences of his  actions, to concede that he was mistaken on important points  of refugee determination and to restore some semblance of 

 fairness, consistency and genuine compassion on this issue.

 For information (06) 277 4022

