---
title: "Hawke back to old form"
date: "1990-06-11"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091409
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08020087%22
---

 P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A  

 H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S

 OFFICE OF PHILIP RUDDOCK, M.P. M E M B E R  F O R  D U N D A S  

 S H A D O W  M IN IS T E R  F O R  IM M IG R A T IO N  

 A N D  E T H N IC  A F F A IR S  A N D  S H A D O W  

 M IN IS T E R  A S S IS T IN G  T H E  L E A D E R   O N  E T H N IC  A F F A IR S

 S U IT E  3 0 2  P A R L IA M E N T  H O U S E

 E A S T W O O D  C E N T R E  C A N B E R R A . A .C .T . 2 6 0 0

 1 6 0  R O W E  S T R E E T  T E L . ( 0 6 )  2  7 7 7 1 1 I

 E A S T W O O D . N .S .W . 2 1 2 2

 T E L . 8 5 8  1 0 1 1  

 F A X . 8 0 4  6 7 3 9

 PRESS RELEASE

 11 June 1990

 HAWKE BACK TO OLD FORM

 If you are having an argument, attack your critic,  preferably personally.

 There are major issues involved about the consistency and  certainty in handling competing claims for refugee and  humanitarian status.

 The Prime Minister has failed to understand the  long-standing and principled approach taken by Australia.

 Our racially non-discriminatory rules have been developed  for all situations and claims.

 In attacking personally Mr Wellington Lee, an informed and  well-placed critic, for arguing for case-by-case review the  Prime Minister has demeaned himself.

 Mr Lee merely drew attention to the well-known fact that  student visas were issued without comprehensive character  checking required for permanent residence.

 At least the Chairman of the Labor Caucus Immigration  Committee had the good grace to admit that character  checking would be required now before granting any Chinese  students Australian permanent residency, a requirement all  migrants must satisfy.

 However, notwithstanding this distraction by Mr Hawke the  questions put by the Leader of the Opposition, Dr John  Hewson last week still remain unanswered.

 The Prime Minister would be better advised to hold his  tongue now on this issue until the Cabinet can settle a full  and complete policy position.

 Contacts 02 - 49 7749 or tomorrow on 06 - 277 4343

