---
title: "Deal with refugees at source: democrats"
date: "1990-09-18"
creators:
  - "Coulter, John"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214093313
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04008730%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE Sh

 T H E  S E N A T E  PR 90/440 

 Canberra September 18, 1990

 DEAL WITH REFUGEES AT SOURCE: DEMOCRATS

 The Australian Democrats said today that Australia must employ a number of measures  now if there was not to be a large increase in refugees in the next few years. The  National Population Council warned the Immigration Minister, Gerry Hand, in a  confidential document this week that Australia should prepare for an "explosion" in the 

 number of political and economic refugees seeking asylum over the next ten years.

 "Australia has failed to recognise the antecedents which give rise to refugees" said  Senator Coulter. "For instance, arm sales to Iraq by western countries preceded the  invasion of Kuwait which in turn created thousands of refugees.

 "Failure to take measures to ameliorate the greenhouse effect may create refugees in the  South Pacific because of a rise in sea-levels.

 "Buying tropical timber from countries where the logging practices are unsustainable may  induce another form of environmental refugee..

 "Failure to give humanitarian aid to poor countries may be the precedent for a flood of  economic refugees, as is the case with Vietnam.

 "Failure to support the United Nations or an unwillingness to employ diplomatic efforts  to resolve political differences may lead to war which in turn creates refugees.

 "Australia must increase its overseas aid effort and ensure aid programs contribute  directly to the alleviation of poverty, to ecological sustainability and to human rights  generally. We must extend our diplomatic efforts to promote the peaceful resolution of  conflict, as we have done in Cambodia. :

 "The Hawke Government has allowed the overseas aid budget to fall from J5  per cent  of GDP to less than .33 per cent. The Australian Democrats in their alternative budget  propsed an immediate increase to .45 per cent, with an increase to 1 per cent in the next  few years. '

 "It is neither humane nor economic to move masses of people from one country to .  another" said Senator Coulter. "Rather than being forced to turn people away in the  future, we should employ all means at our disposal to stop refugees being created in the  first place" he concluded.

 Further information: John Coulter 06.2773648 Jenny Macleod 06.2773645

 1885

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M ICAH

