---
title: "Khmer: access to advice"
date: "1990-09-07"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214093073
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08020210%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate Parliament House

 Tel: (02) 858 1011 Tel: (06) 277 4343 Fax: (02) 804 6739 Fax: (06) 277 2062

 KHMER: ACCESS TO ADVICE 7th September 1990

 The Government needs to come clean on its plans in relation to the  ongoing accommodation of Khmer asylum seekers in Australia.

 Already it has been suggested that the 79 Khmer in Darwin are to be  moved to more substantial premises at Port Hedland in order to  provide adequate accommodation during the wet season.

 However, there are suggestions that the 24 Khmer in Sydney, and  possibly the larger number in Melbourne, might also be moved to  Port Hedland.

 If the Government has in mind such a proposal the situation needs  to be clarified quickly.

 It is causing enormous anguish - not only to those personally held  in custody - but also to relatives and friends within Australia.

 A further matter which needs to be properly considered is the  rights of the asylum seekers to have access to proper advice in  order to assist them in putting forward proper claims they may have  to protection.

 It should not be forgotten that the Khmer generally have suffered  far more than most people who arrive in Australia seeking that  assistance.

 As we have seen volunteers with legal expertise assisting some of  the Khmer in Darwin, it is reasonable to ask how such voluntary  assistance might now be available to the remainder# as Port Hedland  is generally inaccessible and such expertise unlikely to be  available locally.

 Similarly, family members who may wish to assist those in Sydney  and Melbourne in obtaining proper legal advice and assistance again  would be put to very considerable additional costs to ensure that  such advice is available in Port Hedland.

 Australia values strongly its reputation for fairness; asylum  seekers do, through our law, have certain rights to be heard and  the Government should deal with such matters in a way which ensures  that not only are those rights respected but also that people 

 seeking to exercise them have a fair and reasonable opportunity to  do so.

 *****

