---
title: "Chinese immigrants threat to security"
date: "1990-06-07"
creators:
  - "Mcgauran, Julian"
source: "Office of MCGAURAN, SEN JULIAN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091362
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08024647%22
---

 SENATOR JULIAN hcGAURAN / -t

 M E D IA  RELEASE NATIONAL PARmENATOR· FOR VICTORIA the Se n a t e

 CHINESE IMMIG

 National Party Senator for Victoria, Julian McGauranf said  today Australia's security would be put at risk by the Prime  Minister's pledge of unrestricted residency status for Chinese  students studying in Australia.

 Senator McGauran said the initiative flatly contradicted  warnings from ASTO'e former Chief, Sir Harvey Barnett, that  Australia carefully regulate the presence of Chinese nationals  in Australia.

 He said these fears had been compounded by ASIO'S recent Annual  Report which indicated Australia's technological secrets had  been targeted by foreign intelligence agencies.

 Senator McGauran said intelligence operatives gaining entry  under loose immigration rules posed a direct threat to 

 Australia's domestic and economic security.

 He said Sir Harvey had publicly warned the Government only last  year not to be trapped by a sentimental overreaction to China.

 "Despite this, the Prime Minister has failed to keep 

 Australia's immediate interests in view when announcing his  initiative," Senator McGauran said. .

 "The unrestricted entry of 20,000 Chinese nationals into  Australia was likely to give a crop of Chinese intelligence  agents easy access to Australia's most vital economic and  military interests.

 "Given this, it is critical any immigration initiatives provide  for rigorous vetting of individual candidates.

 "The Government, however, has given no indication it will  investigate the students' backgrounds to ensure they present no  security threat to Australia."

 Senator McGauran said the plan to open the door to Chinese 

 students showed a disregard for community anxieties over the  current levels of immigration.

 "While the public has sought a thorough debate about the impact  of the social and economic effects of immigration, the 

 Government has struck out on its own course.

 "The Government has a manic determination to dismantle 

 Australia's cultural heritage," Senator McGauran said.

 - 2 -

 "Ite decision to permit the entry of a new wave of Chinese 

 immigrants will shatter all efforts to build a community 

 consensus on immigration policies.

 "The entry of 20,000 Chinese students would be swiftly followed  by a rapid and uncontrolled expansion of the family reunion  scheme.

 "This would blow any desires the community might have to 

 stabilise the mix of migrants in the community out of the 

 water," Senator McGauran said.

 He said the Government's initiative also showed a lack of 

 genuine humanitarian concern as there were many thousands of  other deserving refugees who warranted consideration in  Australia's immigration policies.

 "The plight of the ethnic Chinese confined in holding camps in  Hong Kong should be of equal if not more concern to the 

 Government than the status of those Chinese students enjoying  the privileges of Australia's education system."

 For further information, contact Senator Julian McGauran t 

 (03) 614-3489 or (03) 419-2019 

 June 7, 1990

