---
title: "Australia 2000 meeting on "building a better society" a great success!"
date: "1991-03-21"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214095787
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004769%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP I f

 Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 21 March 1991

 REF:

 AUSTRALIA 2000 MEETING ON "BUILDING A BETTER SOCIETY"  A GREAT SUCCESS! The question of how to build a better Australian society  towards the year 2000 was posed at a local Public Meeting  hosted by Federal Member for Dundas and Shadow Minister for 

 Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Philip Ruddock.

 This second Australia 2 000 meeting, held at the St Anne's  Church Hall, in Church Street Ryde last Tuesday evening, 19th  March, 1991 was aimed at giving local residents the 

 opportunity to express their views as to how a better society  could be obtained and to listen to various speakers with  differing persuasions.

 A diverse and interesting representation of local residents  attended, and the members of the Forum included the Reverend  Sir Alan Walker, Chairman of the National Goals and Directions  Movement and previous Superintendent of the Central Methodist  Mission, now known as the Wesley Central Mission.

 Les Whitcroft AM also participated as a forum member 

 representing the local Ryde Rotary club. Les has also had a  wealth of experiewnce in community involvement.

 Susie Nelson-Smith, Project Manager of Epping Skillshare  completed the Panel. Susie was representing the adult  education sector, and has had a background in Communications.

 The main points to come out of this meeting were as follows:

 * People must be prepared to adapt to change if we are to  ensure a better future for Australia and a better society in  which to live.

 * Much of the emphasis was placed on a change in values and  standards. We need a country that will be productive, not  only in terms of our economy, which was covered more 

 expansively at our first Australia 2000 meeting on "Creating a

 — z- Z

 More Productive Economy", but in terms of community spirit and  involvement, and the ability to get alongside those in need.

 * Reverend Sir Alan Walker also stressed the need for 

 Australian society to return to God and to the practices of  Christianity, and the need for the revival of a spiritual 

 focus. He also made the point that public leaders must adhere  to the pledged word. Without honesty in Government, and 

 Government being a reflection of general society, it would be  very difficult to ensure that societal standards and values  could be raised.

 * Immigration was a theme in the evening's discussions, 

 especially regarding the current levels of immigration. The  whole area of immigration is complex and different facets of  the programme were discussed, such as the recent tightening up 

 of conditions for marriages involving overseas spouses,  refugees and humanitarian applications.

 * The deterioration of the family unit due to economic 

 constraints, societal expectations and consumer demands was  another area discussed. Youth homelessness has been a direct  result of this, according to Les Whitcroft, and in order to  stop youth homelessness, there needs to be a return to the 

 importance of the family as the major support network. In 

 order that this can happen there needs to be a whole series of  actions, from Government level - a change in policy and 

 leadership bringing about an upturn in the economy and in the  allocation of resources to the community and individual 

 levels.

 * Health, conflict resolution and welfare spending and 

 allocation were other areas considered.

 "All in all, this meeting was most productive in considering  fresh approaches to this problem currently of concern to all  Australians, said Philip Ruddock.

 "All of the comments made will be forwarded to the respective  Liberal Federal Shadow Ministers for their consideration and  incorporation into Liberal Policy strategy".

 "Through this programme, and through other community 

 consultation programmes being undertaken throughout Australia,  I am confident that we will approach the next,: Federal election  the most thoroughly prepared party to implement the necessary  and wanted changes to Australian society, structures and 

 istitutions for a better Australian society."

 The next Australia 2000 meeting will be on "Improving and  Protecting our Environment". For further information on the  Australia 2000 programme, please do not hesitate to contact my  office on 858 3367.

