---
title: "Immigration department addressing permanent residence application backlog"
date: "1991-05-03"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214096426
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03009575%22
---

 M e d ia  Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T 2600   Telephone: (06) 2 7 7  7860

 MPS 32/91

 IMMIGRATION DEPARTMENT ADDRESSING PERMANENT RESIDENCE  APPLICATION BACKLOG

 Additional resources provided to the Immigration Department  earlier this year have enabled the Department to progress to  a point where it can reassess priorities in relation to  processing some of the older outstanding applications for  permanent residence.

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, said today many people from a range  of nationalities were still awaiting decisions on their  applications for residence status made under the former  Section 6(A)1 of the Migration Act —  a Section repealed on 

 19 December 1989.

 "I am aware from my community consultations and from -representations to the Department of the concerns about long  delays expressed by many applicants who lodged permanent  residence applications under provisions now repealed," the  Minister said. ,

 "I have also been concerned about the times being taken to  process cases in both the Determination of Refugee Status  (DORS) and Grant of Resident Status (GORS) areas, and expect  to improve those times.

 "The Government has given the Department additional  resources for both the current financial year and 1991-92 to  clear the outstanding on-shore residence caseload and to  process new cases.

 "In addition the Government recently provided extra  resources to implement a new system for determining claims  for refugee status and humanitarian stay, effective from 10  December 1990. Staff are already being recruited and trained  to undertake refugee processing."

 Mr Hand said many of the older outstanding residence cases  involved nationals from the Peoples Republic of China. They  would be processed along with all other cases in that group.

 "In this regard,  I am pleased that so many Chinese nationals  have decided to take advantage of the special temporary  entry arrangements announced for them on 27 June 1990," he  said.

 "Over 13 000 applications covering about 16 000 people have  already been made.

 "Some PRC nationals have decided not to apply for the  concession but to maintain their existing residence  applications. They are entitled to do so, and their  applications will be processed.

 "The Department will be asking people with outstanding  applications to provide updated information on their  circumstances, and the Government will attempt to determine  cases on the basis of that new information.

 "But the situation in some countries is still fluid, and it  may not be possible to resolve some- cases without further  lengthy inquiry."

 Mr Hand expressed the hope that this statement would relieve  the concerns of those who were worried about the length of  time needed to process their outstanding applications.

 "But," he added, "I cannot give any guarantees on how long  processing may take or what the possible outcomes might be."

 CANBERRA, 3 May 1991

 MEDIA INQUIRIES: Lynne Adams Minister's Office  (06) 277 7860

 Barry Welsby  DILGEA (06) 264 2195

