---
title: "Architect of ELICOS shambles revealed"
date: "1991-03-26"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214095899
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004765%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP 33

 Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739 Tel: (06) 277 4343 

 Fax: (06) 277 2062

 Parliament House

 ARCHITECT OF ELICOS SHAMBLES REVEALED

 It was always clear that the ELICOS program was out of control; that it had done enormous harm to  the Immigration Program; that it seriously impeded entry control; that it delivered an enormous illegal  entry problem.

 Only now it is clear that the Minister for Education, Mr Dawkins, is responsible for this shambles.

 In his attempt to "promote" the Education Export Industry, Mr Dawkins and his Department bypassed  entry requirements, degraded testing procedures and passed the responsibility of bona fide testing onto  education institutions ill-equipped to carry out this task.

 The harm done to the Immigration Program is immeasurable. It has led to a breakdown of the onshore  refugee program, with as many as 8,000 PRC applicants claiming refugee status banked up in the  system.

 The overstay rate of ELICOS students was estimated at 23.3 per cent in 1989. The overstay rate for  PRC students was 40 per cent in the same year. (1990 figures show the overstay rate of all students at  only 8.8 per cent). The breakdown of administration in this area will add up to approximately 40,000  illegals over the longer term including those who may have arranged marriages in an effort to stay in  the country.

 The average cost (excluding court costs) associated with locating and deporting an illegal entrant was  estimated at $9,000 by Senator Robert Ray in November 1989.

 An embarrassed Prime Minister through his inability to make emotionally unaffected decisions,  compounded the problem by extending 4-year temporary entry visas to many people who would  otherwise not have been eligible to remain in the country.

 The subsequent ream of regulations introduced to address this problem created by Mr Dawkins is an  indication of the extent to which the immigration program as a whole has been undermined.

 The scale of mismanagement of the Immigration Program by this government and particularly its  handling of ELICOS will mean that a final determination of the status of most PRC students in  Australia will be made by another government in 1994. The principled approach of case-by-case  determination of proper claims for protection can then proceed for those who have not found a place 

 in that immigration program under properly applied, non-discriminatory criteria.

 March 26 1991

