---
title: "Half a million dollars to fund Red Cross to aid Kurdish refugees"
date: "1991-05-08"
creators:
  - "Howe, Brian"
source: "Minister for Community Services and Health"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214096511
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04001813%22
---

 /£/ 

 NEWS Brian H o w e

 RELEASEMinister for Community Services and Health BH76/91 8TH MAY 1991

 HALF A  MILLION DOLLARS TO FUND RED CROSS TO AID KURDISH  REFUGEES

 The Federal Government will fund the Red Cross to send  Australian health and medical personnel to aid Kurdish refugees  in Iran, in addition to the Defence Force specialist  humanitarian Aid team announced on Monday.

 Announcing the decision today, on World Red Cross day, the  Minister for Community Services and Health, Brian Howe said he  was providing half a million dollars this financial year to  fund the medical and relief workers through the Red Cross.

 "The personnel will be chosen by the Red Cross, who will supply  people such as surgeons, nurses and sanitary engineers,  depending on what is needed and requested by the International  Red Cross in Geneva.

 "The personnel will be paid volunteers on a contract to work  for a period of three months in Iran, and it is expected the  funding will be enough to maintain up to 14 people in the field  for three months to six months, " Mr Howe said.

 "My colleague, the Minister for Immigration, Local Government  and Ethnic Affairs, Gerry Hand, is currently visiting the  Kurdish refugee camps in Turkey and Iran and on his return on  Sunday will be able to provide the Government with a first hand  assesssment of the situation," Mr Howe said.

 "The Red Cross is the appropriate body to manage the project as  it has the necessary structures, experience and expertise, both  here and internationally.

 "The Red Cross have indicated to my Department that as is their  role they will recruit, train, equip and support the medical  and relief workers. '

 "I am pleased that my Department is able to assist the  humanitarian cause to aid the Kurdish refugees in this way", Mr  Howe said.

 Media Contact: Marilyn Chalkley 06 2777680.

