---
title: "Overseas aid budget boost"
date: "1991-08-20"
creators:
  - "Blewett, Neal"
source: "Minister for Trade and Overseas Development"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214097655
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02003367%22
---

 No. Date: 

 Sb

 Overseas Aid Budget: Boost

 Australia's international development assistance funding will   be increased by one percent in real terms to $1313.9M in   1991/92.

 The Minister for Trade and Overseas Development,  Neal Blewett,   said that despite continuing tight fiscal discipline, the   Government would maintain the aid budget ratio of Official   Development Assistance (ODA) to Gross National Product (GNP) at  

 0.35 percent —  about the average for OECD countries.

 Dr Blewett said the budget increase would allow for a number of   key initiatives.

 "The development co-operation program for 1990-91 addresses   global environment issues,  emergency relief needs, assists   Australian exporters and provides increased support for   Australian non-government organisations," he said.

 Funding for the Government's Environment Assistance Program,   EAP, for developing countries would be increased to $80M over   the next four years.

 "Through the EAP, Australia will play a leading role in   developing a co-ordinated international response to the growing   environmental problems facing the world and the implementation   of ecologically sustainable development," Dr Blewett said.

 Australia would join the World Bank's Global Environment   Facility, provide funds for the Montreal Protocol to help   protect the ozone layer and support initiatives to protect   tropical forests, develop new population planning programs and   provide assistance for environment and conservation management  

 in our region.

 Dr Blewett said that in recognition of their important role in   the developing world, Australian Non-Government Organisations,   NGOs, would co-operate with AIDAB in implementing around $60M   of activities through the official Australian aid program.   Direct funding would be increased by 10 percent to $17M.

 Australia's Development Import Finance Facility (DIFF) would be   increased by $9M to $93M to assist Australian firms to win   development contracts in the face of stiff competition from   foreign firms supported by their governments.

 / 2 .

 2 .

 Dr Blewett said that 1990/91 had been an exceptional year for  natural and other disasters, causing the Government to increase  assistance by $7M over budgeted levels.

 "Conscious of the growing refugee problems throughout the world  and the prospect of massive famine in the Horn of Africa, the  Government has decided to maintain emergency and relief funding  at last year's higher level of $64M," he said.

 Funding for the .Australian Centre for International  Agricultural Research (ACIAR) would be increased to $18.9  million and funding for other intenrational agricultural  research activities would rise to $7.4 million.

 "This reflects the importance of agricultural research in  facilitating significant advancements in food production,  forage research, pest and disease control," he said.

 Dr Blewett said that $1.2M would be provided to assist with the  development of economic planning capacity in the anti-apartheid  community of South Africa.

 This assistance would be additional to the on-going $110M  three-year program for all Southern African countries.

 Another small but important initiative was a $270,000  contribution to an intra-ocular lens factory being established  by Professor Fred Hollows in Eritrea.

 "Australia's development co-operation program will continue to  respond to the growing challenge of poverty.

 "Environment screening of aid activities will help ensure that  ecologically sustainable activities are supported through the  program.

 "Other initiatives in areas such as health, women-in-development and population will be on-going.

 "The level of development assistance in our immediate  Asia/Pacific region will be maintained, and we will continue to  assist other countries in South Asia, Africa and the Indian  Ocean.

 "We will also play our part as a good international citizen  through our support of the international development banks, the  United Nations, the Commonwealth and other international  organisations," Dr Blewett said.

 Canberra: August 20 1991

