---
title: "Illegals still understated"
date: "1991-12-04"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214099800
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004507%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration 

 and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 ILLEGALS STIT T, UNDERSTATED

 The Coalition welcomes the Government's statement today that there has  been an increase of 216 percent in the number of illegal entrants located  between July and October 1991 compared with the same period last year.

 This amounts to some 4737 illegal entrants located and nearly half had their  departure enforced by the Department.

 This begs the question, what happened to the other half.

 According to the Department in an answer to a question in the Senate  Estimates more than half the illegals apprehended by the Department  exercised their entitlement to apply for grant of residence or refugee status.

 Senator Ray as Immigration Minister estimated that the cost of locating  illegals was approximately $9,000 per person in 1988. This figure would be  much higher in 1991 dollars.

 Thus, in that four month period, it would appear to have cost the Australian  taxpayers some $21 million to find some illegals only to see them apply to  remain in Australia on some other basis.

 Also, the number of people who became illegal whilst in Australia for 12  months or less last year was over 40,000. This would amount to an additional  13,000 who became illegal in the same four month period.

 Instead of seeing a benefit from the trebling of compliance officers, it would  seem that we are still going backwards in terms of the numbers of people  who are becoming illegal in Australia.

 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MiCAH

 ...12

 -  2 -

 The measures employed by the government to deal with this ever-growing  problem are still largely inadequate.

 The Coalition has suggested some additional ways in which the flow of  illegal immigrants to Australia may be slowed.

 The use of sanctions on employers who knowingly employ illegal entrants  ought to be considered, for example and a requirement on the tax office to  cite proof of status before tax file numbers were issued.

 The Australian Federal Police (AFP) have also raised concerns about the  increasing number of reports they are receiving about Chinese students  alleged to be involved in prostitution, credit card fraud and Triad-linked  offences, such as widespread extortion activities in the Chinese community.

 The AFP report, tabled in Parliament yesterday, also suggests that some of  the students have formed an employment pool to promote such activities.

 The Prime Minister ought to be held personally responsible for this rapid  increase in organised crime within this group, many of whom were illegal at  the time of the Tienanmen Square massacre. It was his personal decision to  grant blanket protection to this group, none of whom were subject to the  normal character checks which may have revealed previous criminal activity.

 The Government has a long way to go before it satisfies the Coalition, and  the Australian public, that it is dealing effectively with the serious problems  posed by illegal entrants.

 4 December 1991

