---
title: "Coalition response to Catholic issues paper"
date: "1991-09-17"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214098279
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004457%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate

 Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House

 Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 4178

 COALITION RESPONSE TO CATHOLIC ISSUES PAPER

 Australia's immigration program has served us well over a long period of time and the  support of the Catholic Church for a continued program is welcome and understandable.

 The Australian Catholic Social Justice Council's issues paper urges policy makers to  almost double the current intake and place an equal weight on each of the humanitarian,  family and economic categories.

 It is certainly true that a carefully targeted immigration program does not have a negative  effect on Australia's economy. If however, the program is unbalanced in favour of poorly  educated, unskilled non-English speaking migrants then a pool of long term,  unemployable settlers will be created.f Recent research discloses that they have the  hardest task in accessing the labour market.

 In the worst recession in sixty years such a pool of people already exists and there are  few opportunities in sight to alleviate their predicament.

 It is a fact of our present condition that the very migrant who would have the capacity  to add to our economy with resources, skills and a high level of education, are the very  people who are deciding not to migrate. Applicants in the economically driven categories 

 of employer nomination, concessional family and independent, have declined significantly  in recent years.

 The floating pass mark system, designed to cap programs, has been lowered to the point  where, in the concessional family category, only those too old, those without adequate  sponsor support, or those whose education is below the higher school certificate level, are  excluded.

 To obtain the significantly higher numbers that the Church is advocating would mean  abandoning the present entry requirements of the skilled category. The preferential  family category already racked by abuse through sham marriages, is at its optimum level  and the refugee categories, also targeted for abuse on-shore, is generous and  compassionate by world standards.

 By doubling in real terms, the size of our immigration program in the worst recession  known to modern Australia, migrants would become scapegoats for our economic and  social problems.

 September 17 1991

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

