---
title: "The Kurdish Tragedy"
date: "1991-04-08"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214096016
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02005208%22
---

 // 3.

 u f 

 John Hewson Leader of the Opposition  M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 77/91 8 April 1991

 THE KURDISH TRAGEDY

 The fate of Kurdish refugees fleeing from Saddam Hussein's brutal  vengeance against them threatens to become an appalling human  tragedy. It is time for the Australian Government to act 

 decisively in demonstrating both its humanitarian concern and its  opposition to Saddam Hussein's continuing contempt for basic  human rights.

 The scale of this tragedy is immense.

 Over the past month thousands of civilians in Iraq are reported  to have died during the repression of unsuccessful revolts  against Saddam Hussein's rule.

 Now there is the prospect of well over a million refugees, mainly  Kurdish, being forced out of Iraq and into neighbouring 

 countries. Many of them, young and old, face death and

 deprivation in the process.

 This situation engages both our humanitarian concern and the  strategic interests of the international coalition that fought  against Saddam in the recent Gulf War.

 At a humanitarian level, the scale of this emerging tragedy  requires a prompt response.

 At a strategic level, Iraq's actions against its Kurdish 

 population clearly threatens peace and security, at both a  regional and international level.

 The Australian Government needs to demonstrate a much greater  sense of urgency and decisiveness in response to this situation.

 Specifically, it should :

 .  lobby actively, in the United Nations and through other 

 appropriate international channels, in support of the view  that the ending by Iraq of its repression of the Kurdish  people should be made a specific criterion for the lifting  of UN economic sanctions against Iraq and for any formal  declaration of peace

 .  in addition to assisting through the United Nations, be 

 prepared, within the existing aid budget, to join with the  United States, Britain, Germany and other countries which  are providing emergency relief directly to the refugees now  isolated on the mountains of northern Iraq.

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 -  2 -

 I will be meeting tomorrow with representatives of the Australian  Kurdish community. I will be putting these points of view 

 directly to them. It is time the Australian Government did the  same.

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT (06) 277 4022

