---
title: "Dr John Hewson MP Leader of the Opposition at the dinner for his excellency Mr Turgut Ozal, AC President of the Republic of Turkey and Mrs Ozal"
date: "1991-05-09"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214096521
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02005281%22
---

 Leader of the Opposition

 Check Against Delivery Embargo 9.00 pm

 SPEECH BY

 DR JOHN HEWSON MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 AT THE DINNER FOR

 HIS EXCELLENCY MR TURGUT OZAL, AC  PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY  AND MRS OZAL

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE  9 MAY 1991

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600 Phone 277 4022

 t

 President Ozal and Mrs Ozal, Prime Minister and Mrs Hawke, Distinguished Guests,  Ladies and Gentlemen

 On behalf of the Federal Opposition, I am pleased to support the Prime Minister this  evening in welcoming both you, Mr President, and Mrs Ozal to Australia.

 I am also pleased to welcome three of your Ministerial colleagues and the Deputy  Speaker of the Turkish Parliament who are travelling with you.

 The program for your visit is certainly an intensive one and I trust it is also  informative, enjoyable and productive. '

 Mr President, the opportunity I had last year to accompany Australia's First World  War veterans to the battlefields near Anzac Cove for the 75th anniversary of the  Gallipoli campaign was one of the most moving experiences of my life.

 I was privileged to make a short address at the Lone Pine ceremony on Anzac Day  last year.

 I spoke of the special pride which all Australians feel at the mention of the word  "Gallipoli".

 I spoke of the special place which the heroes of our first Anzac Day hold in the  hearts of all Australians.

 I was particularly pleased to see so many young Australians who had gone to Gallipoli  to see the Battlefields that were in many cases so important to their families. That visit, Mr President, also taught me much about your own country.

 I was able to appreciate how the Gallipoli campaign created an enduring sense of  nationhood not just for Australia, but also for Turkey.

 I was able to witness at first hand the especially high regard in which your own First  World War soldiers are held by the Turkish people.

 It was, therefore, the pride I felt in our own ANZACs and the better understanding I  gained of what Gallipoli meant for the Turkish people that made Anzac Day 1990  such a memorable experience for me, and I am sure, for so many others.

 The depth of the reconciliation between Australia and Turkey in the years that  followed the tragic confrontation of 1915 says much about the people of both our  countries.

 Last year's 75th anniversary of the Gallipoli campaign highlighted the depth of that  reconciliation.

 Its memorable success was due not only to the spirit of friendship and comradeship  among all who attended. It was also due, Mr President, to your own committed  efforts.

 t

 s

 2

 And I take this opportunity of conveying publicly to you, sir, the appreciation of the  Liberal and National Parties for all that you did to help make the 25th of April 1990  so memorable for so many people.

 Mr President, I welcomed the opportunity we had this afternoon to discuss a range of  bilateral and international issues.

 It would be less than honest, of course, to pretend that we agreed on all those issues.  The fact that we did not, however, makes meetings such as ours today and visits such  as yours to Australia all the more important. Because only by putting our views  clearly and directly can we minimise misunderstandings and maximise the potential for  the resolution of differences we have.

 Each of us put our different views on issues such as the situation in Cyprus and the  importance of respect for basic human rights.

 These are important issues for Australians and their significance should not be  underrated.

 It is a measure of the maturity of our bilateral relations that we can discuss our  differences on such issues in a direct, but respectful, way - as we did this afternoon.

 It is also important that without minimising or avoiding our differences, we keep them  in proper perspective.

 There are many important issues on which Australia and Turkey share common views.  And there are many bilateral economic opporutnities where great potential exists.

 First, as joint members of the Western Alliance, Australia and Turkey share many  common security interests. The Gulf war served to highlight that fact.

 Turkey, Australia and an overwhelming international coalition led by the United  States, joined together in ensuring that Iraq's naked aggression against Kuwait would  be neither legitimised nor tolerated.

 The contribution of both our countries to that outcome should be a source of pride.

 But now the world confronts the consequences of the upheaval within Iraq. In  particular, we are witnessing the appalling tragedy that has befallen the Kurdish  refugees in northern Iraq.

 The short-term requirement is for a massive international relief effort - and both  Turkey and Australia are now making a significant contribution to it.

 f

 3

 But in the longer term, the situation will only be resolved by a change of attitudes. In  whatever country they live, minorities, such as the Kurdish people, must be allowed to  live their lives free from persecution and intimidation. And that right must be one  which a]l nations respect.

 In that context, Mr President, the democratic reform measures passed last month by  the Turkish Parliament, including measures to respect the use of the spoken Kurdish  language, are an important step forward. We hope they will foreshadow further such  measures in the future.

 Second, on international trade issues, Australia and Turkey share a commitment to  the open multilateral system. Within that system we are both making regional efforts  to encourage a freer movement of people, goods and capital.

 There exists great scope for both our countries to work together to maintain the  GATT-based open trade system which is currently under such challenge.

 And there is also great scope for each of us to learn from the other's efforts at  regional trade liberalisation - Australia's in the APEC process, and Turkey's in the  recently established Black Sea Economic Co-operation Process.

 And third, at a bilateral level, the opportunities for growth are expanding. With our  relatively modest two-way trade in 1990 worth $170 million, the scope for expansion is  considerable.

 The Australia Turkey Joint Economic Committee, established last year, provides a  good basis to facilitate such expansion, particularly in areas such as agricultural  technology and traditional markets such as coal and wool.

 I hope that your visit will provide the impetus that will enable some of these potential  growth areas in our bilateral relationship to be realised.

 I note, in particular, that you have seen at first hand this week some of the  magnificent engineering achievements of the Snowy Mountains Hydroelectric Scheme.  I hope that some of that expertise can be utilised by Turkey in its major agricultural  engineering undertaking - the South-Eastern Anatolia Project.

 Mr President, your visit to our country symbolises the strength of a bilateral  relationship that is growing in its scope and in its maturity.

 We wish you well for the remainder of your visit and a safe return home.

 oooOOOooo

