---
title: "Budget related papers confirm opposition's view"
date: "1991-08-30"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214097973
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004465%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP (Ot

 Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 BUDGET RELATED PAPERS CONFIRM

 OPPOSITION'S VIEW

 Budget-related paper number 8.9 contains information which confirms the  Opposition's long-held view on the inadequacy of the determination of  refugee process.

 Of the 17,000 cases which have been backlogged in the system for up to a  year, only 6,000 cases have been pre-screened to establish whether a claim  of substance has been made.

 Even with increased funding and extra staff, 13,000 primary decisions will be '  made but only 3632 applications will have been through the review process  this year. It is not unreasonable to expect that people who have their  applications refused in the first tier will want to press their claims further  and apply for second tier review. At the rate these claims are expected to  be dealt with this year, it will still take up to five years to process the  backlog.

 Government claims that the backlog will be cleared by the end of June 1993  should be viewed with scepticism.

 The Government will probably also find that the 15% allocation of funds to  the review stage will be inadequate to deal with the anticipated case load.  We should not be surprised to hear that this allocation will have to be  increased before the end of the year.

 (The relevant pages of the budget-related paper number 8.9 are attached).

 August 30 1991

 PROGRAM PERFORMANCE

 Program Element 1.5

 Processing of On-Shore Asylum Claimants 

 Performance indicators

 . number of cases processed per unit of ASL;

 . number of decisions overturned on review; and

 . level of consultation with community interests on the effectiveness of the  determination process and provisions for asylum claimants.

 OUTCOME FOR 1990-91

 In the course of the 1980s an average of approximately 400 refugee claims per year were  received. The application rate which averaged about 1,000 per month in 1990 (producing  an accumulated total of approximately 16,100 cases in May 1991) appears to be  stabilising at about 800 per month. About 65% of applications are from the People’s 

 Republic of China (PRC) nationals.

 On 10 December 1990, a new streamlined system providing expeditious and fair  determination of claims for refugee status and humanitarian stay in Australia was  introduced. It comprises three stages: a primary stage for applications to be assessed and  decisions taken quickly on the grant of refugee status; a review stage, consisting of an 

 examination of negative assessments by a Refugee Status Review Committee (RSRC); and  Ministerial discretion to grant temporary stay on humanitarian grounds where refugee  status is not recommended but the Minister believes there is a compelling reason for  humanitarian stay.

 Resources available to process applications were also significantly increased in order to  speed up decision-making. Approximately 160 extra staff members have been recruited  and specifications and costings for equipment and computer systems have been prepared.  The additional resources will minimise the uncertainty and hardship faced by many  applicants awaiting the outcome of their applications and will ensure that frivolous and 

 unfounded claims are dealt with expeditiously and fairly.

 An important element of the new system is the inclusion of a community representative  on the RSRC. This will enhance the independence and integrity of the refugee  determination process. In addition to providing a merits review stage in the determination  process, the RSRC will also provide advice to the Minister in the exercise of his 

 discretionary power to grant stay on humanitarian grounds.

 61

 Guidelines to assist the RSRC in identifying the cases to which the Minister may wish to  consider granting stay on humanitarian grounds have been prepared following extensive  consultations with community groups and interest groups involved with refugees.

 New arrangements for residence were also introduced 4n order to end the presumption in  law and practice that the grant of protection to those determined to be refugees or to have  humanitarian claims leads to the automatic grant of permanent residence. From July  1990, successful applicants for refugee status or humanitarian stay are now granted four 

 year temporary entry permits. People holding temporary entry permits with an ongoing  need for protection will have the opportunity to seek permanent residence after four years  subject to places being available in the Migration Program or be granted a further  temporary entry permit.

 Processing of applications in 1990-91 was affected by the focus on the development and  implementation of organisational infrastructure for the new system. From July 1990 to  February 1991, 239 cases were finalised. Of this number, 62 cases were approved for the  grant of refugee status. In 1989-90, 449 cases were finalised, of which 77 were  approved. Fluctuations in the proportion of approvals to cases finalised occur from year  to year, often as a result of extraneous factors and do not reflect changes in policy.

 The focus of Determination of Refugee Status (DORS) activity from January to June 1991  has been the development of detailed administrative procedures to implement the new  DORS process and the recruitment, training and organisational design necessary to absorb  the newly recruited staff to tackle the 17,000 cases on hand. Despite this focus, about  6,000 cases have been pre-screened to establish whether a claim of substance has been 

 made (a necessary test prior to issuing a work permit).

 Refugee processing centres have been established in Canberra, Melbourne and Sydney.  The process is centralised with operations being set up in Sydney and Melbourne to cater  for detention cases and the high volume of PRC cases.

 The number of persons approved for Grant of Residence Status (GORS) on humanitarian  or compassionate grounds during the year was 2173, far exceeding the 1,000 places  which were originally set aside for grant of residence on refugee or humanitarian grounds  in the 1990-91 Migration Program. A backlog of 4,500 remains.

 Special provisions were implemented for PRC nationals who were in Australia on 20 June  1989, as announced by Government on 27 June 1990. PRC nationals in this group  became eligible to apply for a special PRC temporary entry permit valid to 30 June 1994.  Approximately 16,000 PRC nationals have taken up the special four year temporary entry  permit.

 Program Element 1.5

 62

 r

 Short term extensions of stay were made available for Sri Lankan visitors and temporary  residents until 31 December 1991 and for Lebanese visitors and temporary residents until  30 November 1991 in recognition of the ongoing conflicts in these two countries. In  response to the Gulf crisis, extensions of stay until 30 April 1991 were granted to 

 nationals of Kuwait, Iraq, Israel and Saudi Arabia who were holders of temporary entry  permits and were in Australia on 17 January 1991. These concessions were extended  until 31 July 1991 for nationals from Iraq and Kuwait.

 Program Element 1.5

 OUTLOOK FOR 1991-92

 For 1991-92 the level of resourcing has been negotiated with the Department of Finance.

 The Resource Agreement covering the 1991-92 DORS program activity provides for:

 . maximum staffing of 310 (including 110 temporary staff) on the basis that the  current 9,000 PRC applications are a ’one-off caseload; and

 . full-year productivity of 50.6 primary decisions or 78.1 review decisions per  officer. Of total resources, 85% will be devoted to processing applications to the  primary stage within an output target of 12,944 decisions, and 15% to the review  stage with an output target of 3,632 decisions.

 The Government has set June 1993 as the target for dealing with the large accumulation  of cases. By that date the processing time should be an average of 9 months per case  (including review).

 From 10 December 1990, applicants for refugee status have the right to seek a review of  decisions to refuse refugee status by a new body, the RSRC. It is estimated that up to  3,632 decisions will be reviewed in 1991-92.

 Processing will be accelerated as additional staff are recruited and trained.

 Planned elimination of backlog by June 1993 assuming applications continue at the rate of  10,000 in 1991-92 and 6,000 thereafter.

 Applications for GORS on humanitarian or compassionate grounds are to be processed as  a matter of priority. With increased resources and greater support and backup from the  relevant procedural and policy areas of the Department, it is anticipated that virtually all  the backlog will be finalised by the end of the program year.

 63

