---
title: "Brickbats and bouquets"
date: "1991-09-03"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214098053
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004461%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP 

 ( O S

 Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 3 September 1991

 BRICKBATS AND BOUQUETS

 "The successful transfer of 113 Khmer boat people from Melbourne to  Sydney last Friday is to be commended" Philip Ruddock, Shadow Minister  for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs commented today.

 "Unlike earlier moves, the Minister consulted widely and ensured those  affected had access to advice and counsel. It should be understood that this  move was necessary in order to ensure that those held in custody could not  abscond. The Melbourne absent-without-leave experience has been sobering  and disappointing.

 Like the Minister I am disappointed that this move has been necessary.  I am pleased that he has learned from the criticism of the last move of  Khmer from Melbourne to Darwin. That move put at risk this country's  reputation for adherance to international conventions on refugee  determination and its application of appropriate, but nevertheless  compassionate, treatment of claimants for protection.

 It must not be forgotten that detention is undertaken at a considerable  cost to the Australian taxpayer. Delay in the lodgement of claims, and  extended time for processing and consideration, is unjust in itself. It builds  up unrealistic expectations amongst those seeking protection and it  compromises the national interest.

 - continued -

 -  2 -

 Australia's ability to control its own borders and determine who shall,  or shall not, enter Austalia permanently is at risk. This risk arises as a result  of the message sent abroad because of these delays. The Government's  failure to realistically grapple with the ever growing numbers of on-shore  refugee claimants, by many who are making bogus claims merely to remain  here also undermines the integrity of our border control.

 Budget related papers report on the enormity of the task and the  inability of the Department, with existing resources, to cope with these  demands.

 The Government's reputation in the area of refugee determination was  sullied when it failed to undertake case-by-case determination of the claims  of PRC Nationals in Australia at the time of the Tienanmen Square  massacre. That failure has precipitated the large number of refugee  applications (17,600) now confronting this Government.

 The Minister, who has already announced his retirement from  Parliament at the end of this term, has little time left to put in place the  initiatives to re-establish control of Australia's entry arrangements."

 *  *  *

