---
title: "Migrant settlement services increased"
date: "1991-08-20"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214097667
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03009560%22
---

 M e d ia  Release  < $ % Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T 2600   Telephone: (06) 2 7 7  7860

 IMMIGRATION BUDGET STATEMENT 2 

 MIGRANT SETTLEMENT SERVICES INCREASED

 Spending on migrant settlement services will increase by  $10.23 million to $135 million in 1991-92, and by $14.41  million to $137.7 million in 1992-93.

 Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, said this represented a real  increase of 7.6 per cent over the current base in 1991-92.

 The Government has, in addition, given the Adult Migrant  English Program (AMEP) the scope to raise a further $6.02  million in 1991-92 and $17.07 million in 1992-93 from cost  -recovery.

 "Mr Hand said- _ t  t 

 settlement programs were underfunded, especially in the  current climate of economic downturn and industry  restructuring.

 "The up-front investment in settlement assistance represents  a relatively small investment compared with the potential  social and economic contributions migrants make to  Australia," he said.

 Recognising the particular importance of English language  to successful settlement, most of the additional resources  will go towards improvements in the AMEP.

 The aim is to increase hours of tuition for each participant  from an average of 370 hours to an average of more than 500,  and in a number of areas the standard of accommodation for  teaching will be improved.

 The additional hours of available tuition combined with  linkages to the Newstart program will help secure better  labour market prospects for migrants.

 I-------COMMONWEALTH

 I P ARLIAMF. NT ARY Li BRARY  j MiCAH

 ·/2

 - 2 -

 Measures to improve the on-going effectiveness of the AMEP  will include better management information systems,  revised  Commonwealth/State arrangements and resource agreements, and  better coordination with Commonwealth labour market 

 programs.

 Grants to the community sector will also increase.

 "This will help community organisations and volunteers to  cope with the demands of new arrivals at a time when their  resources are being stretched by the need for additional  support from the general population," Mr Hand said.

 "It will reinforce their capacity to deal effectively with  migrants who are most at risk, including refugees."

 Limited resources will also be available to improve  on-arrival accommodation in some areas, again targeting  those new arrivals at greatest risk.

 Some of the cost of these adjustments will be borne through  revenue available to the Department from existing fees and  charges.

 Within the settlement program itself, part of the additional  resources for the AMEP will be met by the introduction of  cost recovery from January 1, following consultation with  community groups and the Minister for Finance on the form  this should take.

 Consistent with the Government's social justice policy,  interpreting services will remain free to individuals and  non-profit community welfare organisations.

 CANBERRA 20 August, 1991

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams David Page Minister's Office DILGEA (06) 277.7860 (06) 264.2061

