---
title: "Coalition ethnic affairs policy"
date: "1991-11-21"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214099385
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004512%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate

 Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House

 Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 4178

 COALITION ETHNIC AFFAIRS POLICY

 The Coalition has exempt settlement services, from expenditure cuts.

 ; , . ' 1  '! ■  1  i , i . ' 

 • It remains committed to providing services which w ill;ensure- the earliest and most  V successful settlement of new migrants in Australia. This includes maintaining a focus on  the provision of English language training, Grant-In-Aid funding and increasing the  , .availability of capital grants for ethnic schools.

 Also, because of continued concern about issues raised in the reports on Racist Violence  and Black Deaths in Custody, the Coalition will retain the Human Rights and Equal  Opportunity Commission.

 As has been indicated before by the Opposition, the issue of racial vilification and  discrimination is one of concern and additional consideration is being given to the  implementation of several recommendations made by reports to the Government.

 However, as with all areas of government expenditure, the Opposition will be looking for  some expenditure savings in its operations.

 In relation to the operation of the Immigration Department it was also decided that no  reductions would be made in departmental expenditure. The department is already  severely under-resourced for a number of its existing functions, particularly in the  compliance areas and refugee determination.

 The Coalition approach is to re-order priorities in the Immigration Department so as to  ensure that the program, which has come into so much disrepute, is once again tailored  to serve Australia's national interest.

 Additional revenue will be generated through full cost recovery for immigration  processing. However costs associated with refugee and humanitarian claims and others  in extreme hardship, will not be pursued.

 November 21 1991 COMMONWEALTH  

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

