---
title: "Australia to fly in emergency assistance to Kurdish refugees"
date: "1991-04-10"
creators:
  - "Blewett, Neal"
source: "Minister for Trade and Overseas Development"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214096059
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02003322%22
---

 No. MT23 Dat(*0 APril 1991 it

 AUSTRALIA TO FLY IN EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE TO KURDISH REFUGEES

 Australia is to provide a large consignment of emergency-  supplies to assist Kurdish refugees in Turkey, the Minister for  Trade and Overseas Development,  Neal Blewett, announced today.

 The consignment of approximately 22 tonnes of tents, blankets,   clothing and emergency food rations will leave Richmond Airbase  on Saturday morning in a RAAF 707 aircraft. The aircraft is  expected to reach Incirlik Airbase in Turkey on Monday local 

 time.

 "Recent estimates have put the number of Kurdish refugees in  the region of the Turkish-Iraq border as high as 750,000. This  area is mountainous and bitterly cold - so the refugees' plight  is extremely serious. They are in desperate need of help of  this kind," Dr Blewett said.

 After being unloaded at the Turkish airbase, the supplies will  be airdropped by parachute to the refugees by allied forces.

 This contribution is being made by the Australian Government in  co-operation with the Australian Overseas Disaster Response  Organisation, which is providing several tonnes of blankets and  clothing.

 The emergency relief supplies to Kurdish refugees form part of  the Australian Government's program of overseas development  co-operation administered by the Australian International  Development Assistance Bureau.

 CANBERRA

 For further information contact:  Ali Gillies, Director, Public Information Section, AIDAB  Phone (06) 2764960

 COMMONWEALTH  parliam entary library MICAH

