---
title: "Speech to be given by Dr Blewett at the opening of the ASEAN-Australia Forum"
date: "1991-04-22"
creators:
  - "Blewett, Neal"
source: "Minister for Trade and Overseas Development"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214096241
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02003320%22
---

 Îœ ®

 ÎœÎ¦25 22 A p r i l  1 9 9 ±

 No. Date: 

 Ao

 ASEAN-AUSTRALIA FORUM

 Following is the text of the sp eech  by the M inister for Trade and   O verseas D evelopm ent, Dr Neal Blew ett, at the op en in g of the   ASEAN-Australia Forum in Canberra on 22 April, 1991:

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY U dRa RY  Mi CAM

 SPEECH TO BE GIVEN BY DR BLEWETT

 AT THE OPENING OF THE ASEAN-AUSTRALIA FORUM

 on 22 Ap r i l 1991

 MR CHAIRMAN

 EXCELLENCIES 

 DISTINGUISHED GUESTS 

 LADIES AND GENTLEMEN

 ON BEHALF OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT I  WOULD LIKE TO WELCOME 

 YOU TO CANBERRA FOR THE FOURTEENTH ASEAN-AUSTRALIA FORUM. IN MY 

 TWELVE MONTHS AS A TRADE MINISTER I  HAVE V I S I T E D  ALL BUT ONE OF 

 THE ASEAN NATIONS AND I  LOOK FORWARD TO DEVELOPING THE 

 FRIENDSHIPS I  HAVE MADE, NOT JUST IN MY CONTINUING 

 RESPONSIBILITY AS MINISTER FOR TRADE BUT ALSO IN A RELATIVELY 

 NEW ROLE -  THAT OF MINISTER FOR OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT.

 AUSTRALIA PLACES PARTICULAR EMPHASIS ON IT S  RELATIONS WITH THE 

 MEMBERS OF ASEAN AND WAS THE FIRST COUNTRY TO ESTABLISH A 

 DIALOGUE RELATIONSHIP WITH ASEAN. SINCE THAT TIM E, WE HAVE SEEN 

 ASEAN DEVELOP AND MATURE TO THE POINT WHERE I T  I S  NOW AN 

 ESTABLISHED AND EFFECTIVE REGIONAL ORGANISATION OF MAJOR 

 IMPORTANCE IN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS. THE ASEAN POST 

 MINISTERIAL CONFERENCES HAVE BECOME THE MOST IMPORTANT REGIONAL 

 GATHERING NOT ONLY FOR AUSTRALIA BUT ALSO FOR THE UNITED 

 STATES, CANADA, THE EC, JAPAN AND NEW ZEALAND.

 THE SUCCESS OF ASEAN AS AN INSTIT U TIO N  CAN BE MEASURED NOT JUST 

 BY IT S  HIGH STANDING IN THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY BUT ALSO BY 

 THE EXTENT OF THE CO-OPERATION AMONG IT S MEMBERS. THE MOST 

 PROMINENT EXAMPLES OF THIS CO-OPERATION HAVE BEEN POLITICAL - 

 WITNESS THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN ASEAN MEMBERS ON ISSUES SUCH AS

 2 .

 CAMBODIA AND THE INDO-CHINESE REFUGEE PROBLEM. BUT ASEAN  

 CO-OPERATION IS WIDE-RANGING. EXTENDING INTO AREAS AS DIVERSE  

 AS TRADE, ENERGY, COMMODITIES, SOCIAL WELFARE, CULTURE, LABOUR  

 AFFAIRS, EDUCATION, THE ENVIRONMENT, YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AND  

 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY.

 ALSO IMPORTANT HAS BEEN THE EFFORT WHICH HAS GONE INTO  

 DEVELOPING INTRA-ASEAN ECONOMIC COOPERATION. I T  WOULD NOT BE  

 UNFAIR, I  THINK, TO SAY THAT IN THE PAST THERE HAVE BEEN SOME  

 PROBLEMS IN THIS AREA, BUT LAST YEAR'S ASEAN ECONOMIC 

 MINISTERS' MEETING CLEARLY RECOGNISED THE NEED FOR A BOLDER,  

 MORE INNOVATIVE APPROACH TO INTRA-ASEAN ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION.

 THE BILATERAL AND TRILATERAL ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION WHICH ASEAN  

 HAS FOSTERED IS  ALSO VERY PROMISING. A GOOD EXAMPLE IS THE  

 "TRIANGLE OF ECONOMIC GROWTH", AN INNOVATIVE CONCEPT IN  

 REGIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INVOLVING SINGAPORE, THE  

 INDONESIAN PROVINCE OF RIAU AND THE MALAYSIAN STATE OF JOHOR.  

 AUSTRALIA, TOO, CAN PROFIT FROM THIS TYPE OF CO-OPERATION  

 BETWEEN THE ASEAN NATIONS. INCREASED PROSPERITY WILL OPEN UP  

 NEW EXPORT AND INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES AND THE POSSIBILITY OF  

 JOINT-VENTURE PROJECTS TO FURTHER DEVELOP INFRASTRUCTURE.

 AUSTRALIA AND THE ASEAN NATIONS ALREADY ENJOY SUBSTANTIAL AND  

 GROWING ECONOMIC LINKS. JUST OVER ELEVEN PERCENT OF ALL  

 AUSTRALIAN EXPORTS NOW GO TO THE ASEAN COUNTRIES, COMPARED TO  

 SIX POINT FIVE PERCENT IN 1 986. IMPORTS FROM THE ASEAN  

 COUNTRIES IN 1990 WERE WORTH SOME THREE BILLION DOLLARS AND  

 ACCOUNTED FOR ABOUT SIX PERCENT OF ALL AUSTRALIAN IMPORTS -  UP  

 FROM FIVE PERCENT IN 1986. THE GROWTH IN TRADE HAS NOT BEEN  

 CONFINED TO GOODS -  TOURISM HAS ALSO BEEN EXPANDING RAPIDLY.

 Î¯ < i.

 A U S T R A L I A N  B U S I N E S S  HAS AL READY BEEN T A K I N G  ADVANT AGE OF THE 

 O P P O R T U N I T I E S  OFFERED BY YOUR DY NA MI C ECONOMI C GROWTH.  L E T  ME 

 B R I E F L Y  ME NT I ON SOME RECENT SUCCESS S T O R I E S .  OTC I N T E R N A T I O N A L ,

 t h e  A u s t r a l i a n  o v e r s e a s  t e l e c o m m u n i c a t i o n s  c o r p o r a t i o n , h a s  h a d  

 a  m a j o r  r o l e  i n  d e v e l o p i n g  t e l e c o m m u n i c a t i o n s  i n  T h a i l a n d , a n d ,  

 u s i n g  B a n g k o k  a s  i t s  b a s e , h a s  e n t e r e d  i n t o  c o n t r a c t s  i n  

 I n d o - C h i n a . K i n h i l l  e n g i n e e r s  a r e  p r o v i d i n g  a  w i d e  r a n g e  o f  

 e n g i n e e r i n g  s e r v i c e s  i n  I n d o n e s i a  f r o m  t h e i r  J a k a r t a

 O P E R A T I O N S .  P AND 0  A U S T R A L I A  HAS WON MAJOR CONTRACTS FOR THE 

 DEVEL OPMENT OF PORT F A C I L I T I E S  I N  M A L A Y S I A  AND THE

 P h i l i p p i n e s . MEGADATA f i r s t  secured  a contra ct  for i t s  power

 STATION CONTROL SYSTEM WITH MERALCO, THE MANILA ELECTRICITY 

 AUTHORITY, AND ON THE BASIS OF ITS SUCCESS IN THE PHILIPPINES 

 SECURED A CONTRACT WITH THE ELECTRICITY GENERATING AUTHORITY OF

 Th a i l a n d .

 THE ASEAN AUSTRALIA ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION PROGRAM, WHICH BEGAN 

 IN 1974, HAS AIMED AT STRENGTHENING INTRA-ASEAN AND 

 ASEAN-AUSTRALIA RELATION? THROUGH ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION. 

 AUSTRALIA HAS PROVIDED ABOUT $100 MILLION FOR THE PROGRAM.

 PHASE ONE OF THE AAECP PROGRAM HAS BEEN SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED. 

 STAGE TWO CONCENTRATES ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY AND FOOD AND 

 AGRICULTURE PROJECTS, AS WELL AS TRADE AND INVESTMENT PROMOTION.

 THE TRADE AND INVESTMENT LINKS BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND THE ASEAN 

 NATIONS WILL CONTINUE TO GROW, ENCOURAGED NOT ONLY BY 

 GEOGRAPHIC PROXIMITY BUT ALSO BY THE DISMANTLING OF THE 

 PROTECTIVE BARRIERS WHICH HAVE TRADITIONALLY SHELTERED 

 AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIES FROM INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION. IN A 

 MAJOR ECONOMIC STATEMENT ON 12 MARCH, THE AUSTRALIAN PRIME 

 MINISTER ANNOUNCED A FURTHER ROUND OF TARIFF CUTS WHICH BUILD 

 ON SUBSTANTIAL REDUCTIONS ANNOUNCED IN 1 9 88 . AS A RESULT OF 

 THESE TARIFF CUTS, THE PROTECTION PROVIDED TO AUSTRALIAN

 3.

 4 .

 INDUSTRY, INCLUDING THOSE SECTORS WHICH HAVE IN THE PAST  

 ENJOYED HEAVIEST PROTECTION, SUCH AS THE TEXTILES, CLOTHING AND  

 FOOTWEAR AND MOTOR VEHICLES INDUSTRIES, WILL BE REDUCED TO VERY  

 LOW LEVELS. THE AVERAGE MFN TARIFF ON ALL IMPORTS WILL FALL  

 FROM ABOUT EIGHTEEN PERCENT IN 1 9 8 7 - 8 8  TO UNDER FIVE PERCENT BY 

 THE YEAR 2 0 0 0 . IN TEN YEARS AUSTRALIA WILL HAVE ONE OF THE MOST  

 OPEN ECONOMIES IN THE WORLD. THE MEMBERS OF ASEAN ARE  

 WELL-POSITIONED TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS.

 THE PROCESS OF LIBERALISATION CANNOT BE A ONE-WAY MATTER. THE

 Au s t r a l i a n  Go v e r n m e n t  has told Au s t r a l i a n  b u s i n e s s  t h a t i t  w i l l

 HAVE TO BECOME MORE COMPETITIVE TO SURVIVE THE CHANGES IN OUR  

 TARIFF STRUCTURE. AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS FOR THE MOST PART IS  

 PREPARED TO MEET THAT CHALLENGE. AUSTRALIA WILL BE LOOKING TO  

 YOU IN OUR EXCHANGES IN THE URUGUAY ROUND, AND IN OUR BILATERAL  

 TRADE EXCHANGES, TO MOVE IN THE SAME DIRECTION.

 THE URUGUAY ROUND NOW OFFERS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR COUNTRIES IN  

 THE REGION TO OBTAIN BINDING GATT COMMITMENTS IN THE AUSTRALIAN  

 MARKET. IN RETURN FOR THAT AUSTRALIA WILL BE SEEKING  

 SIG NIFIC A NT TARIFF AND NON TARIFF LIBERALISATION IN ASEAN  

 MARKETS. THE EXTENT TO WHICH WE WILL ALL JUDGE THE URUGUAY  

 ROUND OUTCOME AS A SUCCESS WILL DEPEND IN NO SMALL MEASURE ON  

 THE DEGREE OF LIBERALISATION ACHIEVED IN TRADE IN OUR REGION.

 CLEARLY THERE IS  MORE THAT CAN BE DONE TO DEVELOP OUR ECONOMIC  

 LINKS. THE LEVEL OF AUSTRALIAN INVESTMENT IN ASEAN IS  

 DISAPPOINTING. HOWEVER I T  IS  USED AS VENTURE CAPITAL IN AREAS  

 VITAL TO ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT. SIMILARLY, ALTHOUGH AUSTRALIA'S  

 TRADE WITH THE ASEAN COUNTRIES HAS RISEN SIGNIFICANTLY IN VALUE  

 OVER THE PAST FEW YEARS, OUR SHA rI  OF ASEAN'S TRADE HAS 

 REMAINED CONSTANT.

 5 .

 the Au s t r a l i a n  Government  i s  c o m m it t e d  to m a k in g  Au s t r a l i a  more

 BUSINESS-ORIENTED AND MORE EXPORT-ORIENTED, AND TO LOOKING  

 PARTICULARLY TO OUR OWN REGION FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT  

 OPPORTUNITIES.

 WE HAVE MADE NEW DECISIONS RECENTLY IN ORDER TO FACILITATE THE  

 INVOLVEMENT OF AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS IN ASIA. IN HIS STATEMENT  

 LAST MONTH THE PRIME MINISTER ANNOUNCED A NEW PROGRAM OF  

 FELLOWSHIPS SO THAT AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS MEN AND WOMEN CAN GET  

 DIRECT WORKING EXPERIENCE IN THE A S IA -P A C IF IC  REGION.

 THE PRIME MINISTER ALSO ANNOUNCED THAT THE RESTRUCTURING OF THE

 Au s t r a l i a n  Trade Co m m is s io n  w i l l  r e s u l t  i n  a s u b s t a n t i a l

 INCREASE IN THE RESOURCES WHICH THIS BODY ALLOCATES WITHIN

 A S E A N .

 YOU WILL THEREFORE FIND THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE  

 SECTOR WILLING PARTNERS IN EFFORTS TO BUILD ECONOMIC BRIDGES  

 WITHIN THE REGION. WE ARE CONFIDENT THAT THE ASEAN-AUSTRALIA  

 BUSINESS COUNCIL WILL CONTINUE TO PLAY A PRODUCTIVE ROLE IN  

 DEVELOPING PRIVATE SECTOR CONTACTS BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND THE  

 COUNTRIES OF ASEAN TO PROMOTE TRADE AND INVESTMENT AND OTHER  

 COMMERCIAL A C T IV IT IE S .

 WE NEED ALSO TO REMEMBER THAT AUSTRALIA-ASEAN ECONOMIC  

 RELATIONS ARE VITALLY AFFECTED BY THE WIDER INTERNATIONAL  

 ECONOMIC FRAMEWORK. AUSTRALIA HAS WORKED ACTIVELY WITH THE  

 ASEAN COUNTRIES TO STEM THE CURRENT TIDE TOWARDS PROTECTIONISM  

 AND TO MAINTAIN THE OPEN, MULTILATERAL TRADING REGIME WHICH IS  

 SO VITAL TO OUR ECONOMIC FUTURE. AS I  HAVE SAID ON MANY  

 OCCASIONS, FAILURE TO COMPLETE THE URUGUAY ROUND WILL PROVE  

 VERY COSTLY, PARTICULARLY FOR THOSE COUNTRIES WHICH HAVE  

 RELATIVELY LITTLE ECONOMIC CLOUT -  AND THAT INCLUDES AUSTRALIA  

 AND THE "MEMBERS OF ASEAN. BROADER REGIONAL ORGANISATIONS SUCH  

 AS APEC HAVE AN IMPORTANT ROLE TO PLAY IN STEMMING THE TIDE  

 TOWARDS PROTECTIONISM, AND AUSTRALIA HAS BEEN DELIGHTED WITH

 6 .

 THE SUPPORT APEC HAS RECEIVED FROM THE COUNTRIES OF SOUTH EAST  

 ASIA. AS THE SECRETARY OF MY DEPARTMENT, MR RICHARD WOOLCOTT,  

 SAID IN BALI RECENTLY, A CONTINUING CLOSE RELATIONSHIP WITH  

 ASEAN WILL REMAIN FUNDAMENTAL TO APEC'S DEVELOPMENT. THE  

 AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT BELIEVES FIRMLY THAT APEC AND ASEAN ARE  

 MUTUALLY REINFORCING AND HAVE A COMPLEMENTARY ROLE TO PLAY IN  

 FREEING UP INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND IN PURSING REGIONAL ECONOMIC  

 DEVELOPMENT. FROM THE VERY BEGINNING WE WERE DETERMINED THAT  

 APEC SHOULD MEET ASEAN VIEWS AND CONCERNS AND TAKE ACCOUNT OF  

 THE INTERESTS OF ITS MEMBERS.

 I  HAVE ALSO BEEN INVOLVED PERSONALLY WITH MOST OF THE MEMBERS

 of ASEAN i n  the Ca i r n s  Group of Major a g r i c u l t u r a l  Ex p o r t in g

 COUNTRIES. OUR COOPERATION HAS GREATLY ENHANCED OUR INDIVIDUAL  

 INTERESTS IN A FAIR OUTCOME OF THE URUGUAY ROUND FOR OUR  

 AGRICULTURAL EXPORTS. THE SUCCESS OF THIS COOPERATION, AS WELL  

 AS THE DEVELOPMENT OF A P E C , POINTS TO ANOTHER GOAL FOR

 Au s t r a l i a  and ASEAN -  to c o n t i n u e  to i d e n t i f y  areas of mutual

 INTEREST IN WHICH WE CAN COOPERATE AND BUILD COALITIONS OF  

 INTEREST AND SO INCREASE THE EFFECTIVENESS OF OUR INDIVIDUAL  

 EFFORTS.

 TRADE, INVESTMENT AND ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION ARE, OF COURSE, NOT  

 THE ONLY AREAS IN WHICH AUSTRALIA AND THE COUNTRIES OF ASEAN  

 BENEFIT FROM CO-OPERATIVE PROGRAMS. OVER THE PAST FEW YEARS  

 AUSTRALIA HAS ALSO PAID PARTICULAR ATTENTION TO THE EXPANSION  

 OF CULTURAL CONTACTS AND OTHER PEOPLE-TO-PEOPLE LINKS WITH THE  

 ASEAN COUNTRIES. ORGANISATIONS SUCH AS THE AUSTRALIA-INDONESIA  

 INSTITUTE AND OUR SIGNIFICANT CULTURAL PROGRAMS IN EACH OF THE  

 ASEAN COUNTRIES ARE PLAYING AN IMPORTANT ROLE IN THIS RESPECT,  

 STRENGTHENING PEOPLE TO PEOPLE LINKS IN A WIDE RANGE OF AREAS,  

 INCLUDING THE MEDIA, LAW, HEALTH AND SPORT. WE HAVE ESTABLISHED  

 THE AUSTRALIA ABROAD COUNCIL AS AN UMBRELLA ORGANISATION TO  

 HELP CO-ORDINATE OUR EFFORTS IN THIS AREA. OUR AIM IS TO  

 ENCOURAGE OUR NEIGHBOURS TO SEE US AS A NATURAL PART OF THE

 7.

 *

 REGION-, AND TO FOSTER IN AUSTRALIA A GREATER UNDERSTANDING OF  

 THE CULTURAL DIFFERENCES AND S E N S IT IV IT IE S  OF OUR NEIGHBOURS,

 AS WELL AS RESPECT FOR THEIR VALUES AND UNIQUE WAYS OF LIVING  

 JUST AS WE HOPE OUR NEIGHBOURS WILL COME TO UNDERSTAND AND  

 RESPECT OUR OWN UNIQUE CULTURE. WE RECOGNISE THAT THE FUTURE  

 OF OUR SOCIETY AND OUR ECONOMIC PROSPECTS DEPEND ON AUSTRALIA  

 BECOMING LESS INSULAR AND MORE INTEGRATED WITH OUR REGION.

 ASEAN-AUSTRALIA DIALOGUE HAS DEVELOPED SIGNIFICANTLY OVER THE  

 PAST FEW YEARS AND NOW COVERS A WIDE RANGE OF REGIONAL AND  

 GLOBAL ISSUES. WE HAVE WORKED TOGETHER ON CAMBODIA. AND THE  

 AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN GRATIFIED BY THE READY HEARING  

 WE HAVE BEEN GIVEN IN ASEAN CAPITALS ON THE QUESTION OF A  

 COMPREHENSIVE PEACE SETTLEMENT. ASEAN NATIONS AND AUSTRALIA  

 HAVE ALSO CO-OPERATED CLOSELY TO PREVENT THE PROLIFERATION OF  

 NUCLEAR. CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS. THE SECOND REGIONAL  

 SEMINAR AGAINST CHEMICAL WEAPONS, HELD IN BRISBANE LATE LAST  

 YEAR, PROVED AGAIN THE WILLINGNESS OF THE ASEAN NATIONS TO WORK  

 TOWARDS A CHEMICAL WEAPONS-FREE REGION AND THE CONCLUSION OF  

 THE GLOBAL CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION. AND WE WELCOME THE  

 VIGOROUS DISCUSSION AT LAST YEAR'S ASEAN POST MINISTERIAL  

 CONFERENCE IN JAKARTA ON REGIONAL SECURITY ISSUES. WE BELIEVE  

 THE DEVELOPMENT OF A DIALOGUE ON THESE ISSUES IS INEVITABLE,

 AND IMPORTANT, GIVEN THE RATE OF CHANGE IN THE GLOBAL AND  

 REGIONAL ORDER IN THE PAST FEW YEARS.

 CO-OPERATION BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND THE MEMBERS OF ASEAN ALSO  

 REMAINS CENTRAL TO CONTINUING PROGRESS ON THE COMPREHENSIVE  

 PLAN OF ACTION TO DEAL WITH REFUGEES FROM INDO-CHINA. WE SHARE  

 WITH ASEAN THE LOGIC AND IN E V IT A B IL ITY  OF THE REPATRIATION OF  

 THOSE REFUGEES WHO CANNOT SATISFY ACCEPTED CRITERIA FOR REFUGEE  

 STATUS.

 8 .

 FINALLY, AUSTRALIA AND THE MEMBERS OF ASEAN ENJOY A GROWING  

 DIALOGUE ON ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES. AUSTRALIA IS KEEN TO WORK  

 WITH ASEAN COUNTRIES TO DEVELOP AND MARKET ENVIRONMENTAL  

 MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES AND ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY IN AREAS  

 SUCH AS CLIMATE CHANGE, BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY AND WASTE  

 DISPOSAL.

 IN CONCLUSION, THESE BROAD-RANGING TIES BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND  

 SOUTH-EAST ASIA -  BE THEY ECONOMIC, CULTURAL, SOCIAL OR  

 S C IE N T IF IC  -  CAN ONLY CONTINUE TO INCREASE. ONE OF THE GOALS

 w h ic h  Pr i m e  Mi n i s t e r  Hawke has s e t for Au s t r a l i a  i n  the 1990s

 IS TO BECOME "A MORE SELF-CONFIDENT AND VIGOROUS PARTICIPANT IN  

 THE DYNAMISM OF OUR REGION". IF  I T  IS TRUE THAT WE HAVE SOME  

 WAY TO GO IN THIS REGARD, I T  IS  EQUALLY TRUE THAT A LOT HAS  

 BEEN ACHIEVED. I T  WOULD BE A MISTAKE TO SEE AUSTRALIA AS STILL  

 BEING AN ISOLATED OUTPOST OF ANGLO-SAXON SOCIETY. AUSTRALIA HAS  

 CHANGED DRAMATICALLY, ECONOMICALLY AND SOCIALLY, OVER THE PAST  

 TWENTY YEARS. WE ARE NOW A CULTURALLY DIVERSE, OUTWARD LOOKING  

 NATION, WILLING AND READY TO BE AN ACTIVE PARTICIPANT IN THE  

 AFFAIRS OF OUR REGION. THE STRENGTH OF OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH  

 THE NATIONS OF SOUTH EAST ASIA WILL BE VITAL TO OUR SUCCESS IN  

 THIS ENDEAVOUR.

 5990Z

