---
title: "Senator Evans: Visit to Japan, Hong Kong and China"
date: "1991-03-21"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214095767
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08000141%22
---

 MINISTER FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND TRADE NEWS RELEASE

 Date 21 M a rc h  1 9 9 1

 SENATOR EVANS: VISIT TO JAPAN. HONG KONG AND CHINA

 The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans, announced  today that he would be visiting Japan, Hong Kong and China in late April.

 Senator Evans has accepted an invitation to deliver a keynote address at the  annual meeting of the Trilateral Commission being held in Tokyo on 20-22   April. Senator Evans will speak at a session focusing on Asia-Pacific regional  developments in a global context. It will be the first time a prominent Australian 

 has been invited to address the Commission. .

 The Trilateral Commission was founded in 1973. It is a policy oriented  organisation of some 300 distinguished private citizens drawn from a variety of  backgrounds from North America, Western Europe and Japan. The  Commission's original focus related to an analysis of major issues confronting  the trilateral regions. In more recent times its membership has sought to extend  the focus of the Commission’s analysis beyond trilateral dimensions to the  global arena. The emphasis at this coming meeting on the developing Asia 

 Pacific region reflects a desire to take account of the dynamics of this region in  world affairs.

 Senator Evans will be in Hong Kong on 21 and 22 April, and again on 25 April  after his visit to China. He will hold discussions with the Governor and senior  Hong Kong businessmen, and will address the Foreign Correspondents' Club.

 Senator Evans said his visit to Hong Kong would be an important opportunity  to discuss bilateral and regional issues, including air services arrangements,  APEC and Vietnamese boat people.

 He emphasised that Australia supported the continuing negotiations between  China and the UK aimed at ensuring a smooth transition to Chinese   sovereignty in 1997.

 "Australia recognises the importance both to itself and to the region of Hong  Kong's continuing prosperity during and beyond its transition to Chinese  sovereignty," Senator Evans said.

 "Hong Kong is the world's eleventh-largest trading entity, with an economy the  size of Singapore and Thailand combined, and was Australia's eighth most  important export market in 1989/90. It is a major source of investment, tourism  and migrants and an important market for Australian education services."

 COMMONWEALTH'

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M1CAH

 "Australia has a high profile in Hong Kong, attributable in part to the very large  number of Australian companies which have chosen Hong Kong as a base  from which to conduct business in the region."

 From Hong Kong, Senator Evans will go to Beijing, (23-25 April), where he will  undertake a wide-ranging series of discussions with China's Foreign Minister,  Qian Qichen, and other Ministers, focusing on bilateral relations, economic and  political issues, and regional affairs. A particular focus of those discussions will 

 be the United Nations Peace Plan for Cambodia.

 Senator Evans' visit will be the first Ministerial visit since the Australian  Government's decision last month to remove the remaining economic and  political restrictions on Australia's relations with China.

 Senator Evans said that Australia recognised China's important role in the  Asia-Pacific region, and remained committed to the development of a strong  bilateral relationship based on mutual benefit, respect and common regional  interests.

 "My visit will enable me to re-establish our high level dialogue with the  Chinese, and to encourage further expansion of the commercial relationship  between our two countries, and to express the hope that the processes of  reform and modernisation begun prior to June 1989 would continue."

 "I would also expect to raise again Australia's concerns about human rights  issues in China," he said.

 Senator Evans is due to return to Australia on 26 April.

