---
title: "Refugee week: fairness and consistency should be the message"
date: "1991-06-16"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214097129
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004730%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 REFUGEE WEEKt

 FAIRNESS AMD CONSISTENCY SHOULD BE THE MESSAGE

 It is appropriate to consider the plight of the world's 17 million  refugees this week.

 Australia's record, over time, has been outstanding in areas of  resettlement of refugee claimants, assistance for those in refugee  camps abroad and the proper accommodation of those who make claims  within Australia.

 The only substantial blemish on this record was in relation to the  treatment of PRC nationals in Australia at the time of the  Tienanmen Square massacre.

 Case-by-case determination was the proper approach to take in order  to give protection to those in genuinue need of it.

 Prime Minister Hawke's intervention still undermines public  perception of fair treatment for those with bona fide claims.

 Following the debacle with the Chinese students in particular and  the grant of 4-year temporary protection to claimants, our rules  for determination of refugee status and consideration of  humanitarian issues are no longer regarded as fair.

 Week by week claims are mounted for treatment on exactly the same  basis whether they are from Sri Lankans or Lebanese whose countries  are wracked by civil war, or the Philippines and Bangladesh again  plagued by natural calamity.

 Arguments mounted to put forward case-by-case determination of  claims are thus gpshed to one side.

 The Minister rightly points out that our ability to assist those  with the most pressing claims from abroad are diminished by  accommodating those who are already here or those who arrive 

 undocumented on our shores.

 n

 CO M M O NW EALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY   MIC AH

 While Australia grapples with the issue of Cambodian boat people it  should be recognised that only those lucky enough to make it here  are able to pres claims, often in advance of those whose needs are  more urgent.

 Fairness, objectivity and resolution are the key words that  Minister Hand needs to keep in mind if consistency in decision  making is again to be re-established.

 Case-by-case determination of claims, against internationally  recognised criteria, fairly reached, is absolutely essential.  This is the Opposition's position. Courage is needed now to ensure  that deserving cases are quickly and promptly heard.

 To ensure that this message is clearly understood by all those,  wherever they may be from, who need our help, those without bona  fide claims or refugee or proper humanitarian claims should be  promptly removed from Australia.

 Anything less sends a completly wrong signal to those who wish to  circumvent the proper entry arrangements and sabotage efforts to  accept those who most deserve our compassion.

 June 16 1991

