---
title: "Regulation for migration agents"
date: "1991-09-03"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214098058
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004462%22
---

 Philip R uddock MP I6H

 Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs .

 Electorate Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 3 September 1991

 REGULATION OF MIGRATION AGENTS

 "Support for Government action to regulate the activities of migration agents  from the. Australian Migration Consultants Association is welcome" Philip Ruddock,  Shadow Minister for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs, said today on behalf of the  Coalition.

 "Reports that the Association would seek licencing to protect prospective clients  from incompetence and unethical practices shows a most responsible outlook. The  Government should act quickly to accept the Association's offer to discuss its  recommendations.

 This matter has also been raised in reports of the Joint Select Committee on  Migration Agents.

 It is almost twelve months since the Minister for Immigration said that he was  concerned about rip-offs by Agents and that he, the Minister, would seek me out in  the not too distant future, as Shadow Minister, to discuss the issue. Since then the  Minister has noted unscrupulous Agents encouraging many people without bona fide  claims for protection as refugees to lodge fraudulent applications.

 Regrettably, in the intervening period, the Minister has also been so preoccupied  with Labor's internal leadership issues, that no discussions have yet taken place.  This is disappointing as the Minister knows more than most the pain and anguish -  not to mention the monies lost - caused by unscrupulous Agents who intimidate and  harrass prospective clients."

 On 11 September 1985 the Minister called for a code of conduct for Immigration  Agents and tighter controls on their practices. The Minister described one Agent,  whose activities were known to him, as "this poor excuse for a human being". He  added "The loopholes which allow these deplorable types of people to play on the 

 vulnerability of intending settlers should be well and truly shut tight". He went on  to say "At present the provisions of the Migration Act which cover Immigration  Agents are wide open to abuse by people such as this and those people who act on  behalf of visitors who seek to change status to that of pemanent residents are not 

 covered under the Migration Act at all".

 - continued -

 -  2 -

 "It is surprising that a Minister with such strong views can, some six years later  as Minister, allow this situation to continue. There is no real excuse for inaction.

 * * *

