---
title: "Budget savings warrant close examination"
date: "1991-04-04"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214095978
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004762%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP Federal M em ber for D u n d as  S hadow  M inister for Im m igration  an d  Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 P arliam en t Flouse  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 BU DG ET SAVINGS W ARRANT CLOSE EXAMINATION

 The Department of Finance has recently released a "Statement of Savings Expected In Annual  Appropriations" which outlines estimated savings in several portfolios, including Immigration, Local  Government and Ethnic Affairs.

 It .is obviously important that administrative savings be made where at all possible and certainly that  money not spent be recouped to revenue.

 But a number of questions need to be raised in relation to some of the expected savings in the  Immigration portfolio.

 At a time when the number o f refugees worldwide are increasing rapidly, it is somewhat curious to see  that the most substantial savings expected are in the area of accommodation and services for refugees and  migrants at migrant centres and flats - $1.4 million.

 In refugee resettlement assistance in the form of financing of the International Organisation for Migration  Loan Fund Scheme, it is expected that a saving of $1 million will be made - just over two thirds of the  total appropriation made for 1990-91. This suggests that the number of refugees being resettled has  diminished considerably or responsibility has shifted to sponsors.

 Other savings include $150,000 from a total of $500,000 made to fund the Community Relations Strategy.  This is not in itself surprising. The funding of public relations campaigns are always dubious and this point  was strongly made by the Opposition when the Government tabled the National Agenda for a  Multicultural Australia in 1989.

 O f greater concern to the ethnic communities, are expected savings in Grant-In-Aid programs, a total of  $330,000. This suggests possible overfunding in the first place. Were there insufficient applicants for grants,  or were applications of such doubtful quality that they had to be refused? Or perhaps now that elections  are out of the way, savings in this area are more easily arranged.

 Given the stated priority accorded to interpreting and translation services, savings in running costs of  $870,000 need further examination. Since the Government will not introduce the "user-pays" principle until  July 1, 1991, it is difficult to see where these savings are being made except by passing responsibility to  State bodies or migrants generally.

 The Opposition will use Senate Estimates to vigorously pursue answers to these questions to see that there  is no negative impact on the adequate provision of migrant services.

 April 4 1991

 — !    n . m j u m

 i COMMON WEALTi- i  I PARLIAMENTARY L I B R A R Y   j MiCAH

