---
title: "Immigration Minister to visit Turkey and Iran"
date: "1991-04-30"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214096366
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03009576%22
---

 Media Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A CT2600   Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 30/91

 IMMIGRATION MINISTER TO VISIT TURKEY AND IRAN

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, will take a first-hand look at the  plight of the Kurdish people in Turkey and Iran.

 The Minister will visit the region from Saturday (4 May) for  several days of meetings with Government representatives,  international agencies, aid workers and others involved in  assisting the displaced persons and refugees.

 The visit will enable the Minister to gain an appreciation  of the conditions under which refugees and displaced persons  are currently living and to assess the type of assistance  needed.

 "While the Government has already contributed financially  to the relief effort, the visit will allow me to look at the  type of practical assistance these people may need.

 "I will be able to report back to* the Government on my  return on the basis of a clear understanding on just how,  and to what extent, Australia can assist," explained Mr  Hand.

 Although third-country resettlement of people affected by  the most recent events will not be the immediate issue with  this group the Minister will, however,  be meeting with aid  workers in established camps.

 "I will be visiting camps where the Australian refugee  caseload is already located, to look at the current  situation and to see just where Australia can make a  contribution or provide assistance," said Mr Hand.

 CANBERRA 30 April, 1991

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams Evan Arthur Minister's Office DILGEA (06) 277.7860 (06) 264.2296

 COMMONWEALTH (  p a r lia m e n t a r y  LIBRARY I  tvfiCAH ' |

 - .... I, J

