---
title: "Australian relief team withdraws from Iraq"
date: "1991-06-18"
creators:
  - "Ray, Robert"
source: "Minister for Defence"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214097235
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04001949%22
---

 Minister  for  Defence

 Parliament House  Canberra ACT 2600  Telephone: (06) 2777800  Fax: (06) 2734118

 Senator the Hon. Robert Ray

 TUESDAY. JUNE 18. 1991 N o ,8 3 /9 1

 AUSTRALIAN RELIEF TEAM WITHDRAWS FROM IRAQ

 The 75-strong A ustralian Defence Force specialist team  involved in the  Kurdish relief effort in northern Iraq has begun its w ithdraw al from  the 

 area of operations.

 M inister for D efence, Senator Robert Ray, announced on June 4 that he had  approved the team 's withdrawal after receiving advice that the task of the 

 coalition hum anitarian relief operation was nearing com pletion.

 The United N ations High Commissioner for Refugees, and other non­ governm ent organisations, have now taken over the responsibility of  continuing to provide assistance to the K urdish refugees returning to their 

 homes in Iraq's north.

 Senator Ray said the efforts of the Defence Force team  had been first-rate 

 particularly under the harsh conditions under w hich it had been w orking 

 and that the assistance had been warmly appreciated by the K urdish 

 p e o p le .

 "It was always intended that the coalition relief team s w ould w ithdraw  

 once the civilian aid effort under UN auspices was in place, and the Kurds 

 who had fled across the border felt safe enough to return," Senator Ray 

 said.

 "This has occurred and the refugee encam pm ents on the Iran-T urkey  border have em ptied rapidly, with close to 400,000 K urdish refugees  moving back into Iraq in the past month," he said.

 The Australian contingent deployed to Turkey on M ay 16 and began 

 providing m edical and dental care in the G ir-i-pit area on M ay 25.

 It com prises four m edical team s, a dental section, a preventative medicine  section, and a field engineering section.

 In its first week of operations alone, the m edical team s treated more than 

 1200 patients and the dental team  assisted m ore than 100 Kurds.

 The preventative m edicine team 's tasks included providing sanitised  drinking water facilities; conducting bacterial and chem ical analysis of  developed w ater points; siting cam ps and facilities for displaced persons;  and controlling, supervising and m onitoring central w aste disposal facilities  in the area of operations^

 The field engineers have concentrated on the identification and  establishm ent of suitable w ater supply points and im proving the w ater 

 distribution system. They also assisted in m inor rebuilding projects in  num erous K urdish villages

 Senator Ray said the Defence Force relief team 's efforts further enhanced  A ustralia's standing as an active and responsible m em ber of the world 

 c o m m u n ity .

 The A ustralians are expected to have com pleted their w ithdraw al by July 1 .

 F urther inform ation:

 - 2 -

 M in isterial: P eter La Franchi (06) 277 7800 (b/h)

 (06) 285 3968 (a/h)

 D e p a rtm e n ta l: M ajor Pat Green (06) 265 3313 (b/h)

 (06) 231 3880 (a/h)

 t

