---
title: "Double jeopardy"
date: "1991-06-13"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214097073
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004731%22
---

 Η

 jQ'iT 

 Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Electorate Parliament Flouse 

 Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 DOUBLE JEOPARDY

 Recent reports that the Singapore Government has introduced new regulations restricting  the movement of our national airlines, has significant implications which need to be  urgently addressed by the Australian Government.

 The new regulations are said to give the Singapore Government the right to stop an  aircraft from leaving if its Captain refuses to take on board a prohibited immigrant that  his airline has brought to Singapore.

 Thus the Singapore Government can now issue: an order to any Qantas Captain arriving  in Singapore ordering him to carry out a prohibited person. The law says the authorities  may take such action or use such force as may be necessary to ensure compliance; they  can order that the plane may not move until the immigrant is on board and if the pilot  refuses, he faces up to six months imprisonment.

 This law has quite clearly been introduced to get Singapore off the hook in relation to  Mr Francisco Vasquez, the Cuban immigrant whom Australia deported on criminal  grounds and who has chosen to remain in Changi Airport rather than return home to  Cuba.

 This action by the Singaporean Government puts Australia's deportation laws at grave  risk.

 There is a provision in our law for criminal deportation for those who are found guilty  of serious offences committed here in Australia. If we are forced, by other countries, to  accept them back into Australia, our whole system of control is jeopardised.

 This move will affect not only criminal deportees, but all undocumented arrivals, illegal  entrants and refugee claimants.

 Laws and regulations are already in place which make a carrier liable for large fines and  the costs of removing undocumented persons which they have carried to Australia.  However, if the Singaporean example is followed by other countries, then Australia will  have to follow suit. If it does not, it will be another signal to the rest of the world that  we are not serious about maintaining the integrity of our borders.

 This issue has serious implications in international law, for Australian migration law, and  in human rights terms. It must be addressed as a matter of utmost urgency.

 June 13 1991 COMMONWEALTH

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M IC A H

