---
title: "Immigration Minister to study current migration trends in Europe"
date: "1991-09-12"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214098221
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03009554%22
---

 M e d ia  Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 58/91

 IMMIGRATION MINISTER TO STUDY CURRENT MIGRATION TRENDS IN  EUROPE

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, is to study at first hand the  current migration pressures facing European countries.

 Mr Hand leaves tomorrow (13 September) for visits to London,  Athens, Rome, Bonn, Geneva and Prague.

 Of particular concern to the Minister is the current mass  movement of people in the northern hemisphere, and the  resulting demands for asylum in West European countries.

 "This is a comparatively recent phenomenon which is placing  huge pressures on the governments of those countries," Mr  "Hand-said- ; — * ----—_______________________ _____________________

 "Germany for example is trying to come to grips with some  200 000 asylum seekers now arriving annually, in addition to  many thousands of formerly displaced ethnic Germans, plus  European Community workers from southern Europe arriving in 

 search of employment.

 "While Australia is not yet facing pressures of that  dimension, there has been a dramatic increase in on-shore  asylum claims here in recent times. It is important that we  maintain the integrity of our on-shore systems in order to 

 ensure that our established refugee program is not  threatened.

 "I will be comparing notes with my European counterparts to  see what lessons Australia can learn from their experience  and I will be passing on to them information about  Australia's methods of processing asylum claims. I know that 

 our methods have already attracted great interest overseas.

 "This exchange of information with government Ministers and  immigration agencies will be of immense value to Australia  in coming to grips with the new immigration challenges of  the 1990s."

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 . . ./2

 -2-

 As part of his responsibilities for refugee and asylum  issues, Mr Hand will also study and exchange views on  matters arising from recent political developments in  Eastern Europe, and will look at the role Australia can play 

 in international efforts to deal with those matters.

 He will also discuss with his counterparts Australia's  experience in computerised monitoring of border arrivals.

 In London, Athens and Rome, Mr Hand is expected to meet  representatives of non-government organisations which work  in the immigration field, while in Geneva he is scheduled to  meet the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs Sadako  Ogata, and the Director of the International Organisation 

 for Migration, Mr James Purcell.

 Among facilities he will inspect will be a refugee camp near  Athens.

 Mr Hand returns to Australia on 4 October.

 CANBERRA 12 September, 1991

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams Minister's Office  (06) 277.7860

