---
title: "Confirmation - immigration out of control"
date: "1991-08-19"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214097568
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004472%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 CONFIRMATION - IMMIGRATION OUT OF CONTROL

 Recent reports suggesting that 950 illegal immigrants caught in Victoria since  November last year cannot be removed, is proof positive that loopholes in  the immigration law are preventing prompt deportation.

 The reasons why this situation persists has not been made explicit by the  Government. Nevertheless it is not hard to recognise how it has occurred.

 First, any illegal entrant once apprehended is entitled to make claims for  refugee status. Such claims will have been held largely in abeyance because  of a backlog of 17,000 applications currently in the system. Even the first tier  decision making process, which is designed to ensure immediate rejection of  non-bona fide claims, has been held up while new refugee determination  arrangements are put in place.

 With the present limited resources applied to this area of the immigration  program, there is little expectation that this situation will change in the short  term. It has been estimated by the Department that only 3000 claims a year  will be processed, even with the new arrangements in place.

 Secondly, while amendments to the Immigration Act in 1989 were intended  to close off access to grant permanent residence on shore, compromises over  time have created new opportunities for applications, particularly for  medium to long-term illegal entrants.

 Contrary to fears expressed that mandatory deportation would lead to harsh  and unconscionable decisions, the evidence seems to suggest that the  balance is still against effective immigration and entry control and in favour 

 of illegals intent on staying.

 August 19 1991

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

