---
title: "Australia medical staff join international relief teams"
date: "1991-12-03"
creators:
  - "Blewett, Neal"
source: "Minister for Trade and Overseas Development"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214099778
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02003297%22
---

 NEWS RELEASE

 MINISTER FOR TRADE AND OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT

 m t  8 9  Date: 3 D e c e m b e r  1 9 9 1

 AUSTRALIAN MEDICAL STAFF JOIN INTERNATIONAL RELIEF TEAMS

 The Australian Government is to provide more than half a million dollars to  finance the placement of Australian personnel on international medical and  relief projects, the Minister for Trade and Overseas Development, Neal Blewett  announced today.

 Dr Blewett said the grant was being made to allow the Australian Red Cross to  provide help to refugees and victims of disaster or conflict in countries of high  need such as Afghanistan and Cambodia.

 "These Australian workers will provide a valuable service in difficult and often  dangerous conditions," Dr Blewett said.

 An initial grant of $300 000 this financial year was provided for the Red Cross to  place Australian medical workers in countries such as Pakistan, Sudan and  Kenya. They include surgeons, nurses and laboratory staff.

 A further $210 000 grant will help fund a variety of Red Cross projects, including  the placement of an Australian surgeon and nurse with the International  Committee of the Red Cross medical team in Kabul.

 "The money will also go towards sending an anaesthetist to work with Afghan  refugees in Peshawar, in Pakistan's Northwest Frontier Province," Dr Blewett  said.

 "An Australian Medical Coordinator will also be sent to work at the Kompong  Speu Hospital in Cambodia."

 Most of the postings will last from six to twelve months.

 The funds are being provided through the refugee and relief aid program  administered by the Australian International Development Assistance Bureau  (AIDAB).

 * * * * * *

 CANBERRA

 For Further information contact Tony Melville, AIDAB Public Information,  (06)276 4971.

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MiCAH

