---
title: "Immigration minister reaffirms support for Australia's refugee determination process"
date: "1992-12-07"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214126548
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008591%22
---

 Media Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, AC T2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 72/92

 IMMIGRATION MINISTER REAFFIRMS SUPPORT FOR AUSTRALIA'S  REFUGEE DETERMINATION PROCESS

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, today reaffirmed his support for  Australia's refugee determination process.

 Mr Hand's comments followed the announcement today that 16  Cambodian boat people had completed the process of refugee  determination and had been formally rejected as refugees.

 The failed asylum-seekers were part of a group of 26 who  arrived at Broome in November 1989. Two of the 26 were earlier given approval to remain in Australia, while four  others withdrew their applications for refugee status and  returned voluntarily to Cambodia. Decisions on the remainder  of the group are pending.

 "The claims of the applicants were examined individually and  on a case by case basis. The decisions have come at the end  of a necessarily lengthy and meticulous process designed to  ensure that the decision-making process is both fair and

 "It should be noted that in each case the final decision  upholds the original decision by the Department not (not) to  grant refugee status," said Mr Hand.

 Mr Hand said the decisions were the first of a number of  final decisions due to be handed down to refugee claimants  over the next few weeks.

 Failed asylum-seekers who have no claim to remain in  Australia are required, by law, to be removed from Australia  as soon as practicable.

 CANBERRA 7 December, 1992

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams

 lawful

 Minister's Office  (06) 277.7860

