---
title: "Speech by the Prime Minister Lions International Convention"
date: "1992-06-19"
creators:
  - "Hawke, Bob"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214123901
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02003001%22
---

 % 

 !Hb

 PRIME MINISTER

 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY

 SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER  1991 LIONS INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION  BRISBANE, 19 JUNE 1991

 Bill Biggs, International President, Distinguished guests,  ladies and gentlemen

 At the outset I want to welcome, on behalf of the people and  the Government of Australia, the International Association  of Lions Clubs to Brisbane and to Australia, and  wholeheartedly to wish you well in your convention.

 This is the first International Convention that Lions have  held in the Southern Hemisphere and we are delighted that  you have chosen Australia for what we hope is only the first 

 of many return journeys for you.

 It's a pleasure to see such a large gathering of  international visitors, drawn from more than 100 countries -  and it is a pleasure too to see the way in which Australia's 

 Lions, your hosts and guides, are working to ensure your  stay here is enjoyable and memorable.

 The Lions movement - today on the eve of its 75th  anniversary - is truly one of the great international and  multicultural movements, spanning the continents and uniting  people of diverse cultures and backgrounds in a common  commitment to community service.

 You are dedicated to creating and fostering a spirit of  understanding among the peoples of the world, and to uniting  your clubs around the world in bonds of friendship, good  fellowship and mutual understanding. In other words, Lions 

 is both a catalyst and a model,  in these challenging times,  for the emergence of more harmonious relations among the  people and the nations of the world.

 It must certainly be obvious to everyone assembled here that  this Convention does take place against an international  backdrop of the most dramatic, and in some respects the most  uplifting, changes seen in more than four decades.

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 2 .

 The last few years have seen the end of the Cold War, the  fall of the Berlin Wall, and - particularly over the last  year - the re-invigoration of the United Nations to the  point where we can hope it will become in fact the 

 instrument of global order envisaged by its founders.

 The end of the Cold War has borne double fruit. Not only  has the threat of global nuclear war been lifted, but the  ideal of international co-operation to keep the peace - an  ideal which lay dormant through the long years of the Cold  War - has now sprung to life once more.

 The success of the United Nations, and of the multinational  coalition led by the United States, in confronting and  reversing the invasion of Kuwait has far reaching and  positive consequences for us all.

 But despite all this we cannot, of course, afford naive  optimism about the future of international relations.

 Economic under-development in the Third World is still a  tragically unresolved problem. The spectres of hunger and  desertification in Africa continue to loom. Population  pressures still increase. The plight of refugees continues  to challenge us. Global environmental degradation threatens  humankind in ways which could ultimately be as significant  as, albeit more gradual and insidious than, the nuclear  threat.

 We see the continuing struggle within the Soviet Union to  contain and repair the damage inflicted on its political and  economic structures by the illogicalities of those decades  of centralised planning - and in observing that continuing 

 struggle we can at best conclude that the outcome is  uncertain.

 And underlining all these difficulties is the continuing  crisis in world trade. In the face of the still unresolved  Uruguay Round of trade negotiations, it would be  irresponsible to be optimistic about the world economic 

 structure.

 So my friends,  as members of an organisation with a truly  international spirit and a truly global perspective, you  will conclude with me, even on the basis of this very  cursory assessment, that for all our justified euphoria in  seeing the end of the Cold War, the current international  climate contains many profound challenges for us all.

 The beneficial changes we have experienced do provide a firm  basis for us to mould a more enlightened international  order. But there needs to be a realisation that the  challenges in this new, fluid, multipolar world are no 

 lesser challenges than those of the static certainties of  the old bipolar world they replace.

 3 .

 How are these challenges to be solved? And how is this  international order to be created?

 In essence, the challenge we face in the 1990s, at the end  of the Cold War, is analogous to the challenge of 1945, at  the end of the Second World War. Each country and region of  course will have its own particular suggestions and  perspectives.

 But the guidelines which should provide our direction in  managing this transition in international relations are  clear.

 They are in essence the same principles that give life to  the great multilateral organisations born in the 1940s - the  principles of fair and open international trade enshrined in  the GATT; the principles of economic development and sound,  market-oriented economic management, which govern the World  Bank and the International Monetary Fund; the commitment to 

 a better quality of life, which provides the fundamental  rationale for the United Nations specialised agencies; and  not least, the principles of respect for national  sovereignty and international cooperation enshrined in the  charter of the United Nations Organisation.

 The challenge is to ensure peace through international  cooperation; to apply enlightened self interest in an  interconnected world - in short, to live up to the high 

 ideals and the realistic expectations of those far sighted  men and women who in that great burst of statesmanship in  the 1940s laid the basis for multilateral activity today.

 And we must make certain that the principles of the United  Nations concerning respect for sovereignty and peaceful  dispute settlement are enshrined not just in the Charter but  in the real world, by giving them concrete backing.

 This is a responsibility which many powers must share. We  hope the US will keep alive the internationalist spirit  which has sustained it in fulfilling its responsibilities  which flow from great power.  And because of the relative 

 shift of economic power, there is clear scope for others to  bear more of the responsibilities and of the burden -  clearly, including Western Europe and Japan.

 In the United Nations and other international institutions,  in the Western community of nations and in the Asia-Pacific  region, Australia is well placed to play a role. We have a  myriad of specific interests to pursue and protect - our 

 independence of action will always be vital in our foreign,  defence, trade and international economic policies.  But we  recognise that a real contribution to the larger reshaping  of international relations can only be effectively made by  working with others.

 Our commitment to multilateralism will help guide our  foreign policy in the decade ahead.

 4 .

 Our rapid and firm support for the United Nations' stand  against Iraq testifies to our commitment to multilateralism.

 Our initiative in establishing the Cairns Group of like-  minded agricultural-exporting countries, which has been  critical in having agriculture recognised as the lynchpin to  the Uruguay Round, likewise testifies to our commitment to 

 multilateralism. And one of the objectives of APEC - the  Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation - of which Australia is a  founding member, is the encouragement of free and open  international trade, as a key to global prosperity.

 In our own region, we have sought with others to find a  formula for peace in Cambodia, to bring peace and stability  to that country, and an end to its people's suffering.

 Australia recognises that the role we are able to play in  global security is necessarily somewhat limited. But we are  one of the most active nations in the measured pursuit of  disarmament - including, through the United Nations and  other negotiating forums, the abolition of chemical weapons.

 My friends,

 The creation of a saner and a safer world is within the  grasp of the international community. Australia will play  its part.

 But I want to close by saying to you, the thousands of  assembled delegates of Lions International,  that the  attainment of this goal is not a task for governments alone.

 Indeed, without the active and intelligent support of  individual people, and of international networks of people  such as the Lions movement, the work of governments will 

 falter and fail.

 Ultimately, if we are to succeed in creating a saner and a  safer world, it will be because people throughout the  nations of the world have determined to achieve that goal.

 Let me say in particular that the Lions project to eradicate  preventable blindness around the world, and its continued  involvement in drug prevention programs, are precisely the  kinds of actions that I am talking about.

 In the same way, voluntary relief organisations have played  an indispensable role in alleviating hardship throughout the  world - nowhere more starkly in recent weeks than in the  Horn of Africa and in Bangladesh.

 We are all in their debt because of the dedication and not  infrequently the courage with which they do their work.

 And the significance of their work is emphasised because it  so often is conducted in areas beyond the proper reach of  Governments, and mobilises resources additional to those  that are allocated by Governments.

 5 .

 So to this gathering I say in closing: you are very welcome  among us in Australia. Your; mission of service, and your  achievements,  stand as an example to governments around the  world of what can be achieved, with determination and  dedication, to attain the goal of a better world.

 * * * * * * * * * *

