---
title: "immigration, Cambodia, medicare, fightback, tariffs"
date: "1992-04-15"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214123018
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02009275%22
---

 I SI

 Leader of the ©pposition

 15 April 1992 REF: TRANSCR\0392.tmc

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  DR JOHN HEWSON, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  GAZEBO HOTEL, PARRAMATTA

 E & 0 E - PROOF COPY ONLY

 SUBJECTS: Immigration, Cambodia, Medicare, Fightback, Tariffs

 Jrnlsts

 Dr Hewson, you've had some very strong remarks to say about  Australia's refugee, policy.  Are you worried at all that they may  affect Gerry Hand's suggestion that now there can be a bi­ partisan approach?

 Hewson:

 No, we think the refugee ^problem is a very important one and it's  obviously got out of co'ntrol.  And as I said yesterday, it's  almost in a state of crisis.

 At a time where we've got to be sending some pretty clear 

 signals, we don't want people to think that they can come into  Australia through the back door. We have a very well developed,  non-discriminatory immigration program. We want to maintain the  integrity of that program and we are very keen to make sure that 

 it happens.

 Now, if Gerry Hand wants to put some proposals to us, we would  be delighted to have a look at them and we will be very 

 constructive. I can guarantee you we will be constructive and  supportive where we can. But it is a big problem, it is always  a very difficult problem, but we have a got a system, the 

 integrity of which we must preserve at all costs.

 Jrnlst:

 Would you let the Cambodians stay? 

 Hewson:

 COMMONWEALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 Well, you can't judge each case in such broad terms. Every  individual case has to be assessed on its merits. What worries  us, is that the process takes an unbelievably long time and  expectations get built up in the minds of people that arrive on

 Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600 Phone 277 4022

 REF: TRANS C R V § 392 .~tmc 2 .

 boats, that perhaps they are going to be able to stay. We don't  send a clear signal, if they're ruled out and really can't stay,  that they will be repatriated.  And the whole process is grinding  on and getting out of hand. We've got to be able to preserve the 

 integrity of our immigration program, while taking a hard line  but a caring line.  If they're genuine refugees, lets get them  determined quickly so that they can stay, if they're not,  lets  forcibly repatriate them so the message goes back, a clear  message goes back that you can't circumvent our immigration 

 policy, you can't just land in Australia and expect to be able  to stay here.

 Jmlst:

 ..(inaudible)., bi-partisan approach, what would you agree on? 

 Hews on:

 Well, we've put down very detailed proposals.  My colleague,  Philip Ruddock, has put down quite specific proposals as to how  to streamline the process, put more resources into it, take the  courts out of it and work in the best interests of the refugees 

 and of Australia.

 And in that sense, they're there and they're on the record and  we would urge Mr Hand to have a look at them.

 Jmlst: *

 Should there be Australian troops in Cambodia?

 Hewson:

 We've taken the view that we support the Government's position  at this stage, subject to some of the reservations that I put  last time.  I raised them as points of concern and our view is  that they are there as part of a particular force, a UN force,  it's a role that needs to be monitored closely. The Government  has undertaken to keep us fully informed on a confidential basis  of changes in the circumstances that whether in relation to the  nature of the troop commitment, the nature of their role, the  terms of their engagement, any further changes in our role in 

 relation to Cambodia. And wei look forward to being as 

 constructive as we can in that process. i

 At this stage, we totally support what has been done, but we'll  continue to monitor it and I know the Government will too.

 Jmlst:

 ..(inaudible)., will come out of the Prime Minister's trip to  Indonesia?

 3. REF: TRANSCR\-B392 vtmc

 Hewson:

 I think it's very important that Paul Keating does genuinely  discover Asia. He's spent very little time in Asia in his life,  he doesn't understand Asia, he's got a long way to go and I hope  that this trip is instrumental in him starting with one of near  neighbours, one area really, that is of fundamental foreign  policy importance to Australia.

 I mean, our principle lines of foreign policy responsibility, our  first priority if you like, are countries like Indonesia, PNG,  Fiji, the Pacific Islands and so on. And I'm pleased to see that  he is going to Indonesia, I hope he takes a constructive message  and I hope as a result of that, we can develop closer links with 

 Indonesia, better business links, a better political standing and  that's what it ought to be about.

 Jrnlst:

 Do you think Health Minister Howe has to re-think his health  policy, as in regards to Medicare?

 Hewson:

 Absolutely. The Medicare system is a shambles. Brian Howe knows  it's a shambles, he knows he's got to do something about it. He  tried to do something about it with the Medicare co-payment, a  very minor tentative'step, but at least he tried - he got rolled. 

 But they've got to face the reality, they're playing cheap  politics with the health of the people of Australia.

 The queues are getting longer, the quality of the service is  deteriorating and it's just not good enough.  Mr Howe ought to  have the strength of character to stand up and fight the Prime  Minister to get a decent health system. And that is going to 

 involve, as the States are asking, for a shift towards private  insurance. We've shown in Fightback! how that can be done, we  have shown how to deal with the over servicing, we've shown how  to reduce the length of the queues and it's about time that they 

 showed leadership and dealt with an issue on its merits and not  played cheap politics with an issue as important as the nation's  health.

 Jrnlst:

 ..(inaudible)., the National Party in Queensland is concerned  about your tariff policy. Are you still committed to reducing  tariffs?

 Hewson :

 We're absolutely committed to negligible protection by the Year  2000. That applies to sugar as it applies to everything else.

 4.

 ÏŠ

 REF: TRANSCR\fi3^2 .Imc

 And look, I think there's a very interesting situation here.  If  the Queenslanders - Mr Goss has been waxing eloquent in recent  days about how he wants to look after sugar growers - let him  look after the sugar growers.  Let's see Mr Goss protect the 

 sugar growers if that's what he feels is in their best interest.

 We will give them major cost advantages in our Fightback!  package, we'll abolish a lot of taxes and charges, reduce a lot  of cost disadvantages under which they operate and that is in the  best interest of the sugar industry. Short term increases in  protection for politically expedient reasons are not in their  best interests.

 So the challenge is to Mr Goss, there's an issue there, he  identifies the issues, he's concerned about the issue, what's he  going to do about it?

 Ends.

 r

