---
title: "Refugee Week"
date: "1992-06-17"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214123832
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006755%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Electorate Parliament House 

 Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 R EFU G EE WEEK:

 Refugee Week is a time set aside in the public calendar when we are asked  to focus our attention on the terrible plight of the world's refugees.

 Australia has international obligations towards refugees as a signatory to the  1951 United Nations Convention the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of  Refugees.

 The world today is currently facing its most serious crisis in regard to  refugees that at any other time in history. There are some 17 million people  who have been recognised as meeting the United Nations Convention  definition of a refugee which is defined in Article 1A(2) as a person who:

 "...owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of  race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or  political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable  or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection  of that country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the  country o his former habitual residence as a result of such events, is  unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it."

 There are also an estimated 1.5 million displaced people in the former  Republic of Yugoslavia and the United Nations Commission on Human  Rights (UNCHR) (1991) has placed the number of internally displaced  persons worldwide at more than 30 million.

 Australia's ability to assist in the resettlement of genuine refugees has been  severely tested and compromised because of the current government's  inability to deal efficaciously and fairly with our on-shore problems.

 The refugee determination process in Australia is backlogged by over 23,000  claims, many of them unfounded and there is also the spectre of increasing  numbers of unauthorised and undocumented people arriving on our shores.

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M IC  AH

 - 2 -

 *

 Australia has been generous in its refugee settlement program accepting  over 500,000 refugees since World War Two.

 The Coalition parties in Government have had a particularly proud record  of refugee resettlement. In 1982-83 the number accepted for re-settlement  was over 23,000.

 However, the Labor Government has slashed that number in the past  decade. Less than 6,300 places have been set aside in the 1992-93 program  years' program for refugee resettlement. There is also provision for 3,700  places in the special assistance category. It must not be forgotten that it is  in the last 10 years that the refugee population of the world increase several  fold.

 This represents an unacceptable decline in the level of Australia's  commitment to assist those in genuine need of protection. Against the  background of an enormous escalation of the refugee population, such a  decline throws into question Australia's international standing in human  rights and refugee matters.

 It is imperative that Australia regain control of the refugee determination  process so that we may once again be well placed to assist in the 

 resettlement needs of genuine refugees. .

 As a nation we must also meet our obligations in respect of finding ways to  ameliorate the conditions which force the mass migration of people.  Increasingly the task will have to be focussed on the issues of causes, and  of prevention, and of return.

 Only then can our claim to a just, fair and compassionate approach to the  refugee problem be honoured.

 June 17 1992

