---
title: "Immigration review"
date: "1992-01-13"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214122811
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006835%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP 3

 Federal M ember for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 IMMIGRATION REVIEW

 Treasurer Dawkins indicated that a reduction in the immigration intake will be  considered separately and shortly after the Government's economic statement in  February.

 The Opposition, in it's FIGHTBACK! program and since Australia entered into  recession, has called for a substantial reduction. While not a cure for our  Government induced ills, a reduction in the intake, during the worst recession in  sixty years, is absolutely necessary.

 The reasons are clear:

 . The absorption of new arrivals at record levels cannot be sustained. Increased  numbers of new entrants with little English capacity and low skill levels, introduce  additional people eligible for employment, but with no real prospect of finding  employment.

 . Up to $400 million is paid annually in benefits to people who have been in  Australia for less than two years.

 . In Australia, in past recessions of a lesser impact than today's, the immigration  intake has traditionally been fixed between 50,000 - 70,000.

 THE SIZE OF THE PROGRAM

 Immigration levels at this time are at record levels and understated. The following  facts need to be understood:

 1. Labor's program for this year 1991-92 is for 111,000 new permanent entrants; for  1992-93 the Government presently plans an intake of 118,000 and for 1993-94 128.000 (including refugees).

 2. This total does not include those given 'quasi' permanent entry. This includes 20.000 PRC (Peoples' Republic of China) students in Australia at the time of the  Tianamen Square Massacre. Nor does it include the 14,000 PRC spouses estimated  to join their partners in Australia. No plans have been suggested by the 

 Government for their long-term future. However former Prime Minister Hawke  suggested none would be required to leave Australia. ...21

 f

 1

 3. The total does not address the situation of 23,000 refugee claimants in Australia.  While only 10% in past experience have been accepted as bona-fide, changed  administrative and legal procedures suggest increased numbers of claimants may be  granted 4 year temporary entry permits. Those who require on-going protection 

 have been promised consideration for places in later immigration program numbers.  Those given four year temporary entry permits are not counted in the present  planned announced intake. In the past refugees were accepted on shore at the  expense of places for those chosen from abroad.

 It can be seen the present program figures of 111,000 entrants understates the  actual numbers of people settling in Australia and eligible for unemployment  benefits provided by the Australian taxpayers.

 RECENT CHANGES

 The recently announced changes to the Points System will, by Government  admission, have minimal impact on the size of the program.

 While application numbers are down, the success rate is obviously higher than  anticipated. The impact of the changes on overall skill level should be marginal, that  is to maintain the skill level the Government originally had in mind. Because the  change impacts equally on both skilled Independent and Concessional Family Entry 

 (brothers & sisters or nephews & nieces) the existing imbalance between the  categories has not been altered.

 It is the Concessional Family category which is not tested for English language  ability and who, with maximum marks for family ties, can enter with little or no  substantial skills.

 WHAT CAN BE DONE?

 1. The Concessional Family category could have again, some requirement for English  language skills testing, like that applied to the Independent Entry category. Such a  test was in place early in the Labor term but was removed in the late 1980s.

 2. Additional testing for bona-fides of relationships could be introduced to reduce the  possibility of continued abuse of the preferential treatment given to spouses (the  fastest growing category of entry). On-shore applicants for entry are only given a  two-year temporary entry permit, to see if the partners continue in the relationship.  Such a test could easily be added for those entering from abroad.

 ...3/

 3. Because of the relative ease of access to Australian welfare benefits, many family  entrants with little or no prospect of employment, still come in expectation that they  could enjoy a higher standard of living in Australia on welfare, than in a less  developed country with no such benefits. It was Labor that removed the  requirement for Assurances of Support for Concessional Family entrants. While  experience has been that assurances are honoured in the breach, for the few  preferential family members to whom they apply, a wider assurance scheme would  alert potential entrants that concessional entry requires realistic family support.  The more appropriate approach would be to adopt the Opposition's FIGHTRACK!  program and deny benefits to new arrivals for a two year qualifying period with 

 appropriate safeguards.

 Where Australia's national interest demands a new approach to policy we have no  objection to plagiarism.

 For further information contact Philip Ruddock: (02) 630 4575 ah or  Pager (02) 925 3911, number #25589.

 13 January 1992

