---
title: "Still no sign of Government controlling borders"
date: "1992-08-24"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214124695
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006723%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP m

 Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 STILL NO SIGN O F GOVERNMENT CONTROLLING BORDF.RS

 The recent arrival of yet another boatload of 68 Chinese asylum seekers is  clear indication that the Government has not been able to exercise any  control over our borders. On the contrary, it seems that the message still  being sent out is that Australia is a soft touch on asylum seekers.

 Reports suggest that the boat was only spotted 4 hours before it landed on  Christmas Island with Customs officials indicating that there was no previous  intelligence on their movements.

 Indonesia's assistance to the boat makes a mockery of a supposed agreement  struck by the Minister for Immigration with Indonesia to provide intelligence  about illegal movements and to prevent the continued journey to Australia  of any boats landing on their territory. *

 The Government has not provided any details about the nature of the  agreement with Indonesia. In the light of this most recent arrival it is clear  that the Minister is a poor negotiator.

 Details of the agreement should be released immediately along with an  explanation by the Government of how this latest incident has been allowed  to occur.

 If the government does not act swiftly to deter and deport all those who do  not have a bona-fide claim for protection, these "advance groups" will  provide a beacon for many more to make the journey.

 24 August 1992

