---
title: "Statement on adult english as a 2nd language programs"
date: "1992-08-20"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214124644
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008605%22
---

 5?λ

 JOINT STATEMENT ON ADULT ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE  PROGRAMS BY THE MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION AND  TRAINING AND THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 20 AUGUST 1992

 INTRODUCTION

 N ew  measures to boost English language training for NESB adult Australians  in the 1992-93 Budget recognise that competence in English language is  central to the education, training and skill formation necessary to produce a  more dynamic and competitive Australian economy.

 Last year the Commonwealth spent $ 1 1 4 .5M on adult English as a Second  language (ESL) training - the Department of Immigration, Local Government  and Ethnic Affairs (DILGEA) spent S101M and the Department of  Employment, Education and Training spent $13.5M .

 In 1 9 9 2 -9 3  the Commonwealth will spend almost $142M  comprising  $ 1 3 8 .2M  from the Budget and $3.65M  from user charging - DILGEA will  spend $9 9.6 5M  ($96M  from the Budget plus $3.65M  raised through user  charging) and DEET will spend $ 4 2 .2M. These figures exclude allocations for  income support and running costs.

 The measures build on the release of the Australian Language and Literacy  Policy (ALLP) in 1991 which highlighted the importance of English for  improving the quality of life and opportunities for disadvantaged members of  Australian society.

 The release of the ALLP has provided the Commonwealth with the  opportunity to undertake a fundamental re-appraisal of its policy interest and  priorities for people requiring assistance ESL. In this context the  Commonwealth has recognised the need for a national ESL strategy. This  Statement outlines essential elements of the Commonwealth's position in  negotiating the ESL component of a national adult ESL and literacy strategy.

 BACKGROUND

 The national settlement consultations which the Minister for Immigration,  Local Government and Ethnic Affairs conducted in 1991 identified a major  structural problem in the administration and delivery of Commonwealth ESL  programs.

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 W ith hindsight past migration policies can be seen to have created an ESI  backlog. More crucially and more recently the demands of a more  sophisticated economy have compounded the backlog. People who could get  by with a form of English now require greater fluency in English and higher  levels of literacy skills.

 The Commonwealth initiatives detailed in this Statement address the dual  problem of responding to a backlog of need for ESL from residents,  particularly those longer term NESB residents who are seeking jobs, and  preventing further additions to the backlog from future migration intakes.

 INCREASED RESOURCES AND NEW ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS  FOR JOBSEEKERS

 W ith restructuring of Australian industry to become internationally  competitive, English has become a key factor in employment and skilling of  the labour market. Research by the Bureau of Immigration Research  confirms that migrants with limited English language competence are  disadvantaged on a range of labour market criteria.

 Responding to the ESL needs of jobseekers has been constrained by  insufficient resources and arbitrary demarcation of responsibility between  DILGEA and DEET based on length of residence criteria and on different  language levels.

 The Government has clarified administrative responsibilities for the ESL  needs of jobseekers and provide additional resources for ESL training.

 DEET will now have responsibility for the English language needs of  jobseekers (other than newly arrived migrants or those already in the Adult  Migrant English Program (AMEP)). This decision will ensure that the needs  of NESB jobseekers are addressed in a labour market context and that 

 English language training can be more closely linked to other vocational  training and employment outcomes.

 The Government expects to spend an additional $105M  over the next four  years to help jobseekers overcome the language barriers hindering their  efforts to find jobs. Together with current Budget allocations being  transferred to DEET, a total of $309M  will be available to help these  jobseekers. This amount includes $146.4M  to fund ESL tuition places and 

 $ 1 5 4 .3 M  for income support.

 W ith the additional funding, DEET will provide ESL training and income  support to an estimated 3 8 ,0 0 0  jobseekers registered with the  Commonwealth Employment Service who would otherwise not have had  access to ESL assistance, and little chance of obtaining employment.

 2

 INCOMING MIGRANTS AND RECENT ARRIVALS

 To ensure that further significant additions to the backlog do not recur  DILGEA has been given responsibility for, Commonwealth management of  the AMEP, and servicing the ESL needs of incoming migrants and existing  AMEP clients.

 Entitlements

 In a radical departure from previous arrangements, where people needing  English were prioritised within a queuing system, in-coming migrants will be  entitled, subject to legislative amendment, to 510 hours of tuition, or the  hours it takes to achieve functional English, whichever is achieved first.  Functional English is the ability to communicate in English with sufficient  ease to participate in basic social and work situations. These arrangements  are due to commence from March 1993.

 Migrants will be required to take up this entitlement within one year of arrival  in Australia, unless they have been granted an authorised deferral by  DILGEA.

 AMEP statistics show that 510 hours is the average time it takes to reach a  functional level of English. Some people may not reach functional English  within 5 1 0  hours, but they will have achieved a worthwhile language gain  and substantial progress towards their language learning goals.

 The entitlement will be subject to limitations on the location of the service  and the type of service appropriate for the individual.

 The provision of a 510 hours entitlement is a substantial increase over  existing levels of service for migrants. Creating an entitlement will minimise  the number of people who have not had adequate access to ESL training and  thus reduce the backlog of poor English speakers in Australia.

 Based on current estimates of numbers of incoming migrants without  functional English, DILGEA will receive funding of $4 4 0 M  over the next five  years. This will enable it to service the annual intake of about 22  0 0 0   migrants without functional English as well as discharging commitments to 

 65 0 0 0  current clients.

 English language testing

 To qualify for an entitlement, incoming migrants will need to establish that  they lack functional English.

 For this purpose a testing instrument is being developed by a consortium of  experts in Australia led by the National Centre for English Language Teaching  and Research at Macquarie University.

 3

 Interim testing systems will be ready for use by March 1993 in major .  overseas centres such as Bangkok, Belgrade, Kuala Lumpur, Manila, Moscow, New Dehli and Singapore. A fully trialled testing system will be in  place by December 1993.

 The capacity for forward planning in DILGEA-funded ESL programs will be  considerably enhanced by the capture of data offshore from the application  of the overseas English language test. In due course the provision of an  offshore English language test will overtake the need to conduct  comprehensive assessments of clients on-shore.

 User Charging in the AMEP

 While the Commonwealth has funded the provision of English language  services for some four decades, it has not been able to keep up with  increasing demand nor meet the large backlog o f changing need arising from  large intakes of non-English speaking background migrant in the past.

 There are substantial benefits to migrants being able to communicate in  English. The Government will therefore be seeking a financial contribution  from migrants requiring ESL assistance which will contribute towards their  total tuition costs. This is in line with the Government's broader user  charging policy.

 In'deciding the level of charging for English language tuition, the Government  has taken into account an individual's settlement prospects as well as  capacity to pay. Subject to legislative amendments, the Government plans  to introduce a sliding scale of off-shore user charges based on the migration 

 category of incoming migrants as well as introducing a flat charge for current  residents of Australia who are participating in the Adult Migrant English  Program. The off-shore sliding scale will commence in March 1993 and the  flat charge for on-shore clients will take effect in January 1993.

 The required contribution from an individual will range from the full cost of  receiving 510 hours of tuition in Australia ($ 4 0 8 0 ) for adults in the Business  Skills and Employer Nomination categories to an exemption from payment for  adults in the Refugee, Special Humanitarian and Preferential Family  categories.

 From January 1993, people who enter the AMEP will be required to pay  $250 per annum for their English tuition if they have not pre-paid or been  exempted off-shore. For people who are participating in informal learning  arrangements such as the home tutor scheme, there will be a placement fee  of $50. Health care card holders and other registered jobseekers will be  exempt from any fees in the AMEP.

 Details of user charging scales are attached.

 4

 The effects of user charging go far beyond the contribution to revenue. User  charging will encourage greater client commitment and service provider  responsiveness to the needs of clients. This will result in a more client  oriented program than exists under current arrangements.

 PROGRAM PLANNING

 The Commonwealth is also committed to achieving value for money and  maximum client outcomes from its investment in ESL programs.

 The Commonwealth has a role as a major purchaser of ESL services from  quality providers. In this respect it is committed to improving the quality of  national ESL provision. To this end DILGEA and DEET will consider ways in  which the Commonwealth's investment in infrastructure support is made  more accessible to the wider ESL industry. This will involve consideration in  particular of, the role of key centres such as the National Centre for English  Language Teaching and Research; support for curriculum development;  consistent assessment and reporting methodologies, and management  information systems.

 Commonwealth decisions on these issues will be negotiated through the  AEC/MOVEET Working Party which is developing a national Adult English  language and literacy strategy.

 DELIVERY ARRANGEMENTS

 About 90 per cent of DILGEA ESL funding is administered by State and  Territory Adult Migrant Education Services (AMES) under joint  Commonwealth-State arrangements. The remainder is delivered in the main  by higher education institutions through contractual arrangements.

 The introduction of AMEP user charging and entitlements will require the  negotiation of a new set of operational arrangements between the  Commonwealth and ESL providers.

 Commonwealth Ministers have written to their State counterparts inviting  them to participate in a consultative process to discuss the development of  new operational arrangements. These discussions will focus on:

 . development of an appropriate network of providers

 . processes for linking funding to numbers of incoming migrants by  State of intended residence

 . standards of service, agreed course outcomes and costs 

 . infrastructure and support elements such as property.

 5

 Consultations with other current AMEP providers and non AMEP ESL  providers will also take place on these issues.

 AMEP higher education providers currently conduct courses for overseas  professionally qualified migrants or migrants with academic aspirations with  higher order English proficiency. To continue to attract DILGEA funding  under the new arrangements AMEP higher education providers will need to 

 re-orient course provision to service migrants with less than functional  English. Alternatively they may wish to focus their expertise on the new  dimensions of labour market training.

 The DEET ESL training will continue to be purchased by the Commonwealth  Employment Service through labour market tendering processes from  qualified providers.

 While DILGEA's direct allocation to AMEP service providers will vary in line  with planned reductions in the numbers of incoming migrants, there will be  opportunity also for these providers to secure additional funds through the  DEET tendering process.

 Both DILGEA and DEET will publish in annual performance statements data  about the effectiveness of Commonwealth-funded programs. The same  obligations to measure performance and outcomes will transfer to providers  who contract to deliver ESL services on behalf of the Commonwealth. The 

 primary indicator will be the measurable language gain by each student for  each course undertaken. The complexities of attempting such measurements  in the field of adult learning are recognised.

 DILGEA has commenced work on the re-development of the Adult Migrant  English Program Information System (AMIS). The re-developed AMIS will  have the capacity to respond to new DILGEA management responsibilities as  well as providing planning information for DEET programs.

 The Commonwealth through both DILGEA and DEET will continue to support  the various processes currently in train which are attempting to refine  curricula assessment and reporting methodologies. These include the  development of a national ESL learner pathway certificate in the AMEP and a 

 project funded under the auspices of the Australian Committee for Training  Curriculum to develop a generic skills framework.

 Harmonising assessment and reporting requirements between DILGEA and  DEET funded provision should considerably enhance client transition between  programs and providers.

 ESL NEEDS OF OTHER GROUPS

 The Government also recognises that other community groups, outside of  incoming migrants and jobseekers, have ESL needs. Research from the

 6

 s 

 X

 Bureau of Immigration Research has identified socially isolated groups  including women, outworkers, rural communities and the aged as being  particularly disadvantaged by limited opportunities to acquire English skills.

 Up to $ 5 0 0 ,0 0 0  will be spent on re-shaping existing delivery arrangements  within the AMEP such as the home tutor scheme and distance learning  provision and in expanding the network of community provision to service  ' the needs of socially isolated community members.

 Responses to the needs of these groups will be further developed in the  context of the national ESL strategy.

 7

 PROPOSED SCHEDULE OF FEES FOR ESL TUITION

 1. *  OFFSHORE CHARGES (FROM 01 MARCH 1993) 

 Migration Category Principal Applicant

 FAMILY

 Preferential

 Concessional

 SKILL

 $

 EXEMPT

 1,020

 Employer Nomination Scheme/ Labour Agreement 4,080

 Business Skills 4,080

 Special Talents 2,040

 Independents 2,040

 SPECIAL ELIGIBILITY 2,040

 REFUGEES/SPECIAL HUMANITARIAN  PROGRAM/SPECIAL ASSISTANCE

 Refugees EXEMPT 

 Special Humanitarian EXEMPT 

 Special Assistance EXEMPT

 Spouse & Adult  Dependent $

 EXEMPT

 1 , 0 2 0

 2.040

 2.040

 2.040 

 1,020

 2.040

 EXEMPT

 EXEMPT

 EXEMPT

 2. FEES FOR CLIENTS IN THE AMEP AT JANUARY 19 93

 (PROPOSED ANNUAL CHARGES APPLY STARTING JANUARY 1993) $

 Clients in formal classroom based activities and  Distance Learning Activities 250

 Clients undertaking less formal activities  eg. Home Tutor and other Tutor Support Schemes; Individual Learning Centres 50

 Exemptions

 Clients with a Department of Social Security issued Health  Care Card and CES registered jobseekers referred to the AMEP  by the CES will be EXEMPT from payment. Clients who have  prepaid or been exempted from charges offshore will not be 

 expected to pay further fees for English training on arriving  in Australia.

