---
title: "Caution still the key word"
date: "1992-06-12"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214123777
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006758%22
---

 MEDIA STATEMENT Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 CAUTION STITT, THB KEY WORD

 The Government's adoption of many of the Industry Commission's  recommendations on the export of education services needs to be  approached with an element of caution.

 In the government's anxiety to get additional students, bona-fides testing  should not be overlooked and the Coalition will be monitoring the  implementation of the recommendations very carefully.

 It should not be forgotten that previous attempts to facilitate the entry of  overseas students led to the situation where some 25,000 Chinese students  were "pipelined" into Australia without proper bona fides testing. Over  17,000 of these students are now claiming refugee status in Australia with 

 the vast majority of these claims being manifestly unfounded.

 Moreover, the enormous costs now being placed on the Australian  cdihmunity are unjustifiable. Informed reports suggest that the cost of this  decision over the past 4 years has exceeded half a billion dollars. These  include benefits paid, time consuming and expensive legalistic refugee  determination processes, costs of legal assistance and detention costs where  appropriate.

 Australia simply cannot afford the situation whereby the education dollar is  seen as more important than immigration control.

 The Coalition views the education export industry as a potentially vital  contributor to Australia's emerging role as the region's principal provider of  quality goods and services. However, with the memory of the previous  attempt still fresh in the minds of our near neighbours, the Government will  have to ensure that the new schema is beyond reproach.

 12 June 1992

 COMMONWEALTH   p a r l ia m e n t a r y  LIBRARY  MICAH

 η η  ο o

