---
title: "Australian high energy biscuits for Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh"
date: "1992-07-17"
creators:
  - "Kerin, John"
source: "MINISTER FOR TRADE AND OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211178703
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3062217%22
---

 q6

 No. Date:

 MTAI 32 17 July 1992

 Australian high energy biscuits for Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh

 "Australia will rush 100 tonnes of high energy biscuits to Bangladesh to provide supplementary feeding for Rohingya children in refugee camps on the Bangladesh/Burma border," the Minister for Trade and Overseas Development, John Kerin, announced today.

 "Over 260,000 Burmese Rohingyas are currently in refugee camps in Bangladesh, with around 150 new arrivals each day.

 "Recent nutritional surveys indicate that malnutrition is rife in the camps and the health situation is expected to deteriorate even further with the onset of the monsoons.

 "The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has made an urgeat appeal to Australia to provide the biscuits, which are used in supplementary feeding programs for 25,000 malnourished children.

 "UNHCR estimates that their stocks will run out within the week. The Australian biscuits, made especially for the aid program by Arnott's, will be rushed from Melbourne to Bangladesh to make up the shortfall."

 This package of assistance to the Rohingya refugees is worth about $580,000. Emergency assistance for the Rohingyas is administered by AIDAB, Australia's overseas aid agency.

 * * * * * *

 CANBERRA For further information contact AIDAB Public Affairs: Wendy Levy, (06) 276 4966 or AR (06) 247 8920. Cathy Walker, (06) 276 4960.

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARYtylICAH

