---
title: "Cambodia: Australia welcomes Thai decision on borders"
date: "1992-12-24"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211179627
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2930490%22
---

  No. Date 

  M234 24 December 1992 

  CAMBODIA: AUSTRALIA WELCOMES THAI DECISION ON  BORDERS 

  The Australian Government welcomes yesterday's announcement by Thailand  that it will be closing all temporary border crossing points into Cambodia on 31  December, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans,  said today. 

  With the implementation of this decision, Thailand will be acting to meet its  obligations under UN Security Council Resolution 792 of 30 November.  Restriction of border crossings to unofficial check points should enable more  effective control of cross-border traffic between Thailand and areas of western 

  Cambodia, part of which is controlled by the Khmer Rouge. The Thai  Government will also move to prevent the transportation of logs across the  border, in accordance with the Resolution. 

  "I welcome this strong confirmation of Thailand's continuing commitment to  the Paris Peace Accords," Senator Evans said. 

  "Thailand has been making strenuous efforts throughout the year to persuade  the Khmer Rouge to comply with the terms of the peace settlement." 

  Thailand stands to gain substantially from the resolution of the Cambodia  conflict. Economic development in a stable, peaceful Cambodia will be of  direct benefit to Thai commercial interests. Moreover, two-thirds of the  370,000 refugees to whom Thailand has been host for more than 12 years have 

  already been-moved back into Cambodia. The remainder of the the refugees are  expected to be repatriated by early next year. 

  On a related matter, _Senator Evans said that Australia wholeheartedly endorsed  a 22 December statement by the United Nations Security Council which  demanded that recent hostile acts against United Nations personnel by the  Khmer Rouge, including illegal detentions of such personnel, cease  immediate I y. 

