---
title: "Autralia's reputation at stake"
date: "1992-09-17"
creators:
  - "Bourne, Vicki"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214125098
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02007538%22
---

 P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A  · THE SENATE

 SENATOR VICKI BOURNE Australian Democrat Senator for New South Wales

 17 September 1992 PR NO 92/501

 NEWS RELEASE

 AUSTRALIA’S REPUTATION AT STAKE

 The Australian Democrats have warned the Federal Government that Australia's  reputation as a humanitarian nation is under serious threat unless there is a stronger  commitment to overseas aid.

 Speaking at today's Australian Council for Overseas Aid (ACFOA) Seminar in  Parliament House, the Democrats Spokesperson on Overseas Development, Senator  Vicki Bourne, said: "Successive Liberal and Labor Governments have consistently  slashed Australia's aid budget over the last 25 years. The cuts have been particularly 

 severe in the Hawke/Keating years".

 "We are now at the stage where this country's overseas aid budget is at historically low  levels. Australia currently sets aside only 0.36% of its GNP which is significantly down  on the level of 0.49% of GNP when the ALP took office in 1983. This lack of  compassion is a trend which has unfortunately creeped into a number of important 

 policy areas including overseas aid".

 "Under this Labor Government, Australia has fallen well behind other developed  nations in terms of assisting the poorer nations of the world at a time when demand  for third world development and humanitarian assistance is increasing. Incredibly the  Liberal Party is also committed to cutting aid if it wins the next election".

 "These funding cuts demonstrate poor forward planning in Australia's relations with  the developing countries particularly our neighbours in the Pacific region. There is  good reason for these countries to question Australia's commitment to the region if  Australia continues to ignore development needs in the area".

 The Australian Democrats have also given their strong support to ACFOA's campaign  to re-shape the nature of Australia's aid program. Senator Bourne said: "The  priorities in third world development are changing and Australia must be respond to  this by sponsoring aid projects which focus on women, refugees, rural development  and environmental issues".

 FOR FU RTH ER INFORMATION PLEASE PHONE SENATOR BOURNE 06 277 3820 (w) or 06 297 3830 (h)

 COMMONWEALTH '  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY'  . · ivHCAH

 Commonwealth Parliament Offices, 5 6 -7 0  Phillip S tre et Sydney, N.S.W.  Postal Address: G.P.O. Box 36, Sydney, N.S.W. 2001  Telephone (02) 247 3377 Facsimile 247 9681

