---
title: "Immigration"
date: "1992-05-12"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214123364
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02009697%22
---

 i \

 Leader of the Opposition

 12 May 1992 REF: TRANSCR\AL

 TRANSCRIPT OF  7.30 REPORT

 PAUL LYNEHAM AND GERRY HAND

 E & Ο E - PROOF COPY ONLY

 SUBJECTS: IMMIGRATION

 Immigration Minister, Gerry Hand, has cut next year's migrant  intake target by 31,000. What's not been revealed until now,  however, is the Minister's admission that Australia could become  home for more than 300,000 Chinese all because of the Tiananmen  Square massacre.

 Gerry Hand is with Paul Lyneham:

 The 80,000 total, does that include the 20,000 Chinese students  who have been here since Tiananmen Square?

 No. It doesn't because those people 89/90, 90/91 were calculated  into the net migration period over those two program years.  The  question of their permanency arises at the end of the four year  temporary entry visa that they've been given, the same as any  other person w h o 's granted refugee status now under the new  arrangements. At the end of the four year period, they are given  a position in the program if a position is available, if not,  they go on being temporary until such time as one is.

 Is it true that 14,000 relatives are expected to join them this  year?

 The estimate was that it was possible, in fact, that 14,000  people, namely spouse and dependant children, could, in fact,

 LYNEHAM:

 HAND:

 LYNEHAM:

 HAND:

 Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600 Phone 774022

 REF: TRANSCR\AL 2 .

 join those people here during the course of this y e a r .  It's  currently running at about 7 , I think. The reason for that is  that under our international obligations anybody that's given  refuge here be they under this particular category, that is the  temporary entry permit, or, in fact, long term, the package has  also been applied in long term visas for employment purposes to  bring their spouse.

 LYNEHAM:

 Now Gerry Hand, you've got a reputation as a straight shooter,  I know if I give you a straight question, I'll get a straight  answer.

 HAND:

 I'll try.

 LYNEHAM:

 Where does this end, is it true that ultimately it could mean  more than 300,000 extra Chinese settling in Australia?

 HAND:

 It could mean considerably more than the 17 plus the 14 but is  it true if those people were to be given if, I stress, they were  to be given permanency at a given point in time, and they were  all to be given permanency, that could flow through, provided the  people meet the requirements in terms of the criteria,

 ...(interjection) .  .  .

 LYNEHAM:

 ... more than the 300,000?...

 HAND:

 ... well, I don't know whether it would flow through to 300,000  but ... (interjection) ...

 LYNEHAM:

 ...it's not a figure you've ever used?

 HAND:

 It's a figure that is without the changes in February, and 

 without the tightening over a long period of time could, in fact  be reached.

 LYNEHAM:

 It could in fact be reached?

 R E F ί TRANSCR\AL 3.

 HAND:

 Well, it could be. That larger number and it begins to flow out  of that, that's the same as to say how many Vietnamese have come  here in the last 10 years or how many Greeks came here in the 

 5 0 's and 6 0 ' s . Obviously, when you have a large number of people  coming in at a given time it does, under the family reunion 

 category, have the ability to develop into a much larger number,  and that's true.

 LYNEHAM:

 Have you made senior members of the Government - your colleagues  - aware that this could end up at 300,000 plus?

 HAND:

 Well, if you were to lump in the 25,000 Chinese students and  others that came post-Tiananmen Square before we tightened up,  it is logical, I think to come to the conclusion that by about  the year 2000 the flow-on effects from both that and the pre-  Tiananmen Square could be around about that number.

 LYNEHAM:

 Why aren't we told, why aren't the people told? This is a very  big development in our ... (interjection) ...

 HAND:

 ... well, if you asked me before I wouldn't have denied the fact  that if there was a maximising under the various categories of  people wanting to come, if you followed normal immigration  procedures in terms of sizes of family etc. you could get up to  that figure. Now, it begs the question ... (interjection) ...

 LYNEHAM:

 ... Have you told the Prime Minister this? ...

 HAND:

 I think it's fairly known for those that have taken an interest  in thing. There's a possibility when you get 40, 50,000 people  coming into the program or into the country, if they were to be  given permanency, i.e. if the pre-Tiananmen Square 19 get  permanency, if the 25,000 post-Tiananmen Square prove their bona 

 fides in terms of their claims, well, presuming they all have  spouse, presuming they all have perhaps dependant children,  presuming they have relatives like everybody else, they would be  eligible given permanency to apply themselves in the way 

 everybody does. Now that's not a thing I've ever denied, it's  a natural consequence of immigration.

 REF: TRANSCR\AL 

 i I4 .

 LYNEHAM:

 Finally, the 8 0 , 0 0 0  target represents a dramatic shift from the  high levels of the 8 0'  s .  Is this the start, do you think, of 

 some sort of ongoing trend or is it going to be seen when we look  back a few years from now as a blip in the graph because of the  recession?

 HAND:

 I think that probably the figure of 8 0 ,  I think people in the 

 business sector and people in State governments and in local  governments, and the migrant community and in the general  community, are probably all looking for some stability. I think  that the figure of 8 0 , 0 0 0  is a good starting point for this year  and in the future.  If demand increases dramatically and, there's 

 shortages when the economy gets going at full steam again, well  then adjustments could be made. But you've got to remember,  the  humanitarian stream is demand driven, and we have only marginally  tampered with that. Preferential is close family relatives and  we haven't tampered with that because it's very difficult.  Where  you have employment related categories, we have targeted we have 

 strengthened them, the skills level of both all of those 

 categories is vastly improved and I think that's good for the  nation.

 LYNEHAM:

 Tougher requirements on English too?

 HAND:

 Tougher requirements on English - I've talked to industry, I've  been talking to everybody. When industry who traditionally have  employed large numbers of migrants, all the companies involved  in this major industry sit across the table and say in the 

 future, people being employed by us will require English. You  have to take notice of that, otherwise you condemn people to a  second class standard of living.

 LYNEHAM:

 So if they come here as independent skilled people and they don't  have a good grasp of English, they've got to put up the money in  advance for an English language course, is that right?

 HAND:

 That's right and I think that that's fair. The demands by those  who are already here and I'm supporting that demand to the hilt  because we have to give people full access and equity. But if  you come here highly skilled, with a highly likelihood of going 

 into a highly paid job, establishing a very good standard of  living for yourself and your family, I don't think it's

 REF: TRANSCR\AL 5.

 unreasonable for you to make a contribution to  ability to earn and provide for your family  that's unreasonable at all given these times.

 LYNEHAM:

 strengthen your  I don't think

 Gerry Hand, thanks for your time.

