---
title: "Address to the Baha'i Society Peace Forum, University Of Western Sydney"
date: "1992-08-14"
creators:
  - "Kerin, John"
source: "MINISTER FOR TRADE AND OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211178862
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3063939%22
---

 fr

 Check Against Delivery

 /CA)

 Embargo: 8pm, 14/8/92

 ADDRESS BY JOHN KERIN MINISTER FOR TRADE AND OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT MEMBER FOR WERRIWA

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARYLMRARY MICAH

 BAHA'I SOCIETY PEACE FORUM UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN SYDNEY 14 AUGUST 1992

 As the crow flies, the distance between Barcelona and Sarajevo is roughly equivalent to Melbourne-Brisbane.  From Mogadishu in Somalia to Baghdad is around the same as Darwin to Hobart.

 All these overseas cities have been high on our news lately. Unfortunately, only one has been there for a good reason.But, at least fortunately for us here, they are all a long way from Campbelltown.

 In Barcelona we have just witnessed the Olympic phenomenon, the first time since Montreal in 1976 that all nations were represented in what is a generally uplifting expression of both the diversity and similarity of all peoples.In Sarajevo, Mogadishu and Baghdad we are witnessing the other side of the human coin.

 The topic tonight - Peace...Towards 2000 - is a very hopeful one in the light of the trouble in these cities and in others around the world. Seeing a way through all the factors that contribute to international and civil tensions and finding a way forward is not easy.

 Tonight I will concentrate on one aspect: the need for fair and equitable distribution of resources to all peoples, no matter where they live or what they believe.  This is essential if we are to reduce tensions between nations, ethnic groups, and

 individuals. It involves issues concerning trade, aid, economic growth, and management of the global environment.

 When I was Treasurer Dr David Suzuki made one of his regular promotional trips to Australia. During this visit, he was reported to be calling for a halt to economic growth in developed nations. This is a view he has consistently put since he rose

 to prominence in the global environment debate.  He argues that only through zero growth will greenhouse emissions be reduced.

 He was given wide and positive media coverage, school students warmly rallied to his cause, and he left Australia probably more popular than ever before.

 Meanwhile, I was presiding over a couple of National Accounts outcomes which showed that we had achieved Dr Suzuki's goal of zero growth and even surpassed it with negative growth in some quarters. It was called a recession.

 I got wide media coverage, became less popular than ever before, and eventually got the sack as Treasurer.

 This is merely one example to show that our understanding of the nexus between economic growth and environmental management is complex and emotionally charged.  So it is more open to simplification and manipulation than many other issues around

 today.

 2

 But we must cut through all that. We cannot afford to be satisfied with anything but the most rigorous analysis - because it has enormous importance for a range of important global policy areas.

 Issues of development versus environment are of much wider relevance than Australia's own domestic conflicts. On a global scale, it is about how countries like Mozambique, the U.S.,

 Bangladesh, China, Japan, the Solomon Islands, and Australia should go about developing their resources in a sustainable and equitable way.  And how the wealthier nations of the world should assist the poorer ones.

 This is absolutely central to all matters of global environmental concern, whether it be rainforest degradation, soil erosion, ocean fish stocks depletion - or the overarching questions of

 population control and global climate management. It is also central to any global consideration of the process of wealth generation and distribution.

 Our primary goal in this area must be to work towards a fairer distribution of wealth between the world's peoples. A key element in this is related to population levels.

 The world's population is now 5.3 billion.On current trends it is predicted to almost double over the next sixty years, reaching around 10 billion by the middle of next century.  Over 95% of that growth is predicted to occur in developing countries.

 So we must stabilise and eventually reduce population growth in developing countries, thereby reducing pressure for resource use in those countries. Only from this first step can we hope to manage the global environment sustainably and distribute finite

 resources fairly.

 The best way to achieve this first step is by raising living standards in those countries - this is the proven key to control of population growth.  Family planning programs are important, but higher living standards are essential.

 Raising living standards in developing countries requires sustainable economic growth for many years.  For this to happen, we need a long and steady flow of development assistance from wealthier countries.

 So we need developed countries to be successfully maintaining economic growth while using their resources sustainably.

 Growth in the developed world is necessary to generate wealth for redistribution to poorer nations. This is especially true because voters in developed countries will baulk at any wealth redistribution which they perceive as diminishing their own

 living standards.

 All these interlinked factors will determine the total global response to the challenge of environmental management.

 In terms of development, the ultimate goal is for all nations to be self-sustaining and independent, with wealth redistributed through trade, not aid.

 3

 In terms of environmental management, the ultimate goal is for the world community to manage its resources and its environment in a sustainable way.

 Both these goals are inextricably linked.Growth is the key. Growth in developed and developing economies makes it possible to raise living standards in developing countries and begin to

 reduce population growth and manage the call on environmental resources.

 So Dr Suzuki is wrong. Although his message may superficially appeal, economic growth is an imperative ingredient in any long-term strategy for sustainable management of the globe's environmental resources. For this reason, and for the reasons of equitable distribution of global wealth, contribution to economic growth is a criterion against which all development assistance and international trading practices must be judged.

 Development assistance must aim to leave the recipients less dependent upon such assistance than they were before.

 More importantly, international trade must enable developing countries to sell their products at fair prices, not at prices dragged down by subsidies in developed countries; and in a free

 market, not in a market narrowed by tariff barriers.

 Globally, how do we currently shape up? Put simply: Aid not so bad but still not enough; trade not so good.

 I used the word 'aid'.  The preferred term is 'development assistance'.

 Aid implies stop-gap support, like a bag of flour dropped on a tarmac. Development assistance contributes to sustainable economic growth, like introducing better seeds and farming

 methods to raise farmers beyond mere self-sufficiency.

 Aid is sending Australian high-energy biscuits to Burmese refugees in Bangladesh.  Development assistance is training and infrastructure development so that small farmers can produce more food and cash crops.

 Aid is disaster relief to South Pacific islands hit by cyclone. Development assistance is providing education services to students from developing countries.

 Many assistance projects fit both categories.  The work Fred Hollows is doing with his clinics - restoring sight to older adults who suffer from cataracts - is humanitarian aid in that it alleviates an individual's suffering.But it is also development assistance because it enables people to be more productive, less dependant upon family members, and more able to pass on expertise and knowledge to younger generations.  Family planning assistance is another example of assistance that can fit both categories.

 So there is a continuum upon which all nation-to-nation assistance can be placed.  Australia's Overseas Development Assistance is spread across this continuum.

 4

 The 'Aid Debate' in Australia centres upon whether the correct and optimal. I acknowledge this, but I am not engage that debate here tonight, except to note that it essentially a debate between the Government and the non-government organisations, because the Opposition's

 cut aid funding put them so far into right-field as to irrelevant.

 spread is going to is

 plans to be

 In the area of trade, you have probably heard me quoted over recent months talking about the Uruguay Round of the GATT multilateral trade negotiations.  This is a tortuous but very necessary exercise in bringing all nations together and trying to

 get them to agree to a fairer and freer international trading regime.

 It is tortuous because of the great variances between the economic and political strengths of the 108 nations which are bound by GATT rules.  It is necessary because international trade is currently dominated by a power-based system - the richest nations win.  Only by moving to a rules-based system will poorer nations and their people have a real chance to seek a

 fair return from the wealth they generate.

 The agriculture sector is crucial to developing countries because agriculture is currently not covered by the rules of the GATT and developing countries are more dependant upon trade in commodities than the wealthier developed nations. In fact, the main sticking point of the Uruguay Round is getting agriculture included in the GATT rules-based system.

 The resistance comes from the industrialised nations, principally the EC. They and the U.S. increased their market share of agricultural trade sharply over the 1960s and 70s, at the expense of developing countries and countries like Australia for which

 commodity trade is an important part of their range of exports.

 Starting in the 1980s, world agricultural trade began to contract and the industrialised countries responded by instituting price supports for their producers, mainly for internal political reasons. This led to global overproduction and subsequent export subsidisation by the developed countries as they fought to maintain market share in a declining market.

 The effect on developing nations was to reduce their access to world markets and, furthermore, reduce their returns for what they were able to sell.  The budgetary pressures on the developed subsidising nations are huge - you have no doubt heard

 of the butter mountain and the wheat mountain that the EC have got stored away - but so far they have seen fit to absorb this cost.

 These budgetary pressures will continue to mount. The negotiating pressure will also continue to be maintained by countries like Australia and our Cairns Group partners. Eventually these combined pressures will almost inevitably lead to a shift in the

 balance towards a more equitable arrangement if this shift is contained within the GATT system.  Until then, however, the prospect for a fairer, more equitable return to developing nations for their commodity exports remains just that - a prospect.

 5

 So their prospects for ecologically sustainable economic growth remain equally limited.  Until this situation turns around, progress to a fairer distribution of global wealth through international trade will be slow, retaining the onus for this on the aid efforts of the developed nations.

 The Australian Government is active on all fronts - multilateral, regional and bilateral - to bring about freer trade. The Australian Labor Party platform also calls for Australian development assistance expenditure to equal 0.4% of GNP by 1995, up from last financial year's outcome of 0.36%.Despite the

 current difficult economic circumstances in Australia - which Dr Suzuki would presumably applaud - we will strive to achieve that target and then move towards the UN target of 0.7% of GNP.

 But we are not a powerful nation in the world order.  Whatever we achieve in trade liberalisation or aid expenditure outcomes, substantial progress towards fairer global distribution of wealth in the world will depend upon actions by the world's powerful

 democratic economies.

 They have much to gain.  Economic growth in the developing world will contribute to slowing population growth, reversing the trend towards degradation of the global environment, and thereby

 enhancing the prospects for a peaceful world.

