---
title: "Wasteful and inefficient aid lacks vision, poverty focus: Hill"
date: "1992-10-30"
creators:
  - "Hill, Robert"
source: "Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214125819
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006533%22
---

 too 

 MEDIA RELEASE SENATOR ROBERT HILL LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS Friday, October 30  95/92

 WASTEFUL AND INEFFICIENT AID LACKS VISION. POVERTY FOCUS: HTT.T.

 The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Robert Hill,  today said a decade of Labor had left Australia with a 

 wasteful and inefficient aid program which lacked both vision  and a genuine commitment to fighting Third World poverty.

 "Labor has no credibility on aid," Senator Hill said.

 "The ALP has consistently cut the quantity of Australia's  foreign aid and allowed the quality to deteriorate.

 "The Government's skewed aid priorities have meant that too  much money has been spent on wasteful, inappropriate and  inefficient projects, and too little has been spent on  initiatives to reduce poverty.

 "The size of the aid bureaucracy has ballooned, but the money  available for urgent humanitarian aid has been cut savagely.

 "Labor has too often used its aid program as a vehicle to  please domestic interest groups.

 "Despite its cuts, Labor has given almost $14 billion to aid -   over the past decade.

 "It is now time to ask how effectively that huge sum of money  has been spent.

 "A Coalition government will boost the quality and delivery of  Australian aid and make the reduction of poverty its 

 overriding goal."

 Senator Hill today released further details of the Coalition's  approach to aid.

 He said Labor's aid policy had failed in several key areas:

 AID PRIORITIES - Millions have been wasted on aid 

 administration, dubious aid schemes and ill-conceived  projects. Too little has been dedicated to the reduction of  poverty, and only pathetically small resources have been 

 available to meet the most pressing international crises, such  as starvation in Somalia.

 The Coalition will cut wastage, make poverty reduction the  central aim of aid policy, and end Labor's cuts to refugee  and emergency assistance.

 ...12

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 *

 I t

 f - .

 i 2 .

 BILATERAL AID - Labor has given too much of its aid indirectly  through multilateral organisations, international financial  institutions and special funds, such as DIFF (Development  Import Finance Facility).

 The Coalition will place greater emphasis on bilateral aid,  pursuant to carefully prepared country programs, to ensure  Australian aid is used more effectively.

 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION - Much of the Government's aid  program in Africa has been of doubtful value to recipients and  Australian taxpayers alike.

 The Coalition will focus bilateral aid on the Asia Pacific  region, where poverty remains extensive and where Australia  has representation to best ensure efficient delivery. The  Coalition will primarily channel funds for Africa through  NGOs (non-government organisations) and multilateral  bodies, such as the World Food Program.

 AID FUNDING - Labor promised to increase aid spending when it  came to office, but it has steadily cut the aid budget since  1983.

 The Coalition will make short-term cuts to aid funding as  part of its overall expenditure cuts, but remains committed  to the internationally accepted aid target of 0.7 per cent  of GDP. Foreign aid under the most recent Coalition  Government was substantially higher than under Labor.

 DIFF - This scheme, for which funding has skyrocketed over the  past six years, has been widely criticised as poor quality  aid.

 Aid support in forms which are primarily export subsidies  will be substantially reduced and ultimately phased out.  Industry will have improved opportunities to contribute to  the Coalition aid program by providing Australian goods and 

 services through the enhanced bilateral program.

 AIDAB (Australian International Development Assistance Bureau)  - The Government's key aid agency has become bureaucratic,  cumbersome and inefficient.

 The Coalition will make AIDAB leaner and more efficient,  and channel more aid funds through NGOs.

 (ends)

 Enquiries: Mark Batistich on (08) 237 7920. Copies of the aid  paper are available from Senator Hill's Canberra office.

