---
title: "Australia's approach to Asia Pacific regional security"
date: "1992-07-12"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211178681
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2945545%22
---

  No. Date 

  M113 15 July 1992 

  AUSTRALIA'S APPROACH TO ASIA PACIFIC REGIONAL SECURITY 

  Following is the text of an address by the Minister for Foreign 

  Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans, to the Institute of Public  Affairs and Heritage Foundation Conference 'Tomorrow's Pacific',  Canberra, 15 July 1992. 

  * * * 

  AUSTRALIA'S APPROACH TO ASIA PACIFIC REGIONAL SECURITY 

  Address by Senator the Hon Gareth Evans QC, Minister for 

  Foreign Affairs and Trade, to the Institute of Public Affairs  and Heritage Foundation Conference 'Tomorrow's Pacific',  Canberra, 15 July 1992 

  Since the pace of international change started to accelerate  in 1989, the extraordinary has so much become the commonplace  that we sometimes need to stop and pinch ourselves to fully 

  appreciate the scale of the transformation. Following the  abortive coup in Moscow last August we have seen nothing less  than a massive historical earthquake, in which the USSR has  vanished, communism has disappeared as a ruling force in all  but four countries, and nearly twenty new states have emerged  on the Eurasian landmass. 

  In short, we have seen in less than a year the total collapse 

  of the bipolar global structure that has characterised and  underpinned international affairs since 1945. On the positive  side, this has meant not only that we need no longer fear a 

  global nuclear holocaust, but that the sterile ideologies of  the past no longer in themselves constitute stumbling blocks  to the promotion of security measures through disarmament and  arms control, to regional problem solving, and to the 

  effective intervention of the United Nations in peace-keeping  and peace enforcement. 

  On the other hand, the lifting of the heavy hand of Marxism­

  Leninism has seen a resurgence of nationalism and ethnic 

  identification, with violence increasingly employed as the  means of self-determination in the break-up of nation states -the appalling series of events in the former Yugoslavia being  only the most obvious current case in point. 

  XVII/92 

  2 

  The fact is that the so-called new world order of the post­

  Cold War world is far more complex, diverse and unpredictable  than the East-West polarity it has replaced. In the fluid 

  situation we now confront, there are both opportunities and  risks. 

  The Asia Pacific area has adjusted to the end of the Cold War  much more effectively than many other parts of the world, and  in the main, developments have been positive.  included movement, albeit stalled at the moment,  settlement of the long and tragic Cambodian 

  These have  towards a  war, the 

  reintegration of Vietnam and Laos into the region, and a 

  modest reduction of tension on the Korean Peninsula. Greater  regional economic integration, which is a fundamental 

  objective of initiatives such as APEC, will also play its part  in reducing regional tensions. · 

  In a phase of world history that has seen a superpower vanish  in a matter of weeks, nothing can be regarded as invulnerable  to the forces at work in the current international 

  environment. And problems and possible sources of tension do  remain in our own region. 

  The economic success of some Asia-Pacific countries, for 

  example, is bringing with it greater political power, and in  time this will require some adjustments in regional attitudes  if envy and competition are to be managed. The increased 

  wealth and technological sophistication of some regional  nations is also leading to increasing weapons imports. While  this cannot yet be called an arms race, the situation will 

  bear watching in the medium term. 

  Another potential source of tension is Japan's role in 

  regional and global affairs. While there is growing regional  acceptance of Japan playing a political role commensurate with  its economic power, there rem;ains considerable resistance to  it assuming an enhanced security role, even in the very 

  narrowly defined context of UN-sponsored peace-keeping  operations. 

  3 

  The development of China's response to the new international  environment has been complicated by the approaching leadership  transition, and while China has been playing a very 

  cooperative role within the Security Council, especially on  Cambodia, we have seen signs that it could adopt increasingly  hardline positions on many international issues, not least on  some long-standing territorial claims. 

  Residual territorial disputes do continue to trouble parts of  the region, most obviously in the South China Sea. In the most  volatile single area of the region, the Korean Peninsula, the  North Korean nuclear program and its possible weapons 

  application continues to loom as a spectre. And there are a 

  significant number of transnational issues - particularly so­ called "police" issues like refugees, piracy, and drugs 

  which are likely to continue for some time causing low-level  but irritating problems. 

  Quite apart from these potential sources of difficulty, the  end of the Cold War has also ·set in motion a quite different 

  process, namely a reshaping of the United States role in the 

  region. Claims of a US intention to withdraw totally are 

  misinformed, but are themselves tending to contribute to 

  regional uncertainty. 

  In responding to the changing circumstances around us, the  starting point of the Australian Government's national 

  security policy has been very clearly defence self-reliance,  as articulated in the 1987 Defence White Paper and in the 

  process of implementation subsequently. 

  But when we talk about security policy we are, of course, 

  referring to something much broader than just defence policy  in the military sense. As I hope I explained very clearly in 

  my Regional Security Statement of December 1989, the Foreign 

  Affairs complement to the 19£7 Defence White Paper, we in 

  Australia do not just look to military means important 

  though they are - to protect :our interests. Rather, we have 

  adopted a multi-dimensional approach which looks to other  policy instruments as well. Political cooperation through  traditional bilateral diplomacy and in the emerging trans­ national problem solving agenda; economic and trade relations;  development assistance; the promotion of people-to-people  contacts all these enhance Australia's security. The 

  development of a sense of real interdependence in all these  respects will be tremendously helpful in creating the kind of  regional environment in which resort to aggression becomes a  less and less palatable policy option. 

  The particular dimension of regional security policy which has  tended to attract most attention in recent times is the 

  politico-military or "pol-mil" one: at the interface between  diplomacy and traditional defence policy. What is primarily  involved here, in this context, is the fostering of patterns  of multilateral security cooperation, in which countries come 

  to see that they are all best served by building their 

  security with, rather than against, each other. 

  This does not presuppose the establishment of any new military  bloc, nor that countries should combine against some external  threat. What is envisaged is a variety of programs that can 

  involve all countries of the region in activities that boost  the confidence of each one and at the same time weave a web of  security cooperation relationships. These activities would  not be a substitute for existing security links; rather they  would complement them. 

  In building more intense patterns of regional security 

  cooperation it is important not to ignore the increasingly  important contribution to this process of what in the past 

  would have been classified as global cooperation strategies.  Global security mechanisms : such as the Nuclear Non­

  Prolif eration Treaty (NPT), the Missile Technology Control  Regime ( MTCR) and the impending Chemical Weapons Convention  (CWC) are all essential foundations for consolidating regional 

  security. This is one of the reasons we have worked so hard, 

  for example, in the chemical' weapons context, not only in 

  5 

  trying to reach a concluded text in Geneva, but also in 

  building a regional technical expertise and political 

  consensus to ensure that the Convention will be embraced and  applied in the region as soon as it is capable of 

  implementation. 

  As so much of the United Nations's activity in the post-Cold  War world is demonstrating - right across its repertoire from  arms control negotiations, to peace-making to peace-keeping to  peace-enforcing - there is an increasingly fuzzy borderline  these days between global and regional (and in some cases even  internal) matters, and certainly security measures in each of  these realms can and should be regarded as complementing each  other in a mutually reinforcing way. 

  While this is not the occasion for partisan posturing 

  indeed, I have always believed that partisanship should be 

  avoided as far as possible in external policy there has 

  recently been published an advance account of an allegedly  wholly new Opposition defence policy which puts all these  regional security matters into very interesting relief, and  which gives me a useful opportunity to highlight just what the 

  present Australian Government's policy is. 

  As described in an interview with Opposition spokesman 

  Alexander Downer in the Weekend Australian of 4 July (the 

  date, as will be seen, is a nice irony), the new Opposition 

  policy seems to be built on three basic propositions. First,  that present Australian defence policy is wholly premised upon  the alliance relationship with the United States; secondly,  that the United States is withdrawing from the region, leaving  our policy denuded as a result; and thirdly, that what is 

  necessary is a new policy of "cooperative regional 

  deterrence", the creation of aâ€¢ credible regional deterrent to  would-be aggressors through a- web of closer military links  with Australia's Asian and Pacific neighbours. Each of these  propositions is, however, quite seriously flawed. 

  6 

  The criticism that our present policy is over-reliant on the  US is rather a startling one to hear from the other side of 

  Australian politics! When the Government released the Dibb  Review - the basis for our current defence policy - in 1986, 

  the Opposition said this was "a preamble to isolationism".  They accused the Government of leading a "military retreat  from ANZUS". Now we hear the opposite - that we have been 

  overly reliant on our great and powerful friend. The reality  is we have got the balance right. Kim Beazley and Robert Ray  have put in place a policy based on a capacity to def end 

  ourselves, effective cooperation with our regional neighbours  .and continued strong alliances. We derive technological, 

  intelligence, training and logistic benefit from our alliance  with the United States, and we' want to maintain it, but self­ reliance means what it says. 

  As to the post-Cold War United States role in the region, it 

  is of course the case that we have to anticipate a lesser 

  presence but it is not a- matter of having to build 

  arrangements that provide for· security in the absence of any  significant US engagement. The disappearance of the Soviet  threat has removed the rationale for a very large US military  presence, of the kind there has been in Asia since the end of 

  World War II, and the absence of this rationale will lead to a  less all-pervasive role, simply because American perceptions  of its interests are changing. 

  But the US is not vanishing, rather going through what is best  understood as a reconfiguration of its regional presence. The  US has to decide what its real interests are, determine those 

  which are most important to it in the contemporary post-Cold­ War world, and devise how to ·defend them. This process of 

  redefinition is very important 'for the region: it is probably  the case that only when US activities in the region are 

  clearly derived from demonstrable American interests will the  countries of the region really be convinced that the US 

  presence is reliable and for keeps. 

  7 

  The most important US interests in the region are in fact 

  fairly self-evident. In geographical terms alone, the United  States is a Pacific country. An extensive western coastline,  Alaska, Hawaii, Samoa and Guam give the US more of an Asia 

  Pacific identity than any perceived European connection. 

  Even more importantly, US trade with the region is already 

  outstripping that with Europe. The measure of these growing  US economic and commercial links across the Pacific gives the 

  United States a major stake in the continuing prosperity of  the region, a prosperity that. would be hard to maintain 

  without a high level of regional security. 

  Commercial considerations aside, the mere presence of two of  the world's great powers, namely China and Japan, in the Asia  Pacific region inevitably generates interests for the US as  the sole remaining superpower.· The US security arrangement  with Japan is widely viewed as· vital to regional stability.  Beyond its past effectiveness in providing a check on Soviet  aspirations in the area, it has also provided reassurance to  the region with respect to Japanese intentions. Memories of  Japanese imperialism linger, and although Japan's growing  military capabilities are not a present concern, there is more  chance of them becoming seen ·as such if, in turn, they are 

  seen as supporting an independent military role outside the  parameters of the US-Japan security pact. Without the glue of  a common threat, and in the absence of a wiser management of 

  the US-Japan relationship, the competition between the two  economic superpowers could lead to increased friction and  added incentive for Japan to go its own way. Such a major 

  change in the complexion of the region would have serious 

  implications for the US as· well as for other regional 

  countries. 

  Taken together, these various ·factors argue cogently for not  only a continuing, but a significant, US engagement in the 

  region for the foreseeable future. I think we c.an take 

  statements of intention to remain thus engaged, of the kind 

  8 

  made by President Bush and Secretary Cheney, at their face 

  value in this respect. 

  Overall, we believe that the United States will re-engineer  its presence in the region, rather than retreat out of sight.  In pursuing its interests in this new environment the United  States will have a trimmer military presence, one in which 

  there will be less emphasis on being able to solve problems 

  single-handedly, and more on mul tilateralism and coalition  building. Certainly we see the regional security environment  as continuing necessarily to involve both the US presence and  the kind of positive US role that has been played in the past. 

  As to the third and most self-consciously adventurous leg of  the new Opposition policy - "cooperative regional deterrence"  - there are several things that need to be said. The first is 

  that the description is unlikely to be appealing to anyone in  the region: it implies that there is a threat to be deterred, 

  risks antagonising major countries, and generally seems more  likely to add to tension than alleviate it. The ASEAN 

  countries have repeatedly foresworn becoming involved in  formal defence pacts, partly because of the perception that  this would if anything tend to attract threats. What the 

  region needs more than simplistic prescriptions is a subtle  understanding of its history and dynamics. 

  The second thing to be said is that even if the Opposition has  in mind not so much a formal mutual defence pact as more 

  formalised cooperation in specific areas like training, 

  exercises, procurement and defence industry, there seems to  have been a conspicuous underestimation of the degree of 

  difficulty involved in negotiating such arrangements. The  region is moving towards · more formalised cooperative 

  arrangements, but the process is slow, cautious and 

  evolutionary: it is not easy, and it cannot be rushed. 

  The third point to make is that we of course fully understand  the desirability of achieving more comprehensive and far­ reaching patterns of mutual defence cooperation - that is the 

  9 

  point at which I began this address - but we believe that we 

  have already been doing everything a country like Australia  could reasonably do to advance the process, building on the  long history we have had of involvement in both bilateral and  regional defence cooperation arrangements. So to the extent  that there is any legitimate substance in what is being 

  proposed by the Opposition, there is simply nothing new. 

  It needs 

  concluding  already 

  to be appreciated and let me make this my 

  theme that the countries of the region are 

  now very much engaged in post-Cold War regional 

  security policy formulation, and they are becoming ever more  so with each passing month. In developments barely 

  conceivable four or five years' ago, regional security has now  become firmly and centrally established on the agenda of the  ASEAN Post Ministerial Conference, the region's premiere 

  political dialogue forum, and the ASEAN Heads of Government at  their recent Summit themselves formally agreed for the first  time to regularly and systematically address security issues. 

  Indonesia has sponsored a -very constructive series of 

  workshops on the conflicting territorial claims in the South­ China Sea and more are to follow. And several major seminars  and conferences on regional security, involving both officials  and non-govenment experts, have already been held in Manila,  Bangkok and Bali. They have been valuable in getting the 

  debate going and in beginning to identify the range of issues  that need to be addressed, even if they have yet only begun to  scratch the surf ace of some · of the fundamental conceptual 

  issues thrown up for debate by the end of the Cold War -

  including, for example, the applicability of the concept of  balance of power in the new era, the place of the theory of 

  deterrence, implications of the changes that are occuring to  the concept of sovereignty, and the consequences of embracing  "common security" as an underlying policy approach. 

  Suggestions for further accelerating this process have also  been coming forward from regional states. Malaysian Defence  Minister Najib has proposed a meeting of Asia-Pacific security 

  10 

  officials, which I understand will take place around the 

  middle of next year. Japanese Prime Minister Miyazawa, in a  recent speech in Washington, floated the idea of a 'dual 

  track' approach whereby an Asia Pacific security dialogue  would complement the sub-regional management of specific  problems like Cambodia and Korea. 

  Australia has been centrally involved from the outset in this  process of generating and exchanging ideas. I will be going 

  next week to the 1992 ASEAN Post-Ministerial Conference and  making some suggestions there about exchanging maritime 

  information and developing strategic planning discussions. I  will not be proposing anything especially dramatic, but this  is deliberate: while there fs a case for floating larger 

  concepts from time to time, I believe that real progress on 

  regional security will only- be achieved in practice by 

  gradual, incremental measures in which the confidence of each  relevant country is won and consolidated step by step along  the way. 

  The overall task, after all, is not so much to define threats 

  and mobilise resources against them, either unilaterally or  cooperatively, but rather to build the kind of relationships  of mutual respect, cooperation and interdependence in the  wider region which will ensure that those threats will never  materialise. 

