---
title: "New UNDP post commemorates Sir Robert Jackson"
date: "1992-03-24"
creators:
  - "Kerin, John"
source: "MINISTER FOR TRADE AND OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211177877
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3058724%22
---

 No.

  MTAI 10 Date: 24 March 1992 3.3

 New UNDP Post Commemorates Sir Robert Jackson

 Australia will fund a new Junior Professional Officer position in the United Nations Development Program ('UN'DP) to commemorate the work of the late Sir Robert Jackson, the Minister for Trade and Overseas Development, John Kerin, announced today.

 "Sir Robert, who died on 12 January 1991, was Australia's highest ranking United Nations official. He is best remembered for being the architect of a number of major reforms recommended in a study, known as the Jackson report, published in 1969.

 "During his 40-year career with the UN, Ijacko', as he was affectionately dubbed by his many friends and colleagues, was instrumental in the establishment of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Among the many honours awarded him was Australia's highest, Companionship of the Order of Australia.

 "The establishment of a memorial Junior Professional Officer position in UNDP is a fitting tribute to Sir Robert's long and distinguished association with the UN," Mr Kerin said.

 Australia already supports the junior Professional Officer scheme in several UN agencies, through the government's program of overseas development cooperation, managed by AIDAB (Australian International Development Assistance Bureau).

 The scheme is designed to enable young professionals to gain experience in UN operations. In 1989 and 1990 Australia appointed eight officers to work for two years with various UN agencies.

 "The scheme presents young professional Australians with a unique opportunity to learn about the UN system and to increase Australia's representation in UN agencies," Mr Kerin said.

 AIDAB will appoint the first Sir Robert Jackson Memorial Junior Professional Officer later this year.

 CANBERRA

 COMMONWEAL

 For further information contact

 PARLIAMENTARY LISRARY MICAH

 Sally Rynveld, Public Affairs, AIDAB (06) 276 4968

 Tony Melville, Public Affairs, A1DAB (06) 276 4960

