---
title: "Minister stands firm on removal of failed asylum seekers"
date: "1992-10-23"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214125729
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008598%22
---

 η 

 Media Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP 

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T2600 Telephone: (06) 277 7860 ,

 MPS 64/92

 MINISTER STANDS FIRM ON REMOVAL OF FAILED ASYLUM SEEKERS

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, today reaffirmed his commitment that  people who do not qualify as refugees will be removed from  Australia.

 Mr Hand's comments followed the announcement that six  Chinese boat people and one child left Australia today for  Guangzhou, PRC.

 "These people came to Australia without authority. They  sought asylum and have been found not to be refugees. Under  Australian law those people whose claims have been rejected  must be removed as quickly as practicable. I fully endorse 

 the actions of my Department today.

 "The successful removal occurred without incident and  without the use of any force. The people were calm and  accepted the fact that they were to be returned home.

 "They are the first group to be removed from Australia  following failure of their refugee applications under the  new fast-tracking procedures.

 "The new procedures which have been followed in determining  their status have been scrupulous and fair.

 "While fast-tracking ensures that no time is lost in , reaching a determination,  it also means that custody  arrangements are not overly protracted and that applicants  are not*left waiting unduly long for a decision.

 "The question of the treatment of these people following  the return to their homeland is a matter of some public  interest. We have assurances from the Chinese Government  that they will not be punished as a result of their illegal  departure from China. The Australian Government is satisfied  with these assurances.

 "Australia has a strong commitment to refugees and a long  and proud record of humanitarian assistance, but I have  stated in the past, and I will repeat again, if you meet the  UN criteria and are found to be a refugee then you will be  able to stay in Australia, if not, then you will have to  go," said Mr Hand.

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams

 CANBERRA

 Minister's Office  (06) 277.7860

 23 October,  1992

