---
title: "Tough talk - little action to date"
date: "1992-05-11"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214123337
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006772%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP έ>/

 Federal M ember for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 TOUGH TAT.K - LITTLE ACTION TO DATE

 Reports that Minister for Immigration Gerry Hand has "got tough" with refugees are just a little  pre-emptory. A look at the record will show that there has been an enormous amount of rhetoric  and no action. *

 Of the 400 or so "boat people" claiming asylum, who have arrived in Australia since 1989, none  have been repatriated. By the Minister's own admission he has been manipulated by those who  would seek to by-pass Australia's migration laws and regulations. The result has been the  extended detention of these people, a backlog of some 23,000 claims and the international  perception that Australia is an easy target for illegal entry.

 The Coalition has repeatedly drawn attention to these issues and offered constructive suggestions  to the Minister ahead of his foreshadowed review of the refugee determination process.

 Measures to limit the processing time to 2 months were announced to deal with the arrival of the  56 Chinese boat people in January this year. This statement is therefore not new and only serves  to emphasise the Government's failure to conclude a timely assessment of boat arrivals claiming  refugee status.

 Notwithstanding the Ministers statements both in the media and during parliamentary debate, he  has still given no clear indication that the government intends to adopt the Coalitions proposals  to reform the process. These include:

 It is essential that these proposals are adopted to address the current crisis.

 The Coalition has always asserted that those who have bona-fide claims, determined against  existing internationally accepted criteria, must be given protection. Applicants who have been  ascertained to have unfounded claims of persecution, must be removed.

 The Minister's "fast-tracking" process for determining refugee claims will need to be assessed not  only in terms of how many applicants for refugee status are properly and fairly processed, but on  how many, and how quickly, failed applicants will be returned to their country of origin.

 re-deployment of sufficient staff and resources to refugee determination to bring  the process under control;

 a requirement for leave before further appeal of contested applications is  permitted;

 excluding appeals beyond administrative procedures, except on questions of law to  the High Court, also by leave.

 11 May 1992 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MIC AH

