---
title: "Emergency assistance to the people of Croatia, Slovenia and Yugoslavia"
date: "1992-01-16"
creators:
  - "Kerin, John"
source: "MINISTER FOR TRADE AND OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211177565
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3058694%22
---

 No. 

 MTAI 2  Date:  16.1.92.

 EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE TO THE PEOPLE OF CROATIA, SLOVENIA AND YUGOSLAVIA.

 Australia is to increase its emergency humanitarian assistance to the people affected by the conflict in Croatia, Slovenia and Yugoslavia, the Minister for Trade and Overseas Development, John Kerin announced today.

 Mr Kerin said Australia would provide $250 000 to United Nations agencies involved in assisting the hundreds of thousands of people forced to leave their homes

 This is in addition to the $200 000 in emergency funds already contributed by Australia in response to the crisis.

 The latest contribution will go towards a combined UN agencies appeal. It will help finance programs operated in Croatia, Slovenia and the Republics of Yugoslavia by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF and the World Health Organisation.

 The continuing crisis has led to the internal displacement of more than half a million people. Thousands of others have fled to other countries.

 So far, most of the internally displaced have sheltered with families or in such places as hostels or boarding schools.

 "With the harsh winter and the deteriorating economic situation it's becoming increasingly difficult to house and feed these people."

 "Australia's contribution will help the UN provide extra food, medical supplies, maternal and child health care and winter clothing for those displaced by the war," Mr Kerin said.

 The money will also go towards establishing rehabilitation services and to help purchase basic domestic items.

 The emergency assistance is being provided through funds administered by the Australian International Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB).

 * * * * * * *

 CANBERRA For further information contact AIDAB Public Affairs: Tony Melville, (06) 276 4971 or Wendy Levy, (06) 276 4966. COK4MONWEALTI-1 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 MICAH

