---
title: "Reports of immigration racket require urgent response"
date: "1992-11-05"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214125903
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006843%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP 13b

 Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Tel: (02)858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Electorate Parliament House 

 Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 REPORTS OF IMMIGRATION RACKET  REQUIRE URGENT RESPONSE

 Increasing numbers of reports about illegal movement of people across the  Torres Strait requires an urgent response from the Government.

 Three separate incursions have now taken place and from published reports,  all appear to be following the same route.

 Only the Department of Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs,  who has de-briefed each party, would know whether or not there is an  organised racket in facilitating illegal entry to Australia.

 However, this back door access to Australia is now sufficiently widely known  internationally that we need to be using our relationship with Papua New  Guinea to suggest they more carefully screen entry arrangements.

 Further, the Government needs to ensure that there are sufficient  Australian immigration officials in the Torres Strait to be able to fully and  properly monitor travel between PNG and Australia.

 The continued free movement of people in the region is dependent upon  co-operation to ensure that others who may be in breach of Australian  immigration entry arrangements are excluded.

 The Government would like to have us believe that these incursions are  merely an extension of international refugee movements.

 But the fact remains that the increasing frequency of attempted illegal entry  to Australia is a result of the Government's failure to get on top of the  refugee determination process and the flawed decisions taken in relation to 

 PRC nationals by former Prime Minister Hawke and present Prime Minister  Keating. r

 5 November 1992

 Contact Philip Ruddock on pager (02) 925 3911 #25589

 CO Μ Μ Ο N WE A L T H parliamentary library  MICAH

