---
title: "Changes to entry arrangements for students from the People's Republic of China (PRC)"
date: "1992-10-28"
creators:
  - "Tate, Michael"
source: "Minister for Justice"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214125780
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008907%22
---

 MINISTER FOR JUSTICE E i  MINISTER ASSISTING THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION

 g g g g F  SENATOR MICHAEL TATEjj MEDIA RELEASE

 28 October 1992 

 TPS 6/92

 CHANGES TO ENTRY ARRANGEMENTS FOR STUDENTS FROM THE PEOPLE’S  REPUBLIC OF CHINA (PRC)

 Private students from the PRC intending to study in Australia will be required to meet more  stringent criteria for entry to Australia from 3 November 1992.

 As a result, the number of visas to be issued to private PRC students (other than post­ graduate students) in the 1993 academic year is expected to be in the region of 300 to 400.

 Announcing the changes today, the Minister assisting the Minister for Immigration, Senator  Michael Tate, said that any applications received on or after 3 November 1992 will be  considered under the new arrangements.

 Since tighter assessment of applications was introduced in 1990, the numbers of private PRC  students entering Australia had dropped significantly, from near 22,000 in 1989/90 to around  1000 in 1991/92, Senator Tate said.

 “Unfortunately the high level of overstay and non-compliance with student conditions of  more recent arrivals continues to cause the Government concern”.

 Senator Tate emphasised that the changes did not affect PRC students sponsored by the  Australian government or an international funding agency, or post-graduate students  enrolling in masters’ degrees or doctorates.

 “From 3 November 1992, all other PRC students will be required to meet additional bona  fides factors when applying for student visa entry to Australia,” Senator Tate said.

 “These include a high level of English language comprehension and qualifications from a  known institution in the PRC”.

 The decision followed consideration of Australia’s future educational relationship with the  PRC, taking into account the high rate of overstay, the Government’s response to the  Industry Commission report “Exports of Education Services” and an earlier review of student 

 entry arrangements.

 “The Government concluded that entry requirements for PRC students should be tightened,  and a planning limit placed on the numbers,” Senator Tate said.

 “The need for this limit, its size, and the categories it will apply to will be reviewed annually.

 “Statistics show conclusively that many PRC students are still not returning home at the end  of their courses,” Senator Tate said.

 COMMONWEALTH  parliamentary library MfCAH

 “It seems that many PRC students are using this route to avoid proper migration processes.

 “About half of PRC student arrivals have either overstayed, or applied for refugee status  which delays their departure from Australia”.

 Senator Tate said the overstay figures for PRC students were much higher than for students  from other countries and imposed significant financial and administrative burdens on the  Federal Government and the tax-payer.

 In future, academic institutions will be asked not to confirm enrolments or require payment  of any tuition fees until bona fides assessment have been completed by officials at Australia’s  overseas posts.

 Senator Tate said that before reaching this decision, the Government had taken into  consideration the views of the National Consultative Committee on International Education  and Training Services (NACCIETS).

 “This peak consultative committee is chaired by the Department of Employment, Education  and Training and comprises representatives from all sectors of the Australian education  system, international students, staff, Commonwealth and State organisations,” he said.

 Media inquiries:

 Minister’s office - Adrian Wild 002/ 349100. DILGEA - Jenny Hoskin 06/ 2642176 or John Greenup 06/ 2642426

 Note:

 The following additional information is available from DILGEA: a) a list outlining specific objectives and principles to guide Australia’s educational relations  with the PRC for at least the next two years; b) statistics on student visas issued and overstay rates, and c) an extract from an Inter-departmental Committee report on educational relations with the  PRC covering some of the statistics and analysis relating to the decisions taken.

 Contact: John Greenup, Director, Students Section, DILGEA., P O Box 25, Belconnen ACT  2617. Tel 06/2642426

