---
title: ""It's back to White Australia Policy, say migrants""
date: "1992-01-15"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214122819
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006833%22
---

 MEDIA STATEMENT Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas Electorate

 Shadow Minister for Immigration Tel: (02) 858 1011

 and Ethnic Affairs Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 T he following is the text o f a letter sent to the Sydney Morning Herald in response to an  article headed:

 "It's back to White Australia Policy, say migrants", (SM H  Tuesday, January 14 1992).

 The assertion made by Ms Pebaque that the Coalition's immigration policy is "an  undercover return to the White Australia Policy" is quite malicious. This is even more so  in view of the Coalition's repeated commitment to a non-discriminatory immigration  policy and one which is generous in its allocation of places to refugees and humanitarian  claimants and immediate family members.

 Nowhere in my statement released yesterday were there any comments which could be  construed as suggesting that the Coalition will prevent the migration to Australia of any  individual on the basis of race.

 I raised the possibility of re-introducing the requirement for English language skills  testing for applicants in the concessional family category. Concessional family migration  covers persons who are either a non-dependent child, non-dependent brother or sister,  non-dependent niece or nephew or a parent of working age not meeting the balance of  family test, of an Australian citizen or permanent resident.

 The cost of inadequate proficiency in the English language to the Australian community  is large. In 1990-91 the cost for providing English language training to migrants was  $111.42 million.

 Even though Australia has the largest government funded adult English language  teaching program in the world, the December 1990 report of the Working Party on Post  Secondary English Language Training recommended that resources for English language  training needed to be significantly increased. It identified significant gaps in resourcing  and deficiencies in outcomes in English Language Programs and estimated that up to  60,000 longer term residents with language difficulties were unable to receive training.

 The Bureau of Immigration Research released a report in 1991 which detailed the cost  of low levels of English proficiency amongst immigrants in the workforce. It was  estimated that this cost to the community was $763 million which amounts to 0.3% of  GDP.

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 ...12

 Furthermore, figures provided by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in  its 1991 budget papers indicate that in 1988-89 27.8% of immigrants to Australia were  self-assessed as having poor English ability.

 There were 22,522 successful applicants in the Concessional family category in 1990-91,  out of a total program of 121,688. The latest figures available (1988-89) estimated that  over 18% of this group were self-assessed as having poor English ability. The percentage  is less than it could be since they were grouped with independent entrants, who are  tested for English language ability.

 It is evident from these statistics that some testing for English language capability in the  concessional category is becoming increasingly necessary. This group of people are being  consigned to the unemployment queues or are disproportionately represented in  industries and occupations already in decline or most vulnerable to decline in the near  future.

 In spite of this however, the competition for jobs in these sectors and occupations is  increasing because of the constant flow of migrants with little or no marketable skills and  little or no English language capability who have no prospect of employment in other  areas. This means that the already onerous conditions are unlikely to improve.

 The logic of fair play suggests that the last thing these Australians need is more  competition from new immigrants for the declining number of low-skill jobs or for the  limited opportunities for training and education that are available to low-income workers.

 Certainly the requirement for an English language test on applicants entering under the  concessional family category will prevent the migration to Australia of some brothers,  sisters, nieces and nephews of Australian residents and citizens. This of course is no  different to each of the other tests of age, skill, education and employablitily already  imposed.

 I had believed that debate on immigration issues could be conducted in a rational,  balanced and intelligent manner.

 Ms Pebaque's comments clearly illustrate that some elements in the community wish such  discussion to proceed on invective, untruths and malicious distortion. It is a pity the  source is an employee of a Government-funded advisory and support body.

 Such comments do enormous harm to a program which is still capable of bringing  significant benefits to Australian social, economic and cultural life.

 - 2 -

 15 January 1992

