---
title: "Further cut to immigration intake needed next year"
date: "1992-05-12"
creators:
  - "Coulter, John"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214123357
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02007590%22
---

 Senator John Coulter Australian Democrats Leader

 92/ 12 May 1992

 Further cut to immigration intake needed next year

 NEWS R E L E A S E

 The Australian Democrats welcome the Government decision to slash this year's  immigration intake but hope for a further reduction next year.

 Leader Senator John Coulter said the 31,000 cut, which would result in a net  migration figure of 50,000, was "a good figure for this year".

 However given that when the economy improved emigration could easily fall from 30.000 back to the pre-recession norm of 20,000 he favoured a further reduction of 10.000 next year.

 "31,000 is a good figure for this year. Administrative backlogs make it impossible  to cut by more," Senator Coulter said.

 However he said the Government could have cut the concessional family reunion  (siblings, nieces, nephews) and independent (skilled) categories further to boosting  refugee intake.

 The refugee category should be raised from 10,000 to around 20,000 as proposed by  the Australian Refugee Council. "Australia has international obligations to help  clear out the refugee camps of Asia. On a per capita basis we are not taking enough  refugees," Senator Coulter said.

 He also said the independent skills category should be tied to labour market needs.  "It is not in the national interest to bring in more engineers or teachers when we  already have too many people trained in these areas."

 Senator Coulter said annual"net migration levels of 50,0001vould graduallyT.ead to-   population stability in about 60 years. "Slower population growth allows for better  government planning and infrastructure development."

 Criticising the Government's sole concern with the economy in cutting immigration  numbers he said: "Annual immigration intakes should be determined primarily on  the basis of what will lead to an ecologically sustainable economy.

 He said additional stress on English language for independent and concessional  family applicants was reasonable. "By and large these people are coming here for  employment and English language is necessary. If it was applied to all categories  then this could be seen as racist," Senator Coulter said.

 Contact: Senator Coulter or Jenni Mack

 A U S T R A L I A N 

 DEMOCRATS P a 06 277 3646 a/h 08 388 2153

 COMMONWEALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MiCAH

