---
title: "Australian interpreters volunteer for Cambodia"
date: "1992-05-26"
creators:
  - "Kerin, John"
source: "MINISTER FOR TRADE AND OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211178239
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3058773%22
---

 Mil I /. 

 1.1  16I / 11111:1 y zr,c

 b5. No. Dahustralian interpreters volunteer for Cambodia

 Six Australians of Cambodian origin today return to Cambodia as volunteer interpreters to assist in the repatriation of 350,000 Cambodians living in camps along the Thai border.

 The Minister for Trade and Overseas Development, John Kerin, said that "the repatriation of the Cambodians is one of the biggest such operations in history."

 "The interpreters should be commended for their courage in facing a difficult and demanding task. All of them lost family and friends in the conflicts which have dogged Cambodia for nearly twenty years," Mr Kerin said.

 "The logistics of moving 350,000 people from camps and helping them to re-establish their lives in their homeland are enormous, and the Australians will play a key role as interpreters.

 "There are at least 18,000 Australians of Cambodian origin, many of whom volunteered to return to assist in the reconstruction of their country of birth.

 "The situation in Cambodia is very dynamic and the process of repatriation is complex. The risks are very real and the challenges of demobilisation of soldiers, running elections and de-mining should not be underestimated."

 The Australian volunteers will undertake a six month mission as part of a joint exercise involving the Australian International Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB), the Overseas Service Bureau (OSB), the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organisation for Migration (IOM).

 Mr Kerin said the Australian Government was pleased to be able to provide funds ($135,000) through AIDAB, the Government's overseas aid agency, to enable the mission to take place.

 The interpreters were recruited and briefed by the Overseas Service Bureau (OSB), well known for its Australian Volunteers Abroad program. The interpreters will work with the UNHCR in rural areas of Cambodia.

 The volunteers fly out of Melbourne for Phnom Penh at 2pm today on Qantas flight QF5. * * * * * * CANBERRA For further information

 David Jones Deborah Rhodes (OSB)

 contact AIDAB Public Affairs: (06) 276 4967 or A.H (06) 241 (03) 419 1788 6248

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY AffI CAH

