---
title: "Keating comments on Hawke, fightback package, boat people and immigration procedures"
date: "1992-01-21"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214122869
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02009396%22
---

 Leader of-the Opposition

 21 January 1991

 DR JOHN HEWSON, HP

 TRANSCRIPT OP DOORSTOP PRESS CONFERENCE  UNIVERSITY OP WA, PERTH

 E fc 0 E - Proof Copy Only

 Subjects: Keating comments on Hawke, Fightback Package, 

 Boat People and immigration procedures.

 Jrnlst:

 (  inaudible)

 Hewson:

 Well it will take time, obviously it will take time and there 

 is no alternative, I think, but recognising that and moving as  fast as we can with major structural change. The policies are  there, they can be put in place and I urge Mr Keating as he is 

 now formulating a so-called "alternative view" that he 

 actually embraces the bulk of Fightback as a a lot of people 

 have told him to do and get on and make the change. The 

 longer he leaves it, the more he tinkers the less headway we 

 are going to make.

 From what you said inside it sounds like you think it is going 

 to get worse?

 Well it will under him. We have got a $50 billion package, he  is talking about a $1 or $2 billion package, he is tinkering,  to use one of his expressions, Paul Keating is working on the  embroidery on the fabric, we are dealing with the fabric and 

 solving the problem.

 What do you think about his attack on Mr Hawke as a weak 

 leader again?

 Jrnlst:

 Hewson:

 Jrnlst:

 Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600 Phone 277 4022

 2

 -4

 Hewsorx:

 It is evident of that fact that they are fundamentally 

 divided, poisonously divided and a house divided against  itself can't stand. There is no doubt in my mind that Paul 

 Keating doesn't have the support of a significant percentage  of his own party and as Bob Hawke said when he was Prime 

 Minister - if you can't govern yourselves, you can't govern  the country, and Paul Keating has shown himself to be 

 amazingly out of depth since he been Prime Minister, wallowing  around, the job is beyond him. You only had to look last 

 night at him on television, his eyes flitting all over the 

 place, he couldn't even look the interviewer in the eye - in  that sense how is he going to look the people of Australia in  the eye? The people he has thrown out, the million people 

 unemployed, he is a running a party that is divided, he can't  govern, he has got no ideas.

 Jrnlst:

 Can you fix it? Do you think the Australian people will be 

 confident that you can fix it straight away given all those  problems you outlined inside?

 Hewson:

 I didn't say straight away, I said that we can certainly fix  it. But it is not just me, we can put the policies in place 

 that will turn this country around but people across Australia  are going to have to change their attitudes and values for the  whole process to work. we are challenging people to think 

 about the circumstances as they find them. We are about to 

 leave a lower standard of living to our children than we 

 enjoyed ourselves and it is time we started to think about our  children and our grandchildren and the future of students,  being here at the university, then we do about political games  that people like Paul Keating and Bob Hawke are playing in 

 Canberra.

 Jrnlst;

 ... (inaudible) ...

 Hewson;

 There is an established procedure called the DORS procedure  for determining whether they are genuine refugees or they are  not. If they are genuine refugees of course then they would  qualify to be immigrants in Australia, if they are not genuine 

 refugees then I believe that they should be forcibly 

 repatriated, if necessary, back to where they came from. Now  we have to set very clear signals, I challenge Mr Keating to  make a very clear cut, hard line statement about this - we do  not want this process to be a way by which our immigration 

 program, the integrity of our immigration program is eroded,  so it is time that we took a clear stand. If they are genuine

 refugees, fine they stay, if they are not we have got to send  a very clear signal back from where they came from that you'll  only get into Australia if you qualify as a genuine immigrant  not through the back door, coming across our borders late at  night trying to disappear into the northern part of Western  Australia.

 Jrnlsti

 ... (inaudible) ...

 Hewson:

 No I am not talking about military deterrents, well it raises  a number of issues, it raises the issue of the effectiveness  of our coastal surveillance and I think that that should be  reviewed very quickly because obviously they messed up 

 somewhere, they knew about it for apparently weeks or months  before hand, secondly, yes I think the process ought to be 

 expedited, there are thousands and thousands of people who are  waiting to be determined as to whether or not they are 

 refugees or they are not and we have urged the Government to  expedite the process. In the case of these people I am told 

 today that it will be a fairly quick determination. But I 

 think Mr Keating has to make a stand, he has to come out and 

 clearly state our position in relation to people who arrive on  our shores so that there is no doubt that we want to maintain  the integrity of our immigration program and there should be  absolutely no doubt about that fact.

 * * * * *

