---
title: "Regional diplomacy: advancing Australia's interests"
date: "1992-09-01"
creators:
  - "Hill, Robert"
source: "Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214124807
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006553%22
---

 REGIONAL DIPLOMACY:

 ADVANCING AUSTRALIA’S INTERESTS

 AN ADDRESS BY SENATOR ROBERT HILL, SHADOW MINISTER

 FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS, TO THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF 

 INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (NORTH QUEENSLAND) AND THE 

 DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY AND POLITICS 

 JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY

 TOWNSVILLE

 I COMMONWEALTH |  

 I  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY I

 1 SEPTEMBER 1992

 Introduction

 In developing the policy response of the Liberal/National Coalition to the Asia-  Pacific region, we have given first priority to the need to build strong and stable  bilateral relationships with our neighbours.

 This is because while strong bilateral relationships are of primary importance to  Australia, the effort and resources necessary to achieve these goals have to some  extent been sacrificed to the competing interests of multilateralism.

 This is particularly so in the economic area, where the Department of Foreign  Affairs and Trade has failed to maximise trade policy expertise to the benefit of  Australia, and the Minister, Senator Evans, has basically been disinterested in the  issues.

 We have said much about reorienting our position from the grand initiatives in  multilateral diplomacy of the current Government, to building strong bilateral ties.  We have talked of strengthening our economic links in the region and the restraints  that our domestic economic position imposes on Australian international trade and  investment.

 But having said that, there are however areas where we can also advance our  interests through the slowly evolving regional bodies of the Asia-Pacific. How we  might advance our interests through regional diplomacy is the question I wish to  address today.

 The Asia-Pacific has not developed regional structures to the extent of most other  regions. In Europe, for instance, regional institutions are well developed and include  the European Community, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe,  the Western European Union, the Council of Europe and the European Human 

 Rights Commission. These bodies provide a background to ongoing development of  the idea of an integrated Europe.

 In America, there has been the recent agreement on the North American Free Trade  Area (NAFTA) and President Bush is currently calling for a continent wide free  trade area under his enterprise of the Americas. There is also an American 

 Convention on Human Rights.

 In Africa there is the Southern African Development Coordination Conference  (SADCC), and in South Asia, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation  (SAARC) was formed for the purposes of economic cooperation.

 The Asia-Pacific principally lacks such regional associations. Yet there are signs of  change and it is important that Australia locks into such regional changes to our  advantage.

 2

 In fact, after a period of globalism - the GATT, the IMF, the World Bank and the  United Nations - it may be that regionalism will play a more important role in the  next ten to twenty years.

 Regional cooperation is to some extent the product of the success of global  multilateral action, as far as it has proved to be useful in enhancing the capabilities  and interests of states by coordinating action to mutual advantage.

 According to the theory, if states can identify common interests on a global basis  worth advancing, then such interests within a region are likely to be even more  transparent and easier to pursue. This has been the positive force of globalism. -

 But to some, the trend to regionalism has been a result of negative experiences. As  states have, for example, struggled unsuccessfully to find consensus in the GATT  Round, the trend has been to develop regional groups both for negotiating purposes  and as a more achievable alternative.

 Certainly for smaller states such as Australia, participation in multilateral  institutions, whether global or regional, with states with common interests often  provides more leverage than acting alone. It can therefore be an effective policy  option in advancing self interest.

 I t is important, however, that Australia clearly identifies which multilateral forums  serve those interests. For a small state such as Australia, with limited resources,  the multiplication of multilateral institutions and their inherent costs means that  our ability to influence outcomes and gain advantages will be constrained if we do  not clearly prioritise our effort.

 And that effort should be directed towards being an integral part of the developing  Asia-Pacific economic, humanitarian, environmental and security regionalism.

 Economic Regionalism

 O f all the areas where multilateral action is possible in the Asia-Pacific, economic  cooperation is the most developed in a regional sense, but is certainly not  comparable to arrangements which exist in other parts of the world. Countries of 

 the Asia-Pacific have only relatively recently started exploring joint action with  respect to mutual economic and trade interests.

 Yet when the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) process was established,  it was with little real thought as to how it might advance the economic interests of  participating states. In fact, surprisingly, the aim of regional trade liberalisation  was not explicitly put on APEC's agenda until 1991, eighteen months after APEC's  first ministerial meeting.

 Given that the fourth APEC Ministerial Meeting will be held in Bangkok on 10-11  September, it is now an appropriate time to critically examine its progress.

 3

 APEC does have the potential to be a useful multilateral economic forum for the  promotion of regional economic interests. However, three years since its inception,  little in the way of practical results for its participants has been achieved. We are 

 now a long way past marvelling over the wonder that such an unprecedented  meeting could be held at all.

 The establishment of the ten APEC working groups promised much, but to date  have delivered little although a few of the working groups appear to be making some  progress.

 The Trade Promotion Working Group, for instance, has established APECnet, an  electronic information network providing information on economic conditions and  trade opportunities, to which Australia has contributed the Austrade database.  However, at the moment the network can only be accessed through Singapore which  of course is a major impediment to private enterprise in Australia wishing to take  advantage of this. Although instructions of how to access APECnet on-line have  been given to Austrade, it has not yet set up the link. Until there is ease of access  to the database, its usefulness will be limited.

 The Human Resource Development Working Group is setting up networks relating  to business management, economic development and industrial technology (the latter  Australia convenes). Within each APEC participant a nominated institution sets up  links in its own country with educational institutions and the private sector and 

 then establishes a network with the rest of APEC. In Australia, the Department of  Employment, Education and Training (DEBT) is the lead institution and the Centre  of Research Polity at the University of Wollongong coordinates the industrial  technology network.

 Some progress has been shown by the Telecommunications Working Group which  is establishing a pilot project on electronic data interchange (EDI) of trade  documentation. This involves an Australian company - BHP - and its steel trade  with New Zealand and if successful is designed to provide a model for other sectors  and industries. This project is an example of where effort in APEC should be  devoted - to practical examples of cooperation which have real potential to facilitate  trade between APEC's participants.

 In turn, the Energy Working Group, coordinated by Australia through the  Department of Primary Industry and Energy (DPIE), is compiling a database on  regional energy supply and demand and a compendium of energy efficiency practices.  The Trade and Investment Data Working Group is constructing a merchandise trade  database, aiming to gain consistency in the way trade data is collected and analysed.

 The other working groups - Tourism, Marine Resource Conservation, Investment  and Technology Transfer, Fisheries, and Transportation - appear to be in the even  earlier stages of cooperation and still preoccupied with working out action plans or  merely collecting data.

 4

 Unfortunately, the most concrete achievement of most of the working groups so far  is the gathering of information. Information, of course, is a valuable commodity, but  a proliferation of databases and information exchanges is not enough.

 There is little evidence of any interlinking between the working groups of the  information gathered by each separate group. To maximise the use of the  information in promoting regional trade, the analysis of information by each  working group for economic opportunities or to identify restrictive practices is  necessaiy, and then the coordination of this information is essential to identify areas 

 for action. There should be practical end goals of liberalising regional trade and  coordinating complementary policies to achieve this. I see no evidence that this is  p art of the aim or output of the working groups.

 In addition, the information does not appear to be distributed to those in business  and private enterprise who are the ones that largely conduct the practical aspects  of trade relations. I certainly do not see any evidence of this in Australia and this  is something which must be rectified.

 Australia should also be pushing, and should have pushed from the start, for the  explicit and active involvement of business groups in APEC. The first hint I have  seen of any involvement of the private sector is on the draft agenda of the Senior  Officials Meeting which is to take place just before the forthcoming Ministerial  Meeting, and then it is listed under the item "Future steps of APEC". Three years  down the track and we are only just considering the involvement of the private  sector!

 The precursor to APEC might be regarded as the Pacific Economic Cooperation  Committee (PECC) - incorporating business, academic and government interests -  which still provides a forum for these interests and is meeting later this month in  San Francisco. However, with the progress of APEC, albeit slow progress, the  question of duplication of effort between the APEC working groups and the PECC's  task forces and forums must be examined.

 It appears that the PECC is increasingly structuring itself to provide input into the  APEC process and making its work more policy relevant. The issue of greater  integration of the two is something which should have been dealt with in the early  stages of APEC, despite the PECC's more diverse membership. The devotion of  resources to two organisations which are essentially examining the same issues is  not efficient and consideration must be given to avoiding duplication of effort.

 In addition, the proposal by Senator Evans for an Eminent Persons Group to  identify the medium term issues involved in regional trade liberalisation sounds like  a waste of resources and an excuse to engage in high profile self-promoting  diplomacy.

 Yet despite these shortcomings, the proposal for an APEC secretariat has received  support and its structure will be decided at the Bangkok meeting. Australia's  interests are to ensure that another resource-greedy bureaucracy is not the end

 5

 result. The lack of progress or coordination of the working groups leads to a  persuasive case for a central management and coordination point. However, such  administrations have a habit of developing a life of their own.

 Nevertheless, the Coalition will work to ensure APEC constructively contributes to  the further liberalisation of trade in the region, which will encourage economic  growth that benefits Australia.

 The issue of participation in APEC is far from finalised. The admission, last year,  of China, Hong Kong and Taiwan to APEC was welcome and although the  perception is that APEC should now undergo a period of consolidation, a strong case  for the further admission of Mexico can be made.

 Given the formation of NAFTA between the United States, Canada and Mexico, the  inclusion of Mexico in APEC could help to ensure that NAFTA does not move  towards a discriminatory trading bloc. The integral linking of trading groups, it is  argued, enhances the chances of maintaining an open international trading order.

 The fear of the consequences of NAFTA is quite apparent in the Asia-Pacific region  and will hopefully add impetus to the desire of regional countries to pursue regional  trade liberalisation.

 However, it could well work the other way. Malaysia's suggestion for an East Asian  Economic Caucus (EAEC) has not been dismissed by the region, except of course by  those countries it excludes -the US, Canada, New Zealand and Australia. Even  Japan has not unequivocally dismissed the idea. The worst outcome for regional 

 and global trade is, of course, an inward-looking Asian trading bloc formed as a  result of a wider failing of APEC to meet the expectations of the Asian member  states.

 The region does have its development bank - the Asian Development Bank (ADB).  Australia is the fourth largest donor (6.5%), and this obviously gives us much more  influence in determining the Bank's strategies and directions than, for example, our 

 participation in the World Bank where our contribution was 1.99%. Yet the recent  trend by the Australian Government has been to increase funding to the World Bank  whilst reducing our contributions to the regional institution where we have greater  interests.

 The Asian Development Bank has been useful in encouraging economic growth and  development in the region. However, Australia has expressed concerns about the  effectiveness of the ADB and the growth in its bureaucratic structure. Given our  position as a major donor and the Asia-Pacific as our area of primary interest,  Australia needs to play a more active role in influencing policy choices.

 How the ADB in its regional development role will link with the regional role of  APEC is yet to be explored. However, the most effective tool for regional  development is, of course, an open trading and investment system.

 6

 Humanitarian Action

 Cooperation on a multilateral basis with respect to humanitarian issues has not been  well developed in the Asia-Pacific region. Differences in history, culture, political  systems and stages of development have constrained the identification of joint  humanitarian priorities.

 Multilateralism is of course dependent on a number of countries cooperating in a  way consistent with shared and agreed principles. In the economic realm obvious  shared interests have facilitated the development of a tentative regionalism. 

 However, the humanitarian and human rights areas are much more difficult.  There exists no consensus, for instance, on human rights. The only specific human  rights body in which regional countries participate is the global UN Commission on  Human Rights (UNCHR), which is now focusing attention on the Asian region. This  focus, however, is being interpreted as pressure from outside and has not been well  received by regional countries.

 Whilst human rights issues are obviously receiving greater global attention, the  Asian position has always been that priority must be given to economic development  issues and that human rights should remain an internal concern.

 However, there have been some tentative, although conflicting, signs that human  rights are being put on the regional agenda. The UNCHR is sponsoring a series of  conferences in the Asia-Pacific to discuss human rights. The first was held in  Manila in 1990, and the second was to be in Jakarta in December 1991. It was  regrettably and somewhat ironically cancelled due to the killings in East Timor.

 In addition, human rights provisions incorporated into the Cambodian peace  agreement were a first for the region and designed to prevent the recurrence of the  appalling abuses evidenced during the Khmer Rouge reign of terror. They do set a  useful precedent for regional attention to other human rights problems.

 However, preparations for the World Conference on Human Rights in 1993 include  a  series of regional meetings, yet the Asian meeting has been postponed with no firm  date set for its convening. The issue of human rights in regional countries is  obviously very difficult.

 The Coalition believes that the promotion of human rights in the region is in  Australia's interests both for humanitarian reasons and for the positive role  enhanced human rights can play in the development of the region. Given regional  hesitancies, however, it needs to be pursued in a sensitive way.

 We have suggested the establishment of an informal Asia-Pacific Human Rights  Cooperation group which could have as its ultimate aim the promulgation of a  regional human rights convention. In order to do this it will be necessary to work  with our neighbours to achieve a consensus which recognises regional sensitivities  but is compatible with the universal character of rights.

 7

 In pursuing this issue, Justice Marcus Einfeld has made a number of suggestions  which have merit and which I acknowledge. At a very basic level, the idea of  provision of simple resources (manuals, texts etc) to encourage ease of operation of  the legal process in regional countries is assessed as one way in which Australia  could encourage the development of national human rights law and practices.  Bilateral monitoring and educational mechanisms which, in the first instance, could  devote attention to less controversial humanitarian projects and build support for  human rights in an incremental way could also play a role.

 In addition, we would argue that the United Nation's Economic and Social  Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), which is based in Bangkok, could  more effectively address a whole range of humanitarian concerns in the region, 

 including human rights.

 A multilateral body whose membership and associate membership stands at 49  states, ESCAP has played a limited role in addressing the more pressing and  controversial issues of the region, although it has contributed to furthering regional  development through the provision of technical assistance, research services and  information.

 ESCAP's 1991 Ministerial Conference focused on the themes of distributive justice,  poverty eradication and popular participation as key parts of a regional social  development strategy. Given it is the only regional body (although with a wider  constituency than APEC) with an accepted mandate to examine the social aspects  of development, Australia should work towards encouraging a greater effectiveness  in addressing some of the more difficult regional issues, especially human rights.  Only by working in a variety of forums at all levels throughout the region can we  hope to develop a regional consensus.

 Dealing with the plight of refugees is another area where there is an absence of  regional strategies or institutions. The most prominent body is that of the Geneva  based United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which works with  various regional NGOs.

 Despite having its resources stretched across the globe, the main area of regional  UNHCR activity is in repatriating 370 000 Cambodian refugees. So far over 90 000  refugees have been returned to Cambodia in a major effort which aims at  repatriating 30 000 people a month and resettling them with land and provisions. 

 The UNHCR is also active on the Burma-Bangladesh border where there are  reported to be over 250 000 refugees from persecution in Burma.

 However, to date, refugee efforts in the Asia-Pacific have been directed under global,  not regional, auspices. Even the pressing regional problem of the flood of  Vietnamese refugees was dealt with at an international conference in Geneva in  1989. Australia has had a proud part to play in the resettlement of these refugees,  but the problem of the remaining 100 000 distributed throughout the region in Hong  Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines has yet to be resolved.

 8

 Indeed recently the ASEAN Foreign Ministers expressed concern about the progress  of the Comprehensive Plan of Action agreed in Geneva. Although only nine  Vietnamese refugees are reported to have fled to Hong Kong this year, compared  with 20 000 in 1991, the problem of repatriation or resettlement remains. There is  no doubt room for a more active regional role in trying to alleviate the causes and  effects of such outflows. The Coalition will encourage this regional priority.

 Action on the Environment

 An area in which multilateralism is not at all developed in an international sense,  much less at a regional level, is the environment. The highest profile global attempt  to manage environment issues - the United Nations Conference on Environment and  Development (UNCED) - was held in June this year.

 Management of the environment is a very difficult issue and one which almost  automatically divides the world along development lines. It was apparent at  UNCED that the developed nations were interested in the environment and the  developing nations in development. There appeared to be little common ground  between the two, with developing nations arguing th at they should not be expected  to forgo wealth creation through adopting the standards of those countries which  have already gone down the development path. Commitments of funding and  technology transfer are demanded by these countries before any commitment on  environmental priorities will be given.

 In fact, as was recognised by the United Nations Development Program's Human  Development Report 1992, poverty is one of the greatest threats to the sustainability  of the environment. In other words, economic development is necessary to protect  the environment.

 So in fact the developing and developed states in the region have a common interest.  They want development and we want the environmental protection which first  requires economic development. Yet to date there seems to be a communication  breakdown. Countries such as ours are seen as the opposition.

 Our concerns about protection of the regional environment are valid. Malaysia, for  instance, fells about 1.2% of its forest reserves each year, Thailand has virtually  exhausted its timber resources, and Burma is permitting the desecration of its  forests by outside interests. Yet we are not sufficiently working together on this  issue either in a bilateral or regional way.

 The very real regional divide on environment issues is illustrated by the strongly  worded communique from the July ASEAN Foreign Ministers' Meeting which  "reaffirmed that ASEAN should strengthen joint actions in countering the anti-  tropical timber campaigns in the major developed countries? and called for the  provision of financial resources and technology transfer to developing countries.

 9

 Protection of forest reserves is not the only environment issue in the region. Issues  such as the sea dumping of waste, nuclear testing, chemical weapons destruction and  driftnet fishing are but a few examples of issues which require ongoing attention.

 And Australia can play an international role with aid, trade and investment which  will encourage sound economic policies and the successful and sustainable transfer  of environmentally relevant technology.

 We support the attempt at UNCED to gain multilateral cooperation on these  difficult issues. The signing of Agenda 21 - a program of action for sustainable  development - is useful in that it provides an international standard to work 

 towards.

 The holding of UNCED should be seen as the beginning of a process. This will be  continued through the establishment of a Commission for Sustainable Development  modelled on the UN Human Rights Commission, which uses public opinion as an  instrument to encourage adherence to its goals. The UNDP and the UN  Environment Program will report to the Commission to ensure that their activities  do not contradict each other. However, there has been no suggestion th at regional  bodies be set up to continue the process and provide a more focused regional  approach. We think there is scope for the development of regional action plans and  perhaps a body such as ESCAP could play a role.

 Security Cooperation

 In contrast to human rights and environment issues, a regional multilateral network  is being developed for security dialogue. Regional states are starting to identify  common interests which can best be furthered through a multilateral process.

 A t present, however, regional cooperation on security issues is limited. There are  no formal structures for security cooperation as exist in Europe. During the Cold  War, regional countries relied on alliances with the superpowers, which cloaked  many regional areas of dispute. As a result, the region has been characterised by  a series of bilateral alliances and friendships with the United States as the  guarantor of security.

 In the post-Cold War era, regional states are dealing more directly with security  issues.

 Cambodia is a good example of the first steps towards regional cooperation on a  pressing security issue. Although the assistance and guidance of powers external to  the region was needed to formulate a peace settlement, the region has accepted  much of the responsibility of the practical aspects of implementing the Cambodian  peace agreement.

 The majority of the peacekeeping troops in Cambodia come from the region,  including substantial contributions from Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, China, India,

 10

 Pakistan, Bangladesh and Australia. The aid pledged for the reconstruction of  Cambodia is also primarily regionally based: Japan, US, Australia, Canada, China  and Thailand have all pledged major contributions. And regional states - such as  China and Thailand - are playing a more active role in trying to find a way to  overcome the intransigence of the Khmer Rouge in the peace process, albeit with  little success.

 This has helped set the groundwork for regional states agreeing to discuss matters  of security on a region-wide basis. It was apparent very early on that proposals for  a formal structure such as a Conference on Security and Cooperation in Asia  (CSCA), as put forward by Senator Evans, were premature.

 Instead, the framework for security discussions is being built around the annual  ASEAN Post Ministerial Conference (PMC) where security discussions were put on  the agenda for the first time at its most recent meeting in July. Japan's suggestion  th at officials meet prior to future PMCs to discuss security issues is likely to be  adopted and this would further consolidate the process.

 Developing a consensus on security issues is likely to be gradual. If Australia is to  be a credible participant in multilateral security discussions, we must be prepared  to consolidate our relations with regional states and respect the regional preference  for a consensus driven approach. It is a pity that Senator Evans in promoting his  CSCA idea and Prime Minister Keating in pressing for an APEC Heads Of  Government meeting had not first learnt how things are done in Asia.

 In addition, it is useful to observe the growing security dialogue within the ASEAN  grouping, illustrated by the separate declaration on the Spratly Islands issued after  the most recent Foreign Ministers' Meeting. However, the ASEAN nations are still  proving very reluctant to examine internal affairs and continue to pursue a policy  of non-interference.

 This is most recently apparent in ASEAN's approach to the situation in Burma  where ethnic persecution and human rights violations are being carried out by a  non-elected regime. However, instability such as in Burma has the potential to  threaten others and destabilise the region. Joint agreement to pressure the Burma 

 regime to cease its abuses and hand over power to elected representatives of the  people should be an aim which regional security discussions address. The fact that  it has not demonstrates how far we have yet to go to develop real security dialogue  in the region. There can, however, be no doubt that in the longer term the dialogue 

 will be important and should be encouraged by Australia.

 Conclusion

 The Asia-Pacific region, therefore, is characterised by a lack of regional cooperation.  In order to achieve a more stable and secure regional environment, greater attention  will need to be devoted to creating a cooperative framework appropriate to the  history and processes of the region.

 11

 4

 The development of regional dialogue in these areas will be a gradual and  incremental process due to the very differences which have prevented a cooperative  process growing up before now. However, over the last forty years the benefits of  multilateralism as a way of managing change have become apparent. Translation  of this concept to the Asia-Pacific region is only just beginning but the benefits could  be great.

 For Australia's part, a Coalition Government will participate actively in the regional  cooperative process. However, we believe that in order to get the most out of this  process, Australia needs to base its participation on solid and substantial bilateral  ties with our neighbours.

 Regionalism must also be directed towards practical and achievable goals. We  believe that it is not in Australia's interests to devote scarce and valuable resources  to the creation of cumbersome bureaucracies or forums which are basically talk-  shops for high profile officials.

 We need to participate in a way which is consistent with furthering our trading and  commercial interests, enhancing the security of our region and promoting values  which are fundamental to human life.

 The Liberal/National Coalition's commitment, therefore, is to Australia first:  domestic economic reform, the development of secure bilateral relations, and the  pragmatic participation in regional forums which realistically promote our interests.

 12

