---
title: "Immigration Minister to visit Cambodia, Thailand and Hong Kong"
date: "1992-01-17"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214122848
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008699%22
---

 mm m

 M e d ia  Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 6/92

 IMMIGRATION MINISTER TO VISIT CAMBODIA, THAILAND AND HONG KONG

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, will visit Cambodia, Thailand and  Hong Kong from 14 February to 23 February to take a  first-hand look at regional refugee and asylum matters.

 The visit will enable the Minister to take to a further  stage discussions he had in South East Asia and Geneva with  international agencies such as the UNHCR, the IOM and the  UNDP and with government representatives on refugee and  asylum matters.

 In Thailand and Cambodia, he will be discussing repatriation  arrangements for Cambodians along the Thai-Cambodian border.  He will also take up discussions, held so far between  officers, on migration from Cambodia to Australia.

 "The development of a normal migration arrangement for  Cambodia is essential to order to discourage people from  leaving Cambodia clandestinely and attempting to reach  Australia via a treacherous boat journey.

 "Such a scheme would provide hope for many Australian  Cambodians who have been separated from their families for  many years and who have been prevented from sponsoring  relatives in Cambodia because of the lack of an established  program," Mr Hand said.

 The Minister wTill look at the current arrangements for the  return of Vietnamese boat people from Hong Kong and general  migration and refugee trends within the region.

 CANBERRA 17 January 1992. .

 Media inquiries: Lynne Adams . Ministers Office  (06) 277.7860

 I COMMONWEALTH |  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRA  I   M . ' C A H  ’ J

