---
title: "Australia provides $49m in aid for Cambodia"
date: "1992-04-01"
creators:
  - "Kerin, John"
source: "MINISTER FOR TRADE AND OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211177925
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3058729%22
---

 37.

 No. MTAI 12 Date: 1 April 92 Australia provides $49m in aid for Cambodia

 The Minister for Trade and Overseas Development, John Kerin, today announced details of Australia's new bilateral aid package for Cambodia.

 The introduction of the four year bilateral program follows a Government decision in October 1991 lifting the restrictions on Australian bilateral aid to Cambodia.

 Australia will provide approximately $49m over four years in development assistance to Cambodia. Of the $49m, an additional $23m has been allocated for the new bilateral aid package, over and above existing aid programs.

 "Australia is committed to providing urgent assistance to rehabilitate Cambodia's infrastructure and resettle displaced people and refugees, "Mr Kerin said.

 "Over the next two years, a special assistance program through Australian NG0s, worth approximately $5m, will support the rehabilitation and resettlement process.

 "The new bilateral program will build on the extensive work undertaken by the NG0s.

 "Australian non government organisations (NG0s) have operated in Cambodia since 1979. They have done an exceptional job in very difficult circumstances," Mr Kerin said.

 "Education will be a major long term focus, with training provided in English. Assistance will also be provided in the areas of agriculture, health and infrastructure. Australian advisers will be placed in key ministries, such as agriculture and education.

 "There will be opportunities for Australian businesses to participate, through provision of goods and services, particularly in the infrastructure sector."

 The program has been developed in conjunction with the Supreme National Council of Cambodia, and will be worth about $15 million a year, in the longer term.

 Further financial allocations to assist Cambodian refugees and displaced people will be made in the coming months.

 Australian bilateral assistance to Cambodia forms part of the Australian development cooperation program, administered by AIDAB, the Australian International Development Assistance Bureau.

 * * * * * *

 CANBERRA For further information contact AIDAB Public Affairs: Wendy Levy, (06) 276 4966 or AR (06) 247 8920. Tony Melville, (06) 276 4960 or A.H (06) 295 8568.

 COMMONWEAL PAR LI AM E NW, Pt Li RA 1-,1Y

