---
title: "Immigration, unemployment, fightback!"
date: "1992-05-12"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214123354
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02009695%22
---

 Leader of the Opposition

 12 May 1992 REF: TRANSCR\NM\S0087

 TRANSCRIPT OF DR JOHN HEWSON HP  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  DOUBLE BAY, SYDNEY

 E & 0 E - PROOF COPY ONLY

 SUBJECTS: Immigration, Unemployment, Fightbackl

 Jrnlst: .

 ...comment:» in regards to immigration in response to the  Chinese boat people?

 Hewson:

 Well, on the boat people, I've supported the hard line all the  way through. It's been our view that we have to maintain the  integrity of our immigration program, while at the same time  ensuring that genuine refugees are given compassionate 

 consideration in Australia.

 So in that sense we've supported more resources going into the  DORS procedure for reviewing refugees, but equally we've  supported a call for - and I'm pleased to see the Government  has adopted a very hard line on refugees. If they're not 

 genuine refugees they should return to the country from which  they came. If they won't go voluntarily, they should be 

 forcibly repatriated.  Because unless we do that, we might as  well set a tour operator up up there on one of the borders and  just direct them straight to Australia and let them get in underneath our immigration rules, And that really can't be 

 tolerated.

 Jrnlst:

 So you're pretty pleased with what Mr Hand's doing at the moment?

 Hewson:

 Well Mr Hand has responded, I think, appropriately so far. But we're yet to see him tested. And let's see what happens  when if he finds that some of these people are not genuine refugees - then, whether they are encouraged to go back, or in 

 the end whether he's prepared to forcibly repatriate them.

 Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600 Phone 277 4022 CO M M O N W E A LTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY   M ICAH

 REF: TRANSCR\NM\S0087 2 .

 But it really is a very important issue from the point of view  of our immigration program. We've got a very equitable 

 immigration program which should be adhered to and its 

 integrity should be preserved. And in that sense, it's very  important that where you get those who are trying to breach  the rules and slip in by the back door, if that's proven then  they should be acted upon.

 Jrnlst t

 Have your views on unemployment changed as any result of  today'a meeting ?

 Hewson:

 We had a very good meeting with a good cross-section of people  from my electorate. I listened to them and they all put their  views from their own particular point of view including a  fellow who is in fact unemployed. I also responded by giving 

 them some details as to what I thought was the appropriate  response.

 We really have three strands to our response - job creation,  and that's getting the economy again - rebuilding the business  community; training and retraining, and I went through some of  our training programs including AUSTRAIN, youth wages,  enhanced emphasis on Skillshare and so on; and thirdly,  programs that are designed to deal with the unemployed as  people - people who suffer financial crisis, people who face 

 family crisis, people who lose their self-confidence and their  self-esteem. It's one of the reasons why we put about

 $50 million into voluntary agencies in Fightback! - to deal  with some of the particular problems that flow at the

 individual level to those who are unemployed.

 So it was a very productive meeting I think. They have

 undertaken to correspond with me now, come back with some  detailed statements as to some of the elements that we talked  about today.

 Jrnlst:

 Did they tell you anything you didn't already know?

 Hewson:

 Well, they give you firsthand examples I think, and firsthand  experience. I have made a practice, since I became Leader, of getting around the country in cities and in the country and regional centres and so on, visiting Skillshare centres,  talking to the unemployed, talking to homeless youth, talking 

 to groups like St Vincent de Paul or the Salvation Army and  Sydney City Mission, or Lifeline, whatever - dealing with all  dimensions, if you like, of the problem. And they gave me

 REF: TRANSCR\NM\S0087 3.

 further evidence of what I've observed all around Australia,   which should give us all a sense; of urgency about the 

 magnitude of the unemployment problem, and we should ,do  everything we can, because we can't be complacent.

 We couldn't accept the possibility that unemployment would  stay near its current level for years, or that one in three  kids can't get a job, or that some of the kids who are looking  for a job today won't find a job by the middle of the decade. 

 I mean we can't at all be complacent about any of that.

 Jrnlst:

 Dr Lawton said if you'd accept his offer and spend a week at  his rectory at Kings Cross, you and other politicians wouldn't  be talking with complacency about a permanent unemployment  rate of 7-8*. .

 Hewsoni

 Well to be fair, Dr Lawton didn't actually say that in the  meeting. That was in a press release that was released before  the meeting. I have spent a lot of time going around and 

 looking at these problems. I haven't taken the cameras on a  lot of occasions. I've gone out on my own to meet these 

 groups and to talk to these people. I am certainly not 

 complacent about it, and nobody has a monopoly of compassion  in this business. We are all dead keen to make sure this 

 problem is solved.

 I think my talents are best used in terms of putting in place  the policies that will rebuild this economy and create jobs -  putting in place the training schemes that will give people a  chance to get appropriately trained - particularly young  people, but also some of the older people in their forties and 

 fifties, who've been in the one job all their life, lost their  job and it'3 hard for them to get back.

 And equally to show a bit of genuine concern about what 

 happens to people as individuals when they can't get back into  the workforce - through no fault of their own. They're trying  hard. They're out there turning up to one interview after  another and getting constantly rejected. They lose their 

 self-respect. Many of them have financial problems. They  have family problems. We don't want those to generalise in  society to become broader social issues, family breakdown  issues, crime issues, drug abuse issues.

 We've got to deal with the problem. That's why there is a 

 need for a genuine sense of urgency, and I couldn't agree more  with Dr Lawton and all the others that we've»all got to move,  and we've crot to move quickly. And that's what annoys me -  when I see so many solutions that are there that could be put 

 in place today. '

 REF: TRANSCR\NM\S0087 4 .

 We had a Premiers' Conference yesterday. Why didn't they  agree to abolish payroll tax and create, as Mr Keating's  estimated, 200,000 jobs? Why proceed with the Superannuation  Guarantee Levy which could * cost as many as another 100,000 

 jobs? Why stay with a wage determination system that's cost a  couple of percentage points in the last few years in terms of  increased unemployment? Why not move to genuine youth wages  so that young kids can get back into the workforce? Why not 

 look at some of the training schemes like we propose? 

 AUSTRAIN; an expanded role for Skillshare that will facilitate  them getting back into the workforce. Why not put more money  into voluntary agencies where they really have a role to play  in dealing with some of these personal crisis problems that  are the most unfortunate dimension, if you like, of the 

 unemployment problem? -  .

 Jrnlst:

 Did you discuss the possibility of imposing an assets test on  various benefits which might be available to the better-off of  the community?

 Hewsoni

 Well, I have explained that in Fightback! and in our policy  positions in recent days we've taken a number of decisions  which blow apart the stereotype, if you like. We have 

 actually sought to take benefits, or access to benefits away  from the upper income groups, and concentrate some of the  benefits more visibly, if you like, to the low to middle 

 income groups - those who are most disadvantaged.

 So in Fightback1  for example, we make people above a certain  income level take out private health insurance. We take back  family assistance. We take back the Dependent Spouse Rebate.  We restrict their access to superannuation. We eliminate a 

 number of the rorts in relation to benefits like AUSTUDY and  Family Allowances and so on - all designed to better target -  and support asset tests and so on, income tests - all designed  to better target the money down to the bottom level of the  income stream.

 One point that was put to me today by this group was that they  didn't believe that the safety nets that are there are high  enough, and I've asked them to come back with some specific  statements as to what they mean by that, and exactly how they  would see that being implemented, and I was pleased to see 

 that they're very keen to do that.

 Jrnlst:

 Would you reconsider the current safety net?

 REF: TRANSCR\NM\S ÎŸ 087 5.

 Hewson:

 No , well we're not - as* I wanted to say to them quite 

 carefully - we're not changing Fightback!  as it stands, but we  are talkincr to people about what we've said in there, and  getting their feedback and their views.  And we will always  take account of community views or the views of particular  groups who have particular experience to make sure that it's  understood which direction we're going,

 We'll always listen to people,  and it may be that we can do  other things in Government to improve the delivery of benefits  or to improve the capacity of people to get back into the 

 workforce, or t o ,  deal with some of the most tragic personal  problems that are associated with people unemployed - 

 particularly the long-term unemployed.  After a while they  start to lose, as I say, their self-respect and their 

 self-esteem. They get into an attitude and a cycle of poverty  which is very hard for them to break out of, and this group  very effectively I think, argued that dimension of the problem  and will bring me more information on that.

 Jrnlst:

 But you're saying that no major aspect of Fightback1  will be  changed between now and the next election?

 Hewson:

 We've said that Fightbackl stands as it is, although there are  a number of areas of Fightbacki where we intend to say more.  We foreshadow in the document a lot of areas where we will add  quite a lot of detail - areas like childcare, accelerated 

 depreciation, infrastructure projects,  a host of those sort of  areas. But we're also looking to, in speeches and so on, draw  attention to other aspects of training and other aspects of  assistance, the sort of things that were talked about today.

 So these sort of meetings I think are very important. They  provide a way of focussing national attention on an issue. I  don't like them to be stunts.  I like them to be genuine 

 discussions and an opportunity for people to give me 

 information and for me to give them' a better idea perhaps as.  to where I'm coming from. ·

 I think it's a bit of stereotype of politicians these days.  They see you on television of a night,  talking to these 

 cameras and they say "you're a pretty dull and boring sort of  guy who only says about 10 words at a time", because that's  all they get. People get a chance to meet you in these 

 meetings and hear what you say, and share your experiences as  much as you share their experiences,  and I think that is a  very important part of doing this job.  We're in this business  to help people, and we're in this business to make sure that

 REF: TRANSCR\NM\S0087 6.

 people in Australia... a very wealth country, it's an 

 embarrassment. We don't have the jobs that should be there.  We've squandered our opportunities. We've got to fix it. And  everybody has a role to play in that - not just the community  groups like I met today; not just politicians, but business 

 leaders and parents and all other people involved in our  society.

 Ends.

