---
title: "Immigration minister's statement to Port Hedland detainees on hunger strike"
date: "1992-08-04"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214124382
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008615%22
---

 e

 M e d ia  Release #4

 Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, AC T2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 46/92

 IMMIGRATION MINISTER'S STATEMENT TO PORT HEDLAND DETAINEES  ON HUNGER STRIKE

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, today reiterated his firm stand on  Australia's refugee determination process.

 "Australia has a fair and proper process for the  determination of refugee status, in line with criteria set  down by the UNHCR, and I am determined that the process will  be adhered to. I am not prepared to be diverted from the  process nor am I prepared to intervene in the process," Mr  Hand said.

 "I would hope that no-one would advise an applicant that  hunger strikes, sit-ins, antics for photographers and  television cameras or other such stunts would have a bearing  on the refugee determination process. Any such advice would  not only give individual applicants false hopes that such  tactics could influence their claims, but could possibly put  the applicant at great physical risk.

 "I state again, these diversions will have no bearing on the  proper process of refugee determination in Australia".

 The Minister repeated his strong views about the integrity  of the process and his unwillingness to intervene in the  process after sending a message to detainees at the Port  Hedland Processing Centre who have been on a hunger strike 

 for the past 48 hours.

 The text of the message is attached:

 .  .  ./2

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH ------ -

 - 2 -

 STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER

 To the hunger strikers at Port Hedland.

 Participation in gestures such as hunger strikes does not  enhance your cases.

 The determination of applications for refugee status and of  appeals to the Refugee Status Review Committee can only  proceed on a case by case basis.

 I am aware that this is a very stressful time for all of  you. I have gone to great lengths to ensure that you have  had access to legal advice and assistance in the preparation  of your applications and appeals. You should discuss your 

 concerns with your legal advisers to enable them to bring  out these issues.

 I would ask you to terminate your protest before any more of  you are hurt.

 CANBERRA 4 August, 1992

 MEDIA ENQUIRES: Lynne Adams Minister's Office  (06) 277.7860

