---
title: "Australian relief aid worth more than $15m for Horn of Africa"
date: "1992-11-10"
creators:
  - "Kerin, John"
source: "MINISTER FOR TRADE AND OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211179415
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3239033%22
---

 No.

 MTAI 57  Date: 10 November 1992

 /5'

 Australian relief aid worth more than $15m for Horn of Africa

 Australia will provide emergency aid worth more than $15 million for people affected by drought and conflict in the Horn of Africa, the Minister for Trade and Overseas Development, John Kerin, announced today.

 "The package includes $10m for Australian wheat, wheat flour, high energy biscuits, cooking oil, beans and associated transport costs. Health and agricultural programs will also receive support," Mr Kerin said.

 "Our aid will be distributed by Australian non government organisations and United Nations agencies working in the Horn of Africa."

 "Civil conflicts and ethnic rivalries in the region have escalated, particularly in southern Sudan. The situation has been aggravated by worsening drought which is spreading to cover most of eastern and southern Africa," Mr Kerin said.

 "People have continued to flee across national boundaries, creating further problems for the relief effort because of lack of security and difficulties in gaining access to different groups.

 "The United Nations has stressed the importance of taking a regional approach whilst bearing in mind the specific needs of individual countries."

 Australian -assistance will be provided as follows: ETHIOPIA • $4.5m through World Vision Australia for relief and rehabilitation projects in South Kalu and Tigray provinces

 • $2m to the Food Aid Working Group, including $1.5m for Australian wheat flour and $500,000 for agricultural rehabilitation in Tigray • $1.5m to the World Food Programme for Somali refugees and drought affected communities in eastern Ethiopia

 • $400,000 to UNICEF Australia to provide supplementary food and health assistance in Gonder province • $300,000 to Australian Catholic Relief for relief food for displaced people in Hararghe, eastern Ethiopia

 • $200,000 to the Australian Council of Churches for primary health care ERITREA • $2m to the Food Aid Working Group, including $1.5m in Australian wheat and $500,000 for agricultural rehabilitation

 • $880,000 to World Vision Australia for relief and rehabilitation • $500,000 to Austcare for emergency medical supplies • $250,000 to Save the Children Fund Australia for health support . •

 COKAMONNIVEALTH

 PARLIAMENTARY LiBRARY MICAH

 2

 SUDAN • $630,000 to World Vision Australia for emergency, agriculture and health programs in southern Sudan • $500,000 to the World Food Programme for emergency airlifts in southern Sudan

 • $500,000 to UNICEF for their emergency program, Operation Lifeline • $500,000 to the International Committee of the Red Cross for emergency work • $300,000 to Australian Catholic Relief for emergency relief in Juba, southern Sudan

 • $90,000 to Community Aid Abroad for supplementary feeding for women and children in Darfur, western Sudan KENYA • $500,000 to World Vision Australia for food, seeds and improved water supply for drought victims in Turkana, north west Kenya.

 Relief assistance for the Horn of Africa is administered by AIDAB, Australia's overseas aid agency.

 * * * * * *

 CANBERRA For further information contact AIDAB Public Affairs: Wendy Levy - (06) 276 4966 or ah (06) 247 8920 Cathy Walker - (06) 276 4960.

