---
title: "Too little too late"
date: "1992-10-29"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214125802
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006845%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP /3^>

 Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Electorate Parliament House 

 Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 TOO LITTLE TOO LATE

 The news th at a boat with 11 people claiming to be from  Romania has been detained by Immigration officials in  Australian waters, and th at another boat with 115 Chinese  on board is bound for Australia, is yet more evidence that 

 the Government's ability to control border entry is still a  lamentable failure.

 Of the 400 or so 'boat people' who have arrived in Australia  since 1989 claiming asylum, only 19 have been removed  after all stages of application and review. A backlog of over  23,000 claims for refugee status still remains.

 Australia's reputation of being an easy target for illegal  entry remains intact notwithstanding the recent limited  deportations. The potential for large numbers of asylum  seekers to arrive on our shores remains a reality.

 The Government would be well advised to adopt the  proposals for reform consistently offered by the Coalition,  which include:

 . a requirement for leave before further appeal of contested  applications is permitted;

 . exclusion of appeals beyond the administrative procedures,  except on questions of law to the High Court, also by leave;

 . re-deployment of sufficient staff and resources to refugee  determination to bring the process under control.

 The Coalition has always asserted th at those who have  bona-fide claims for refugee status, determined against  internationally accepted criteria, must be given protection. . . . 2 /

 COMMONWEALTH PA R L IA M EN TA R Y  LIBRARY  M 1CA H

 -  2 -

 . v

 However those whose claims are ascertained to be  unfounded must be repatriated immediately.

 It is obvious with the arrival of these latest boats from  Romania and China th at the message 'arrive in Australia  and you'll be able to stay', is still being received, loud and  clear.

 The Government would be well placed to start replacing its  laudable rhetoric with some swift and meaningful action.

 29 October 1992

 Further information: Philip Ruddock (06) 249 7749 ah or  Pager (02) 925 3911 #25589.

