---
title: "Australian-Japan: looking together to an Asia Pacific 21st century: keynote speech to the 12th Australia-Japan Ministerial Committee meeting, Tokyo"
date: "1993-11-02"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211183593
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1650079%22
---

 ` C

 9M

 AUSTRALIA-JAPAN:  LOOKING TOGETHER TO AN ASIA PACIFIC 21ST CENTURY

 Keynote speech by Senator Gareth Evarts, Australian Mlnlster for Foreign Affairs, to the 12th Australia-Japan Ministerial Committee meeting, Tokyo, 2 November 1993

 My Australian Ministerial colleagues and I are delighted to be here in Tokyo for the

 12th Meeting of the Australia-Japan Ministerial Committee. You have welcomed us

 warmly and graciously, Foreign Minister Hata. As always in Japan, we feel

 ourselves immediately to be with very close friends.

 This meeting is significant in two important respects. First, it is now twenty years since our countries first established the AJMC_ Almost unique in its structure, this

 bilateral ministerial dialogue of ours on political and economic issues has played a

 major role in shaping the close, comprehensive and confident relationship we have

 today. I have been corning to these meetings now for nearly a decade, wearing a

 number of different ministerial hats. Over that time I have seen our meetings

 become more broad in the range of issues addressed, more deep in the intensity of

 discussion on particular issues, and ever more direct, relaxed and free-flowing in

 style. I hope that we can continue all of these trends today, and in doing so add still

 more dimensions to our "Constructive Partnership".

 The other significant aspect o r tI'iis meeting is that it comes at an historic time In

 Japanese politics, soon after the inauguration of the Coalition Government. You are

 embarking on a major process of adaptation and change: we undeisttarid the

 magnitude of your task, and wish you well in it. It is similar in some ways to the

 complex and difficult process we have been through ourselves in the last decade as we have internationalised the Australian economy, and come to terms in many new

 ways with the reality of our geography as an Asia Pacific nation.

 Since this Committee last met in 199 .1  the rush of events, both internal and

 international, have left us all a little breathless. Our agenda today will cover many

 different political, security and economic issues - global, regional and bilateral

 levels.  There is one particular theme however that will often recur in our

 discussions, and which I would like to emphasise at the outset - and that is the very

 rapid emergence over the last few years of 'a real sense of Asia Pacific commun^c .

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

 ^ J

 2

 The most obvious manifestation of this in the economic context has been the rapid

 evolution of APEC, arid in the political and security context the recent creation of the ASEAN Regional Forum. But I believe this emerging sense of Asia Pacific

 community is beginning to have an even wider significance: changing the way in

 which all countries in the region are thinking, at all levels, about their relations with

 each other. We have a chance to create, in this very diverse region of ours,

 something quite new: a region of real peace, and real prosperity, working

 cooperatively together in the common interest to bridge gaps of culture and

 ideology, and in some ceses very different levels of development, all of which have

 been sources of tension and conflict in the past.

 I believe that Australia and Japan share very similar visions about our regional

 future and that, just as we have worked so well together in the past, we can play a

 real leadership role together in the future to make that vision a reality.

 International Securit y  Environment

 There have certainly been many great improvements in the international security

 environment flowing from the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold

 War, including:

 Superpower agreements for significant reduction in nuclear arsenals;

 additional adherents to the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty;

 significant moves towards the negotiation of a Comprehensive Test Ban

 Treaty:

 the conclusion of the Chemical Weapons Convention;

 the signing and implementation of the Cambodian Peace Accord., an

 immensely positive development to which Australia and Japan both

 contributed, and which we can both regard with some pride;

 the inclusion of Russia, China and Vietnam -arid Laos -- in regional political and security consultative processes, now formalised as the new ASEAN

 Regional Forum; and

 b

 3

 the olear articulation by the Clinton Administration of a United States policy commitment to the Asia Pacific - and in particular express US statements of

 intention to maintain key military undertakings in North East As12 as the

 cornerstone of an overall commitment to comprehensive political and

 economic engagement in the Western Pacific.

 Unfortunately, the new strategic environment has not swept away all proplems, including;

 the unresolved issue of the DPRK's nuclear program and the need to ameliorate tensions on the Korean peninsula;

 the issue of the Northern Territories;

 on a wider international front, reform in the structures and processes of the

 United Nations system - In this regard, we continue to support Japan

 becoming a permanent member of the Security Council, and hope that Japan

 will support our efforts (spelt out in my recently published book Co-operating

 for Feace) to improve the inlernal.iorral machinery for the resolution, and

 above all prevention, of conflict; and

 the continuing imperative to ensure the observance of universal standards of human rights, notwithstanding the sensitivities and difficulties involved.

 International and Regional Economic Environment

 We meet at a particularly critical time for the international economic system. We

 have a date and a deadline (15 Dec:errrber) by which we will Know whether we are to

 be working in the future within a . vigorous, constructively evolving, multilateral

 trading system - or rather whether the vital and ambitious Uruguay Round has

 foundered, and we are looking instead at a trading system in danger of rapidly

 deteriorating.

 Rational self-interest demands, for Japan and Australia and every country

 dependent on global trade, that there be a successful outcome to the Round. Australia's leadership of the Cairns Group and Japan's position as an economic power of the first rank can give considerable weight to the international efforts in

 these critical final weeks of the Round. By asserting a leadership role, Japan has

 A

 4

 in exceptional opportunity to make a major coriLribution to removing remaining

 bottlenecks in the market access package and to securing a genuinely trade

 liberalising result on agriculture, in particular by agreeing to a schedule which is

 consistent with . the Dunkel text and with comprehensive tariffication without

 exception.

 We also see APEC as a logical means for pursuing closer integration, and ultimately further trade liberalisation, among Asian Pacific economies. APEC has been piacea on a firm institutional footing, and the initiative for a leaders meeting will come to

 fruition later this month. So too will the adoption of a Trade and Investment

 Framework which will consolidate the region's collective commitment to consensus-building in pursuit of trade and investment liberalisation_ Japan has been an

 important partner with us from the outset in all of this You share, I know, our vision

 of APEC's .long term potential to promote economic integration In the Asia Pacific,

 and we look forward to you to make an energetic commitment to realising that

 vision.

 It is particularly important that we continue to emphasis the importance of Asia

 Pacific-wide economic cooperation, given the emergence of new free trade

 arrangements involving North America and the ASEAN region respectively. These

 developments in sub-regions of major economic importance for both Australia and

 Japan certainly  work in a way that is genuinely trade creating, and offer

 opportunities to us, but we need Lo stay alert to the possible risks and

 disadvantages for countries like us of arrangements of this kind. It is essential,

 more generally, that we both promote arrangements that encompass economies on

 both sides of the Pacific and do not encourage any which may tend to drive wedges

 between Asia Pacific countries.

 We in Australia have watched with a good deal of interest the conclusion earlier this

 year of the United States-Japan Framework Agreement for a New Economic

 Partnership. The stability of your bilateral relationship has major implications for the

 global and regional economies and not least for Australia. we have welcomed the

 commitment of both parties to pursue bilateral trade relations on a most favoured

 nation consistent basis, and without resort to managed trade policies.

 4

 I '

 I

 5

 Bilateral Relations

 In the more than four decades since the San Francisco Peace Treaty, Australia and Japan have been very successful jr putting the wartime past behind us. We have no wish whatever to relive that past, but nonetheless we do think it is helpful - for

 Japan`s bilateral relations throughout the region - for there to be strong statements

 of regret for past acts of aggression, like those recently made by Prime Minister Hosokawa and by you, Foreign Minister Hate, and also for steps to be taken to

 ensure that the lessons of the past are learned by each new generation.

 Since the 19505 we have both benefited profoundly from fundamental economic

 complementarities - your need for commodities and ours for manufactures. But we

 have also now moved far beyond this limited trading structure. Economic links have

 been substantially diversified through extensive Japanese Investment in Australia,

 the growing expert of Australian processed products and elaborately-transformed

 manufactures to Japan, collaboration in science and technology and the

 development of a vast trade in services, particularly tourism and education.

 Political and security ties have also developed to the point where our two countries

 are regular interlocutors in many different forums. Our co-operation has broadened

 out from. its Western-alliance base to. include now common interests as good

 international citizens in promoting disarmament, peace-keeping, security dialogues

 and various humanitarian causes.

 Along with these fundariiental developments in the economic and political areas has

 gone a large-scale effort to promote people-to-people exchanges between our two

 countries in the spheres of education, academia, culture, journalism and so on.

 The Celebrate Australia promotion, to be . launched this week in the gracious

 presence of their Imperial Highnesses the Crown Prince and Princess of Japan, is a

 $40 million effort to bring an even better understanding of Australia and its

 achievements to Japan - one that recognises, in particular, that we are not just a

 collection of mines, farms and tourist beaches, but a sophisticated, cosmopolitan

 culture and a highly--sophisticated manufacturing and service providing economy_

 We will be delivering message this inoriltr with 100 events in 30 Japanese Cities,

 covering the arts, business, education, technology, food, wine and sport.

 b

 1

 As we move towards the 21st century, the challenge for the Australian-Japanese

 partnership is to continue to move forward. Let me spell out, finally, some of the

 areas where we think further movement is both possible and desirable:

 I mentioned before Australia's program of economic reform and of into nationalising our . economy.  Your new government in Tokyo now

 foreshadows a domestic reform program of similar proportions. If such a

 reform program were to embrace, in particular, measures to break down

 residual barriers to imports in foodstuffs, services and procurements.  It

 would also strengthen Japan's international and regional credentials as an

 economic leader, and it would do much to eliminate rern sininy frictions in the

 Australia-Japan economic relationship.

 Australia is concerned to diversify our trade, and in particular to increase the

 share of manufactures and high-tech products in our exports to Japan.

 Increased Japanese investment in Australia in these areas can play a major

 part in the further broadening of our economy.

 The Australia-Japan relationship will also benefit from further effective action

 on the part of Japan working for trade liberalisation and increased economic

 interdependence throughout the Asia Pacific region through APEC and other

 multilateral processes.

 Changes in the international and regional strategic situation will also tend to

 reinforce shared interests between Australia and Japan. Australia has long

 made clear that it would like to see a more active Japanese role in global and

 regional affairs, and we are pleased that this is now being translated into

 positive action in the pace-keeping sphere. Co-operation in arms control,

 threat reduction and puce-keeping issues and in the sphere of non-military

 threats to security through aid, refugee, drug, health, environmental and

 counter-terrorism programs, will all be fertile ' areas for advancing our

 partnership into the 21st century.

 We can never pay too much attention to people-to-people contacts and public

 diplomacy. Strong support by governments, business arid institutions in both

 countries will be essential to cementing the educational, academic,

 professional and cultural contacts which we will need to complement our

 growing economic and political links.

 Q

 •

 ` o

 7

 As we go through our agenda today, I suggest that we bear closely in mind { y aw we

 can build further on our traditional strengths in the economic area, our already soild

 political relationship and our already substantial contacts ;n the non-governmental

 area.

 Our broader objective should be the establishment by the 21st century of a bilateral

 relationship of such confidence and substance that it is a major lynch-pin in the

 emergence of a stronger and more cohesive, secure and prosperous Asia Pacific

 community.

 r

 • F^

