---
title: "Australia welcomes agreement between Burmese government and UNHCR"
date: "1993-11-12"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211183713
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1643009%22
---

 AUSTRALIA WELCOMES AGREEMENT BETWEEN BURMESE

 GOVERNMENT AND UNHCR

 The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Gareth Evans, has welcomed the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Burmese Government and the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR).

 This agreement provides for the establishment of a UNHCR presence in Burma's Rakhine State to monitor the return and reintegration of Burmese refugees from Bangladesh.

 The Memorandum of Understanding was signed on 5 November by the Director of the UNHCR's Regional Bureau for Asian and Oceania Affairs, Mr Werner Blatter and the Director General of Burma's Department of Immigration and Manpower, Maung Aung.

 Under the agreement, the UNHCR will have a presence at the reception camps and access to all returnees. The returnees will be issued with identification papers and they will enjoy the same freedom of movement as all other nationals in Burma.

 "The signing of this agreement and the subsequent establishment of a UNHCR presence in Burma will make a significant contribution towards the repatriation program and will do much to allay the concerns of both the refugees themselves and the wider international community," Senator Evans said.

 "The agreement is a responsible and commendable step towards greater cooperation by Burma with the international community. We continue to look to the Burmese State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) for signs of tangible political and human rights reform," he said.

 Background In early 1992, more than 250,000 Burmese muslims crossed the border into Bangladesh following disturbances in Rakhine State and alleged persecution by the Burmese military. The pace of repatriation has quickened in recent months, thanks partly to the prospect of a UNHCR presence in Bangladesh. Approximately 44,000 of the estimated 250,000 Burmese refugees in Bangladesh have already returned to

 Burma.

 The Australian Government has on a number of occasions raised the issue of the Burmese refugees in Bangladesh with both the Bangladesh and Burmese authorities. Senator Evans, in bilateral discussions with the Burmese Foreign Minister, has consistently argued that a UNHCR presence in Burma would provide

 the most appropriate framework for the return of the refugees.

 1 COMMONWEALTH PARL[AMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

