---
title: "Federal annual grants for community organisations"
date: "1993-01-14"
creators:
  - "Price, Roger"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY TO THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211179754
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1738391%22
---

 NEWS-: RELEASE

 'ROGER PRICE MPFEDERAL MEMBER FOR CHIFLEY PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY TO THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE 14 January 1993

 Federal Annual Grants for Community Organisations

 Federal grants worth some $3.4 million have been allocated to 132 organisations around Australia which . provide a service to migrant communities.

 The Nepean Migrant Access Inc, based in Roger Price's Federal electorate of Chifley, was one of those which came out ahead, with a $10,000 grant to analyse and address the needs of migrants in

 the Hawkesbury region.

 There were also many ethnic-based community organisations, which serve local people, getting funded by the package. A list is provided.

 The grants package was announced on Thursday by the Federal Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs, Gerry Hand. Mr Hand recently visited locals, meeting with the Blacktown Migrant Resource Centre late last year.

 The grants will assist community organisations in meeting settlement needs and will facilitate migrant and refugee access to mainstream services," said Mr Hand.

 Federal Member for Chifley, Roger Price, said the grants recognise the priority the Government gives to ensuring that recent arrivals have easy access to settlement services.

 .j2

 PHONE: 625-4344  FAX: 832-2641

 COMMONWEALTH

 E

 RLI AMENTARY LIBRARY

 MICAH

 ../dilgea funds

 2

 "Particular attention has been given to refugees, women, youth and those affected by industry restructuring and the recent recession," said Mr Price.

 An issue of particular importance for many people was the continued need for a nationwide network of services for torture and trauma victims.

 "Some $200,000 has been awarded this year for services in WA, SA, Queensland and Tasmania," said Mr Hand.

 "I will continue to press those State Governments which have not yet taken on responsibility for the provision of services for torture and trauma victims to do so. In the meantime, people in need will not be disadvantaged," he said.

 Media Contact: Brian Mitchell (02) 6254344

 9

 13J

 i

 9

 r

 w

 4

 W '0C

 : A9 1N3S^

 Iii.

 CV

 G] 

 Q'V

 ^ w

 Yv

 L0' d SO: 6 26'10'6T ' 

 o N -131 03 S,3OI21d

 I

 0..

 a z 0 LL

 LL

 ^y  O O

 0

 PRICE'S EO TEL No. 19,01,93 9:07 P.04

 SENT 6Y:

 ;14_ 1- 9e ; •l U;'4AM -jMIN LMMIQKA11UN CHllk3'1, 1 zaa . AL +' "l V

