---
title: "Australia's foreign policy fails to take trade interests into account"
date: "1993-09-13"
creators:
  - "Peacock, Andrew"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211182950
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2116831%22
---

 /6

 -P .L 474 4.- v*:PARUAMENT OF AUSTRALIA HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600 TEL. (06) 277 4048, 277 4419 FAX. (06) 277 4990HON. ANDREW PEACOCK, M.P.MEMBER FOR KOOYONG SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRSLEVEL 1690 COLLINS STREETMELBOURNE, VIC. 3000 TEL. (03) 650 3455 FAX. (03) 650 5115 PRESS RELEASE BY HON. ANDREW PEACOCK, MP

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 AUSTRALIA'S FOREIGN POLICY FAILS TO TAKE TRADE INTERESTS INTO ACCOUNT

 The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Hon. Andrew Peacock, agreed today with the thrust of farm industry complaints about the Government's approach to international negotiations on a Desertification Convention.

 It was not acceptable, he emphasised, for the Government to be pursuing international environmental agreements, with next to no regard for our particular domestic national interests.

 This, he said, applies to all aspects of Australia's multilateral environmental diplomacy.

 Mr Peacock said that desertification was among the highest priority environmental issues on the agenda for the 48th Session of the UN General Assembly, the Opening Session of which he was attending later this month. It is essential to find cooperative

 solutions to international environmental problems such as desertification. This is part and parcel of the United Nations effort to prevent and minimise threats to global security, including threats arising from environmental degradation. Desertification he said also raised major humanitarian and

 refugee concerns, especially in Africa.

 Mr Peacock said, however, that there were a number of problems with the Government's approach to the Desertification Convention. First, the Government is not taking full advantage of the opportunity provided by these negotiations to push hard for vital

 international agricultural trade reforms. The underlying causes of desertification include, he said, international agricultural export subsidy policies which tend to discourage sustainable land-care practices.

 Second, the Government has not developed a comprehensive strategy to counter the possible interests of some participating countries in preambular text supportive of commodity market intervention.

 Third, the Government has not devised a workable strategy for the delivery of commercial benefit to Australia by maximising use of Australian consultancy expertise oriented to dry land farming conditions.

 COMMONWEALTH

 1 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 MKAH

 Mr Peacock said there was little substance to the Government's

 repeated assertions that it was giving prominence to trade and economic issues in the pursuit of foreign policy. If the Government believed its own rhetoric, then it should take the opportunities provided by Australia's participation in the multilateral system, including in the environmental arena, also to pursue Australia's trade policy interests.

 Mr Peacock said that good international citizenship alone was not a sufficient basis for foreign policy. Australia's foreign policy and our associated diplomatic effort must, he said, reflect national realities and priorities.

 The Government has failed to develop a properly integrated perspective on how to meet the global environmental challenge effectively.

 Canberra, 13 September 1993

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT JANE DRAKE-BROCKMAN ON (06) 277 4419

 2

