---
title: "$1.5M to repatriate Indochinese asylum seekers"
date: "1993-05-31"
creators:
  - "Bilney, Gordon"
source: "MINISTER FOR DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AND PACIFIC ISLAND AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211181469
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1693337%22
---

 19

 Gordon Bilney MP

 Minister for Development Cooperation • Minister for Pacific Island Affairs

 No: MDC 21 Date: May 31 1993

 $1.5M TO REPATRIATE INDOCHINESE ASYLUM SEEKERS

 Australia will provide $1.5 million to assist in repatriating Indochinese asylum seekers in south east Asia, the Minister for Development Cooperation, Gordon Bilney, said today.

 This brings to $6.7 million the total that Australia has contributed to the Comprehensive Plan of Action for Indochinese Asylum Seekers since its inception in 1989. Repatriating the asylum seekers has been identified as the most pressing need by the United Nations

 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and host countries.

 "In January this year there were nearly 140,000 asylum seekers in camps in south east Asia, including Hong Kong, the Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand. Some 86,000 of these are Vietnamese boat people," Mr Bilney said.

 "Australian funds will help repatriate thousands of asylum seekers. This will reduce the number of people living in cramped and frequently unhygienic conditions in the camps. It will ease the pressure on the countries accommodating the camps and provide greater opportunities for those who are repatriated."

 Mr Bilney said the $1.5 million would be divided as follows:

 * UNHCR will receive a total of $1,405,900, of which

 - $560,000 will assist in repatriating 20,000 unsuccessful Vietnamese asylum seekers; - 450,000 will assist in continuing determination of refugee status processing in Indonesia, Philippines, Malaysia and Thailand; - $200,000 will be used to repatriate Lao refugees currently in Thailand; and - $200,000 will be used for UNHCR administrative costs.

 * The Australian Red Cross Society will receive a further $49,000 for its training program to encourage voluntary repatriation for Vietnamese asylum seekers in Malaysia.

 * * * * * *

 COMMONWEALTH

 CANBERRA

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

 For further information contact:

 Richard Moore - (Minister's Office) 06 277 7660 06 281 4578 (AH) Wendy Levy - (AIDAB) 06 276 4966 06 247 8920 (AH)

