---
title: "Stop mining the civilians: too much to ask?: address to the Human Rights Council/Community Aid Abroad Conference on Landmines, Canberra"
date: "1993-11-23"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211183834
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1650172%22
---

 Attached is Senator Evans's address to the Human Rights Council/Community Aid

 Abroad Conference on Landmines, Parliament House, Canberra, 23 November 1993.

 1 COMMONWEALTH I PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

 I.

 STOP MINING THE CIVILIANS: TOO MUCH TO ASK?

 Opening Address by Senator the Hon Gareth Evans QC, Minister for Foreign Affairs, at the Human Rights Council/Community Aid Abroad Conference on Landmines, Parliament House, Canberra, Tuesday 23 November 1993

 In an article in the Sydney Morning Herald earlier this year, Tony Wright told the story of Australian defence force personnel in the Cambodian town of Battambang who came across two children playing a game with a small green toy. Before the soldiers realised it wasn't a toy, two children had been blown to pieces. Most of us are only too sadly

 familiar with the heart-rending sight of Cambodian children, victims of anti-personnel mines. For every person killed, there are another two people on crutches or with artificial or missing limbs or otherwise maimed.

 It is the effect of landmines on civilian populations which is of most concern to us today - although I know that many of you here will say they are an obscene weapon in any context. In traditional warfare, mines have been seen as a legitimate weapon to protect territory by slowing down the advance of enemy troops. Until about 20 years ago, land

 mines were mostly deployed by armies in clearly demarcated areas and their locations recorded so that once hostilities were over they could be cleared with relative certainty and safety. Certainly that is the procedure advocated in Australian military manuals.

 The disturbing fact of the matter is nevertheless that for some years now, in an increasing number of conflicts, mines have been laid indiscriminately in the full knowledge that innocent people might be killed or injured. In some cases - and Cambodia is as stark as any example - the objective has, in fact, been to maim and kill civilians. At around ten dollars each, land mines have become a cheap, effective and brutal way to depopulate whole areas so as to deny an enemy sanctuary.

 The problem of land mines is not, of course, limited to Cambodia and the reality conveyed by the pictures is just as ugly whatever the country, be it Afghanistan, Angola, Mozambique or Somalia. The ICRC estimates there may be more than 100 million land mines scattered throughout 62 countries claiming around 800 victims each

 month.

 XXXVI193

 But Cambodia provides a chilling and immediate example. No one knows exactly how

 many mines have been laid there or if they are still being laid today. Figures just in from UNDP suggest there may be anything between four and eleven million. And we don't have any clear maps of where they have been laid over the past 25 years or

 more. Apart from the direct pain and suffering of the victims, there are other enduring, if less immediately visible legacies. The widespread sowing of land mines has a devastating effect on development, frustrating the resettlement of refugees and displaced persons and the return to normal agriculture and commerce. For a nation like Cambodia which is highly dependent on its agricultural sector, the effect is particularly marked. As the Director of the Cambodia Mine Action Centre commented recently,

 land mines are destroying the productive engine of Cambodia.

 During the UNTAC period, more than four million square metres were cleared of mines and about 37,000 mines and other unexploded ordnance destroyed. I know that some of the groups represented here today have been highly critical of this record and feel more should have been done by the UN. In fact UNTAC was not given any mandate by the Paris Agreements for mine clearance as such; only to train and supervise

 Cambodians in mine clearance (Article IX of Annex 2 to the main Agreement).

 Many of you may find that unacceptable. But the priority had first to be to establish peace and get Cambodia back to some condition of normalcy in which the massive and long-term task of mine clearance could be carried out as an important element of the international effort to rehabilitate and reconstruct the country. The other reality was that

 the UN was simply not going to be able to gather, let alone maintain over the period necessary, the numbers of foreign military experts in mine-clearance needed for such a task, particularly given the numbers of troops already required for the normal peace keeping functions in Cambodia.

 It must also be said that mine clearance will be the primary responsibility of the new Cambodian government in the long term. Thus it really comes down to the international community helping the Cambodians to help themselves. And it must be admitted that there has been progress. To date, some 2,330 Cambodians have been trained, of

 whom about 1,400 are currently employed in the actual clearance of mines.

 At the same time, I cannot deny there have been some question marks over the future of the Cambodian Mine Action Centre (CMAC) which was set up to take over demining activities after the departure of UNTAC. CMAC is now a statutory authority of the Cambodian government under the supervision of the United Nations. The UN recently

 a

 '

 3

 sent a senior official to Cambodia to report on CMAC's immediate financial requirements. He found that there were sufficient funds in the Cambodia Trust Fund to continue funding CMAC for the short term. Beyond that, the United Nations launched an appeal on 17 November for contributions to a new Trust Fund to establish CMAC's operations on a sounder basis, with oversight to be carried out by UNDP. At the urging of a number of countries including Australia, the United Nations has also extended some of the existing international demining personnel for an interim period and agreed to leave UN demining equipment in Cambodia.

 For our part, Australia believes that it is important that as the last members of UNTAC withdraw, our compassion doesn't withdraw with them. We have already pledged a contribution of A$1 million which will provide substantial support for CMAC operations, and we are encouraging others to follow suit.

 In Afghanistan, Australia has provided ADF personnel since 1989 to assist the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance to Afghanistan (UNOCHA) in training Afghan refugees in mine clearance. Ten teams were dispatched on rotations of up to six months to serve with the United Nations Mine Clearance Training Team (UNMCTT) and several personnel provided technical advice to

 UNOCHA.

 Earlier this year, the Minister for Defence decided that Australia would not replace the tenth Australian contingent to UNMCTT, and it returned to Australia in July. Next month, the three remaining ADF members serving as technical advisers to UNOCHA will return to Australia - although it should be noted that we have provided an additional

 $200,000 to UNOCHA to assist with its continuing demining operations and last month Australia hosted a visit to Australia by an Afghan delegation to learn more about mine clearing techniques. It is also worth making the point here that since December 1991,

 Australia was the sole country contributing military personnel to the UN Mine Clearance Training Team in Afghanistan.

 To date, 14,000 Afghans have been trained in mine clearance and a further 1.2 million have been trained in mine awareness. Through our assistance to the demining team, Australia has been able to play a constructive role in the rehabilitation of Afghanistan and our efforts have been acknowledged internationally as such.

 While it is important that we clear up the minefields of the past, it is also important that we look to the future. If we can put in place an international regime that prevents the

 4

 intentional or indiscriminate deployment of mines against civilians, then we can expect to spend less effort and scarce resources cleaning up the mess while also saving many innocent lives.

 In my book Cooperating for Peace - the so-called Blue Book - and in my address to the United Nations General Assembly almost two months ago, I stressed the importance of preventive diplomacy and the powerful role that arms control and disarmament regimes can have in peace building. The very process of their negotiation can have a highly beneficial impact on international peace and security. Over time, these regimes build confidence further as their restraints on arms procurement or military holdings begin to stick.

 In the Blue Book, I make the point that the international community must seek ways of strengthening or extending the existing treaty proscriptions dealing with the use of landmines. I advocated the need for a review of the 1980 Inhumane Weapons Convention, especially Protocol 11 which covers landmines, booby traps and similar devices. As I said in the Blue Book, this treaty must be strengthened through increased adherence - there are currently only 39 parties, including Australia - and more stringent verification and complaints mechanisms.

 Australia has supported the action taken by France earlier this year to draw attention to the need for an early review of the Inhumane Weapons Convention and its Protocols.

 In August, we called for an urgent review of the Convention at the International Conference for the Protection of War Victims in Geneva. The call was supported by delegations from a number of other countries and we expect that the current session of the General Assembly will endorse the holding of a Review Conference.

 If the United States, which is only a signatory, were to become a full party to the Convention and then pressure other countries to do likewise, it would add significant weight to the impact of the Inhumane Weapons Convention. For our part, Australia has already been making representations to regional countries urging them to become party

 to the Convention.

 Another key issue facing us is that current international law fails to cover internal conflicts, like Cambodia. One way to address this lacuna and the lack of parties to the Convention would be to extend restrictions on the production and export of land mines. The United States and France currently maintain moratoria on any mine sales. But the

 problem of locally produced. copies also has to be addressed.

 4 ,

 4

 5

 France has also suggested that the international community ban the use, trade, production and stockpiling of mines that are non-detectable and non-self destructing.

 We are currently looking at the benefits and feasibility of this proposal, which has obvious attractions.

 The Review Conference will also need to consider a mechanism to verify compliance with the convention and procedures in the event of a breach. I don't have to tell you that these are complex and difficult issues: unlike weapons of mass destruction, mines are very common and many of the worst problems they cause are not readily

 susceptible to elimination by the decision of only 39 states. It is important that our actions have early and practical impact. The first step, which is already underway, is to use the Review process to attract serious attention to the mines problem, to address

 the adequacy of the Convention's current provisions and, through these steps, to develop international norms on the use of mines that will encourage more countries to accede to and comply strictly with the rules.

 Against this background, it is eminently right, proper and timely that the Human Rights Council of Australia and Community Aid Abroad should join with other non-government organisations and follow the lead of the International Red Cross to focus world attention on the effects that land mines can have on civilians. It is incumbent on all civilised

 peoples and nations to seek to eliminate their indiscriminate use. I congratulate the organisers of this conference and am happy to lend my support to your efforts to lift both domestic and international awareness of this insidious state of affairs by officially opening the conference.

