---
title: "Annual conference of Ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
date: "1993-06-25"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211181926
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1706996%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC

 AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Senator Nick Bolkus Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 B17/93

 COMMUNIQUE

 ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF MINISTERS FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 Commonwealth, State and Territory Ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs met in Brisbane this week to discuss migration, settlement, multicultural and ethnic affairs issues.

 The Commonwealth Minister, Senator Nick Bolkus, expressed his appreciation for the cooperative participation of his State and Territory colleagues. "This forum has a major role in coordinating activities across the full spectrum of immigration, multicultural and ethnic affairs," he said.

 Such meetings are held annually and are preceded by a meeting of Officials with participation of New Zealand representatives.

 For the first time, representatives of Local Government participated in the Conference. Ministers welcomed this participation in recognition of the strong interests between all three spheres of government in cooperating to facilitate migrant settlement. This followed the initiatives of the Council of Australian Governments in 1992.

 Ministers also welcomed the setting up of a Task Force to examine the settlement of people admitted under Australia's Humanitarian Program.

 Major issues considered by the Ministers this year included:

 the Humanita rian Program , which this year is administered independently from the Migration Program;

 the Migration P ro gram , noting support for current intake levels and composition;

 settlement issues, recognising the significant inroads achieved within the framework of the National Integrated Settlement Strategy;

 COMMONWEALTH

 • PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 MICAH

 J

 _2-

 IancivacYe services, emphasising the development of the National Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters (NAATI) and also emphasising the specific needs of women for access to English language training;

 multicultural affairs in particular the growing appreciation of access and equity issues.

 The Humanitarian Program

 Participants noted the increases in the Humanitarian Programs in both 1992-93 and 1993-94.

 In January 1993 the Commonwealth Government increased the 1992-93 humanitarian program from 10,000 to 12,000 places due to the increased need to respond to current international developments.

 Simultaneously, the Government separated the Humanitarian Program from the Migration Program, in recognition of the need for greater flexibility in dealing with emerging situations requiring a humanitarian response.

 In this context, the Ministers discussed the need for the Commonwealth and the States to coordinate responses sympathetic to an adequate provision of torture and trauma counselling. The Ministers also discussed the implications of detention of boat people.

 Minister's noted that the Commonwealth Government had also decided to enhance coordination between the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Australian International Development Assistance Bureau, to ensure a timely and adequate response to situations of

 humanitarian need, whether in the form of resettlement, diplomatic initiatives or aid.

 An additional 1,000 refugee places are planned for 1993-94, making a total allocation of 13,000 places in that year's Humanitarian Program.

 Migration Program

 Minister's supported an ongoing Migration Program but noted that there was a need for the Program to be consistent with Australia's current economic and social circumstances and requirements.

 - 3-

 Ministers noted the significant decline in applications for migration and the reduced recruitment of overseas skilled workers by business. These factors, in the absence of any policy changes, had led to a slight reduction in the size of the 1993-94 Migration Program and a relative increase in the size of the Family component of the Program.

 Ministers noted that the maintenance of existing policy settings and selection standards in the 1993-94 Program was appropriate and consistent with Australia's current economic conditions.

 The Commonwealth assured the State/Territories that the Migration Program would be monitored closely during the year and any increased interest for employer sponsored skilled migration or business migration would be accommodated by adjusting numbers in the independent category.

 Settlement Issues

 Ministers noted with some satisfaction the progress of developing State and Territory settlement plans within the framework of the National Integrated Settlement Strategy (NISS). Through such planning, all three spheres of government are able to better

 coordinate the delivery of services to migrants, particularly those who have only recently arrived.

 -The establishment of a Task Force within the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs was particularly welcomed. This will be examining, in conjunction with the relevant sub-committee of the Minister's Settlement Advisory Council, the settlement of people admitted under Australia's Humanitarian Program. The outcomes of this

 review are to be submitted to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs by the end of 1993, and relevant aspects will be taken up in the context of the State/Territory settlement planning mechanisms.

 Language Services

 It was agreed that the NAATI is to develop a three year plan for consideration by October 1993. Ministers will use the plan as the basis for setting new directions for. future NAATI activities and its relationships with other organisations.

 The Commonwealth undertook to monitor and report on outcomes from its funding of English-as-a-second language through the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and the Department of Employment, Education and Training programs for consideration by October 1993 and concerns about access by non-English speaking

 background women and disadvantaged groups and people in isolated areas, including those who currently fall outside Commonwealth priorities. This will be designed to further enhance the current program.

 SE

 Multicultural Affairs

 Ministers noted the measures taken by the Commonwealth to implement the findings of its Access and Equity Evaluation Report, and the success of the Australia-wide seminars to promote understanding of the post-evaluation Access and Equity regime which also involved state, territory and local government representatives. Ministers expressed their determination to press Access and Equity measures in all spheres of government.

 Ministers recognised the importance of community relations strategies for an harmonious Australia and the need for governments to playa leadership role.

 The NSW Minister for Multicultural and Ethnic Affairs tabled for the information of the Conference a copy of a review of the question of the racial vilification law of NSW prepared by the Hon James Samios, and their Anti-Discrimination (Amendment) Bill of 1993 which changes the racial vilification laws in NSW. Ministers welcomed this

 package of measures which will further help to both combat racism and discrimination and support the very fabric of our multicultural society.

 Ministers welcomed the Commonwealth's position on the potential economic benefits to Australia arising from our cultural and linguistic diversity, through the productive diversity initiative which is being pursued in partnership with industry and most States/Territories. They were encouraged by the positive direction that the initiative

 had taken so far.

 Next Conference

 The next annual Ministers' Conference is scheduled to be held in the ACT in March 1994.

 Brisbane:  25 June 1993

 Media Inquiries: Ruth Dewsbury 018 624 847

