---
title: "Evans must address failed Cambodia plan: Hill"
date: "1993-04-18"
creators:
  - "Hill, Robert"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211181010
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1801752%22
---

 3

 111.4 1 4L-c4UST ' AL/A

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 SENATOR ROBERT HILL LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE

 Sunday, April 18 42/93

 EVANS MUST ADDRESS FAILED CAMBODIA PLAN: HILL

 The Shadow Minister for Defence, Senator Robert Hill, today criticised the international community and the Australian Government for refusing to address the consequences of the failed Cambodian peace agreement.

 The United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) is no longer supporting a process of national reconciliation and the situation on the ground in Cambodia is deteriorating," Senator Hill said.

 "It is clear that the United Nations peacekeeping forces are locked into a failed peace agreement.

 "Recent events in Cambodia indicate the seriousness of the situation. For instance:

 latest reports indicate that the Khmer Rouge may have withdrawn from the peace process through their departure from the Supreme National Council and Phnom Penh;

 overnight, the Khmer Rouge reportedly said that it would not recognise the result of the May elections in Cambodia and refused to rule out the use of further violence;

 suspected Khmer Rouge guerrillas have attacked areas near UN-held positions with heavy mortar and artillery fire;

 the Khmer Rouge is engaged in a campaign of fear and intimidation and has murdered dozens of Vietnamese settlers and seven UN peacekeepers in the past fortnight;

 Khmer Rouge actions have resulted in a new refugee problem with 12 000 Vietnamese settlers now on the Cambodia-Vietnam border;

 political violence continues by parties contesting the elections;

 the administration of Cambodia - in which the UN is involved - appears to be breaking down; and

 the economic situation is worsening, making the lot of ordinary Cambodians more difficult.

 / 2

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY tvlI CAH

 "The United Nations is obviously floundering in Cambodia. UNTAC

 has been given no clear directions on how to address the ever-growing crisis.

 "The UNTAC forces, including Australian troops, are operating in a dangerous and confused environment.

 "The UN Security Council needs to address the consequences of the failure of the Paris agreement and the actions of the Khmer Rouge in the environment leading up to the May elections.

 "The UN Security Council should also draw up a comprehensive nation-building plan for Cambodia in the post-election period. It must not underestimate the seriousness of the problems which are being created for a new Cambodian Government.

 "The UN must consider how it will support Cambodia after elections. It must consider whether international military support is appropriate given that the Khmer Rouge will remain fully armed, and whether to give Cambodia short-term budgetary support to allow basic services to be maintained.

 "The Australian Government appears to be ignoring the realities of the situation in Cambodia.

 "Senator Evans has painted a false picture of Cambodia for months. His unrealistic optimism and foolish naivety have only delayed the necessity for the Australian Government to address our very real interests in Cambodia.

 "Some aid agencies are reporting that the situation in Cambodia is now worse than before the UN intervened.

 "The Australian Government needs to consider the safety and the future of our defence force personnel with UNTAC. The current term of involvement of Australian troops ends three months after the May elections.

 "Senators Ray and Evans must address the situation in Cambodia as a matter of urgency.

 "The Australian Government should honour its promise to keep the Australian people informed and to consult with the Parliament about the future of Australian troops in Cambodia."

 (ends)

 Enquiries: Mark Batistich on (08) 237 7920 or (08) 224 0167

