---
title: "Federal court orders release of Chinese boat person"
date: "1993-08-13"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211182519
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1706925%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC

 AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Senator Nick Bolkus Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 B23/93

 FEDERAL COURT ORDERS RELEASE OF CHINESE BOAT PERSON

 Mr Jia Xin Tang and 25 other Chinese boat people will be released into the community today following a Federal Court decision that Mr Tang's continuing detention at the Immigration Reception and Processing Centre at Port Hedland is not authorised under the Migration Act.

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, said today that the court had ordered that Mr Tang report to immigration officials once a fortnight and notify the

 department of his intended address, giving 48 hours' notice of any further change of address.

 "Mr Justice Neaves of the Federal Court has determined that the Government is obliged to release Mr Tang from detention," Senator Bolkus said. "Twenty five other asylum seekers who arrived in Australia illegally on the Isabella and are in a similar

 situation to Mr Tang will also be released.

 "The Government will arrange for the 24 people- in the Port Hedland centre to leave for Perth this afternoon. Another two people in custody in Perth will be released later today. The department has been consulting with community groups, who have undertaken to arrange for their accommodation and other needs."

 Senator Bolkus said the Government would appeal Mr Justice Neaves' August 6 ruling that the 273 day limit on detention set by Federal Parliament had expired by the time Mr Tang's

 application for refugee status was refused. "We believe that the cases of all 26 people have been fairly and consistently assessed by the department within the 273 day limit set by Parliament," he said.

 "It is important to remember that Mr Justice Neaves has not overturned any decisions concerning Mr Tang's application for refugee status. Mr Tang lost both his primary and review applications for refugee status."

 Mr Tang is appealing to the Federal Court on the rejection of his refugee status. If he loses the appeal he will be liable to deportation.

 Matters relating to the detention of illegal entrants to Australia by boat are currently under review by the Joint Standing Committee on Migration Regulations, which will report to Parliament in December.

 CANBERRA AUGUST 13 1993 COMMONWEALTH

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 Contact: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860 MiCAH

