---
title: "Invitation for applications for Community Grants Program"
date: "1993-12-10"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211184046
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1706915%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC

 AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Senator Nick Bolkus

 B47/93

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 INVITATION FOR APPLICATIONS FOR COMMUNITY GRANTS PROGRAM

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, today invited ethnic and other community organisations to apply for a number of grants under the Department's 1994-95

 Community Grants Program.

 "The aim of these grants is to address the settlement needs of migrants and to improve their access to government and other services," Senator Bolkus said.

 The Community Grants Program consists of two schemes:

 the Grants-in-Aid Scheme under which grants are awarded normally for three years to assist organisations to employ a specialist social welfare worker; and

 the 'Migrant Access Program Scheme, which provides one-off grants, to assist organisations to purchase equipment or to undertake complex research projects.

 Priority will be given to proposals which address the needs of the following groups of non-English speaking background:

 • recently-arrived migrants, including humanitarian entrants; • other priority groups, such as women, youth, or migrants with significant social, cultural and language difficulties; community groups whose members require settlement services

 which are currently not available from mainstream agencies; • employment-related needs resulting from industrial dislocation; • other groups and needs identified in State/Territory

 settlement plans; special need groups among longer-term residents.

 "I look forward to receiving proposals which strike a balance between services for newly-arrived migrants and refugees, as well as services for longer-term residents including special need groups," Senator Bolkus said. "About $9.5m will be available for

 these grants, which will commence on 1 October 1994.

 "The assessment process will be on a needs basis. A network of Funding Advisory committees representing Commonwealth and State/Territory funding agencies will also assist the Department in the process. The grants would be advertised in tomorrow's press and final decisions would be made by July 1994.

 CANBERRA 10 DECEMBER 1993

 Media queries: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860

 COMMONWEALTH 

 I I4 MIC

 AH

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 n

