---
title: "Special assistance category for Cambodians with Australian links"
date: "1993-10-19"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211183373
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1706968%22
---

 r1

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Senator Nick Bolkus

 B36/93

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 SPECIAL ASSISTANCE CATEGORY FOR CAMBODIANS WITH AUSTRALIAN LINKS

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, has approved the establishment of a Special Assistance Category for Cambodians with close links to Australia.

 The Special Assistance Category (SAC) was introduced to the Government's Humanitarian program in 1991-92 to reach groups with close links to Australia who are in vulnerable situations but who do not fit into the traditional refugee and humanitarian categories.

 "SAC has the flexibility needed to respond to diverse situations of hardship," Senator Bolkus said.

 Senator Bolkus said the decision to implement a SAC in Cambodia reflected the desire of both the Australian Government and community groups to assist people living in Cambodia who have close links with Australia and for whom settlement in Australia is considered appropriate.

 "Its purpose is to enable these people, who would otherwise not be eligible for migration to Australia, to settle here permanently,"'he said.

 "The Cambodians who will be eligible are those normally resident in Cambodia who have close links with Australia and are experiencing hardship as a result of upheavals in that country over recent years.

 "They will be required to have been resident in Cambodia for 12 months before lodgement of an application. Successful applicants will have to meet the usual health and character requirements."

 Senator Bolkus said the program will benefit a range of people with close family ties to Australia, both those who remained in Cambodia and people who had left and-subsequently returned there.

 The latter group includes Cambodians either currently or formerly resident in asylum camps in the region who have returned to Cambodia.

 The program will also be open to people who arrived in Australia illegally by boat from Cambodia between 28 November 1989 and 26 April 1991 and were held in immigration detention for the greater part of their stay before returning to Cambodia - either

 voluntarily or when they were required to do so by law. It will not apply to people covered formally by a deportation order.

 In keeping with United Nations practice, all those returning from Australia will receive the same reintegration assistance as those who have already gone home.

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMEN TARY LIBRARY MICAH

 n

 As they have to date, Australian Embassy officers in Phnom Penh

 will meet returnees on arrival and continue to monitor their progress in Cambodia.

 In all cases, eligible persons will have a close link with Australia by:

 • having a near relative who was either an Australian citizen or permanent resident. A near relative includes parents, children, siblings, aunts, uncles, nephews or nieces; or

 • having arrived unauthorised by boat between 28 November 1989 and 26 April 1991 and having been held in immigration detention for the greater part of their stay in Australia.

 "The Government decides each year which groups are in most urgent need of assistance. Assessment for SAC focuses on those in greatest need of resettlement who have family and other strong community links with Australia."

 Under the 1993-94 Humanitarian Program, about 6,300 places have been allocated to the SAC. SACs are currently in place for minorities from the former USSR; displaced persons from the former Yugoslavia; East Timorese in Portugal; Sudanese; and

 Burmese, both in Burma and Thailand.

 As with all SAC programs, a near relative or supporting community organisation will be required to provide a written undertaking with regard to assistance for successful applicants during the first six months after their arrival in Australia, to help cover:

 • food, clothing, accommodation and household goods;

 • personal support;

 • access to community and public services;

 obtaining employment;

 • language interpretation and securing English language instruction;

 • community involvement and self-reliance.

 Arrivals under the SAC program are granted permanent residency in Australia and can access the full range of Commonwealth benefits on arrival in Australia.  They or their relatives/support groups will be responsible for arranging and

 funding their travel to Australia. (The health levy and bond do not apply under the SAC program).

 The Cambodian SAC program will start this financial year and come into force as soon as the relevant regulation can be gazetted. There will be sufficient places to cover all those who have returned from Australia.

 CANBERRA OCTOBER 19 1993 Contact: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860

