---
title: "Further Australian relief for the former Yugoslavia"
date: "1993-06-10"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211181757
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1619851%22
---

 M88 10 June 1993

 FURTHER AUSTRALIAN RELIEF FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA

 Australia will provide further humanitarian relief worth $200,000 for the former Yugoslavia, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Gareth Evans, announced today.

 "This assistance for the victims of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia will be channelled through the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)," Senator Evans said.

 It brings to $1.55 million the total provided by Australia in humanitarian assistance since the conflict began.

 "Emergency needs for the former Yugoslavia have grown significantly since December 1992. When the first appeal for the former Yugoslavia was launched in December 1991, there were 500,000 in need. Fifteen months later, that number has increased to 3.8 million.

 "Australia has directed most of its assistance through international agencies best able to ensure that aid is received by those most in need.

 "Australian funds will be targeted for the provision of food as the World Food Programme has warned that very little food has been pledged for the period April to December 1993. Basic rations, such as protein biscuits and dried whole milk, are required urgently," Senator Evans said.

 CANBERRA For further information contact AIDAB Public Affairs: Wendy Levy on 06 276 4966 06 247 8920 (AH) David Jones on 06 276 4967 06 241 6248 (AH)

 CO"'AP^?ON`VVEALTH PARLIAl ffNT IRY Li3;;ARY

