---
title: "Hill outlines Coalition approach to key foreign policy issues [and] Priorities in Liberal-National foreign policy, an address to the Victorian branch of the Australian Institute of International Affairs, Melbourne"
date: "1993-03-09"
creators:
  - "Hill, Robert"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "and"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211180784
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2071857%22
---

 lk

  MEDIA RELEASE ono vIA SENATOR ROBERT HILL EP ASAVW 1LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATESHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRSTuesday, march 9 35/93• o: T • • zo ,b1; S ct 4* I el s os I 11/..The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Robert Hill, today outlined the Coalition's approach to several pressing foreign policy issues a Hewson government would need to address immediately after the March 13 election.The issues - Cambodia, Somalia, the Asia Pacific Economic Co- operation (APEC) process, human rights and the environment - had been left unresolved or neglected by the Labor Government.Senator Hill made his comments in a speech in Melbourne to the Australian Institute of International Affairs.CAMBODIASenator Hill said the Paris Peace Agreement for Cambodia had clearly failed, and the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) was no longer supporting a process of reconciliation.Senator Hill said the Coalition believed the Labor Government, and especially Senator Evans, had maintained a naively optimistic view about the events in Cambodia."A Hewson government will review the situation in Cambodia as a matter of urgency," Senator Hill said."We are committed to maintaining Australian troops in Cambodia until the end of their current term of involvement, but make no commitment as to future involvement."The Coalition believed a comprehensive nation-building plan must be drawn up under the auspices of the UN to address: the nature of support for the newly elected Cambodian government after the May elections; appropriate military support for that government; the state of the Cambodian economy) and the continued and co-ordinated reconstruction of Cambodia.SQMALIAAustralia would withdraw its 900 peacekeepers currently with the US-led Unified Task Force (UNITAF) in mid-May, and had agreed to provide 45 personnel to the UN Operation in Somalia(UNOSOM).COMMONWEALTHPARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY NM;AH 	.../2

 2 .

 Senator Hill said the UN would probably press Australia to consider contributing to UNOSOM II more than the 45 pledged to UNOSOM.

 The Coalition did not dispute the need for a greater international commitment of peacekeepers, and would not like to nee the world turn its back on an area of such need.

 "However, in considering our response, we will need to examine a number of issues relevant to our contribution to Africa's areas of need,* Senator Hill said.

 "Any decision that a Hewson government makes with respect to Somalia will be based on a realistic assessment of the situation in Somalia and the competing needs of other parts of the world, including Africa.

 "The Coalition believes that peacekeeping operations have an important role to play in maintaining international peace and stability, but that we must maintain Australia's capacity to respond to other peacekeeping requirements - especially in our region - should any arise.*

 AREC Senator Hill said the Labor Government had done little to focus APEC on regional trade liberalisation, which was vital to Australia's interests in APEC.

 "The Coalition believes APEC must focus on regional trade liberalisation,* he said.

 "To this end, early commencement of regional trade negotiations between APEC participants, focusing on both tariff and non-tariff barriers, is essential.

 "A Hewson government will identify specific areas and sectors where regional trade liberalisation is possible.

 "We will initiate negotiations towards specific targets and timetables in order that a comprehensive plan of action can be drawn up by APEC participants so as to achieve concrete goals with benefits to all APEC's participants."

 iturAN 

 Senator Hill said the Coalition was concerned that Australia was being excluded from the Asia-Pacific regional human rights process as it was currently developing.

 . .4/3

 3.

 "Australia has already been excluded from the regional preparations for the World Conference on Human Rights, to be held in Vienna in June," Senator Hill said.

 He said that under Labor, Australia had not developed sufficiently strong relations with the Asian region to be considered a legitimate player on the issue of human rights.

 "A Coalition Government will support (the aims of the World Conference) and, in contrast to Labor, also stress the positive advantages of respect for human rights and attempt to develop, step-by-step, a regional consensus on the benefits

 for growth and development which recognition of internationally accepted standards of human rights can bring," Senator Hill said.

 In December 1990, the Liberal/National Coalition proposed the development of regional co-operation on human rights to advance respect for human rights in the region.

 ZNIZIRONMENT

 A Coalition Government would explore with Asia-Pacific states the possibility of establishing a regional body to encourage co-operation on environment issues.

 Senator Hill said the body could identify areas of environment management which needed attention, together with states which could provide financial, technological or advisory resources,

 and on this basis develop regional environment action plans.

 "The process would not be designed to be one of conflict, but encourage a spirit of co-operation where the benefits of development and environment protection could be enjoyed by all," he said.

 (ends)

 Enquiries: Mark Batistich on (08) 237 7920

 PRIORITIES IN LIBERAL/NATIONAL

 FOREIGN POLICY

 AN ADDRESS BY SENATOR ROBERT HILL, LEADER OF THE

 OPPOSITION ]IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW MINISTER FOR

 FOREIGN AFFAIRS, TO THE VICTORIAN BRANCH OF THE

 AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

 MELBOURNE

 9 MARCH 1993

 On 12 February, I released the 

 Hewson Government Foreign Affairs Statement

 which outlined the approach that a Liberal/National Coalition Government will take to Australia's international relationships.

 The key message in that statement is that our primary foreign policy aim is to maximise Australia's position as a significant economic and political power in the Asia-Pacific region by the Year 2000.

 This, we believe, will be achieved by using a focused approach which we call enlightened self-interest, where we will clearly identify and vigorously pursue Australia's national interests.

 Our focus is on the Asia-Pacific region because it is vital to Australia's future prosperity. It is where our greatest economic opportunities lie and is vital to our political and security interests.

 However, by focusing on the Asia-Pacific region, we will not neglect traditional friends or allies, nor will we neglect new opportunities in other parts of the world.

 The Liberal/National Coalition will put economic and trade issues at the top of our foreign policy agenda, which we believe is necessary to ensure Australia's future security. The Labor Government has neglected our economic and trading relationships, and instead has poured our limited resources into building grand multilateral initiatives, with little regard to the fundamentals of a successful foreign policy.

 The Liberal/National Coalition's first foreign policy priority, therefore, will be to building strong and substantial bilateral ties with our neighbours. Our next priority will be to pursue Australia's interests at the regional level as a way of promoting

 common interests. Our third priority will be participation in global multilateral forums.

 The emphasis on economic and trade interests does not mean we will overlook other areas of significance. Our concern with the importance of democracy, human rights, peace and stability, means that if Australia is able to constructively contribute to furthering these important goals throughout the world, we will do so commensurate with our resources and expertise.

 The Hewson Government Foreign Affairs Statement and the Liberal/National Trade Policy released by my colleague Andrew Peacock, outline in detail the approach the Coalition will take to further developing our international economic and trade relations and building strong and substantial bilateral relations.

 Today, however, I wish to concentrate on several pressing foreign policy issues which a Hewson Government will need to address immediately following the March 13 election, and which have been left unresolved or neglected by the Labor

 Government.

 2

 The foreign policy priorities which Labor has left, and on which I will focus today,

 are Cambodia, Somalia, APEC, human rights and the environment.

 CAMBODIA

 The Paris Agreement which outlined a peace plan for Cambodia has clearly failed, yet the international community has not faced the fact that the environment in which the United Nations is attempting to operate in Cambodia is fundamentally

 different from that originally envisaged.

 The United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) is no longer supporting a process of national reconciliation. This is obvious in the UN Secretary-General's February 13 report on Cambodia, which was the least optimistic of any of the numerous reports that the UN has made on Cambodia.

 It painted a picture of ceasefire violations by both the Khmer Rouge and Hun Sen's army, violent attacks by the Khmer Rouge against Vietnamese settlers and by Hun Sen's supporters against political party offices, tightened restrictions by the Khmer Rouge on UN personnel in their zone, and the "numerous and large scale" violations by all parties of the moratorium on the export of logs.

 UNTAC's military component has been redeployed to protect voter registration and to support a neutral political environment. This has been necessary because the four Cambodian factions remain fully armed and not cantoned as they should have been under the original plan.

 The Cambodian economy is in chaos, with reports that many government workers have not been paid for many months. A US dollar economy has flourished due to the amount of money flowing in wages to UNTAC personnel, which greatly inflates the prices of commodities to the detriment of ordinary Cambodians. Corruption is reportedly rife.

 There is a danger of a new class of internal refugees being created as a result of the hurried return of the Cambodian refugees from the Thai border and the lack of available cleared land. There has been a shocking lack of progress on mine clearance.

 The rehabilitation and reconstruction of Cambodia is proceeding very slowly and with little coordination. Of the US$880 million pledged in Tokyo last year, only US$95 million has been given. The recent follow-up meeting of aid donors does not appear to have accelerated the process.

 The extent of the problems still existing in Cambodia means there is a pressing need for the international community to address how Cambodia can be supported in the post-election environment.

 We believe that the Labor Government, and especially Senator Evans, has maintained a naively optimistic view about the events in Cambodia and the

 3

 seriousness of the problems which are being created for a new Cambodian

 government.

 A Hewson Government will review the situation in Cambodia as a matter of urgency. We are committed to maintaining Australian troops in Cambodia until the end of their current term of involvement, but make no commitment as to future involvement. Instead, any decision will be based on a thorough and realistic review of the situation.

 We believe a comprehensive nation-building plan must be drawn up by the international community under the auspices of the United Nations Security Council. The Liberal/National Coalition believes that such a plan must address a number of questions:

 - the nature of support for the newly elected Cambodian government after Cambodia's elections, especially given that any new government is likely to be a weak coalition of parties;

 - as the UN Secretary-General indicated in his February report, there remains the problem of appropriate military support given that a new government will have to face a fay armed Khmer Rouge controlling about 15 percent of Cambodia. This support could take the form of military training or assistance with the formation of a police force;

 - the state of the Cambodian economy and the possibility of short-term budgetary support in order that basic services can be maintained; and

 - a plan for the continued and coordinated reconstruction of Cambodia through international aid and assistance.

 We recognise and support Australia's responsibility to continue its role in international efforts to bring peace and democracy to Cambodia, and a Liberal/National Government will remain committed to the goal of creating a stable and peaceful Cambodia.

 However, Senator Evans devoted an enormous proportion of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade's resources to Cambodia. Despite our commitment to Cambodia, a Liberal/National Government will not be able to maintain Labor's level of resource allocation in the future, given the number of other priorities we will have to address in order to achieve our foreign policy goals.

 A Hewson Government, however, will maintain the level of foreign aid to Cambodia committed by the Labor Government, as we acknowledge Cambodia's tremendous need for assistance. We will concentrate on distributing this aid through Non Government Organisations (NG0s) as we recognise the valuable and effective work which NGOs contributed many years before the commencement of official bilateral

 aid.

 4

 SOMALIA

 Another priority which a Coalition Government will need to address is our future contribution to the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II).

 The current situation in Somalia is confused and in disarray. Although the US-led Unified Task Force (UNITAF) has succeeded in delivering humanitarian aid, we are not at all confident that the warlords are reaching an accommodation which will lead to an environment of peace.

 Somalia has presently no effective functioning government, no organised police force and no disciplined national armed force. Moreover, the atmosphere of lawlessness and tension remains, and the disarmament of warring clans has yet to formally

 commence. The US-led UNITAF currently in Somalia has not been comprehensively disarming the factions, but according to the March 3 Secretary-General's report, part of the forthcoming UNOSOM II's mandate will be the "control of heavy weapons" and to "seize small arms".

 The United Nations does not appear at all ready to take over operations from the United States and the US has been critical of this lack of planning. The UN Secretary-General has admitted that a secure environment is far from complete in Somalia and that the hand over from UNITAF to UNOSOM II will be progressive, once UNOSOM II has adequate troops and resources, the majority of which are yet to be firmly committed. This process of a phased transfer of responsibility is supposed to begin on May 1.

 The UN Secretary-General has stated that without improved security the political process cannot prosper and humanitarian operations will remain vulnerable to disruption. Accordingly, he has recommended to the Security Council that

 UNOSOM be enlarged to 28 000 troops (to create UNOSOM II), and be granted a mandate to include peace enforcement. This would include preventing the resumption of violence, maintaining control of heavy weapons, disarming, protecting all ports and airports, mine clearance and assisting in the repatriation of refugees.

 Australia will withdraw our 900 peacekeepers currently with UNITAF in mid-May. We have agreed to provide 45 personnel to UNOSOM. In the light of the Secretary-General's recommendations, the UN will probably press Australia to consider contributing to UNOSOM II significantly more than these planned 45 personnel of

 the Movement Control Unit.

 The Liberal/National Coalition does not dispute the need in Somalia for a greater international commitment of peacekeepers than originally envisaged, and we would not like to see the international community turning its back on such an area of humanitarian need.

 However, in considering our response, we will need to examine a number of issues relevant to our contribution to Africa's areas of need. For instance, is the plight of the people of Somalia greater than those of the people of the Sudan? Would an

 5

 Australian contribution be more useful in Mozambique, given the traditionally closer

 links we have had with Southern Africa and the likelihood that there is a real chance of peace in that country? Can we usefully make new contributions when we have Australian forces committed to Western Sahara?

 Any decision that a Hewson Government makes with respect to Somalia will be based on a realistic assessment of the situation in Somalia and the competing needs of other parts of the world, including in Africa.

 The Coalition believes that peacekeeping operations have an important role to play in maintaining international peace and stability, but that we must maintain Australia's capacity to respond to other peacekeeping requirements - especially in our region - should any arise. In addition, we also need to ensure that Australia's defence force capacity is not weakened by an over-commitment to peacekeeping

 operations - peacekeeping is not the primary mission of our defence force.

 APEC

 The Liberal/National Coalition believes that the Labor Government has done little to focus the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum on regional trade liberalisation which is vital to Australia's interests in APEC.

 APEC was formed in 1989 and has been preoccupied with information exchange and database creation ever since. Yet in the light of developments in the world trading system - such as the uncertainty of the outcome of the current GATT Round and the formation of the North America Free Trade Area (NAFTA) - regional trade liberalisation in the Asia-Pacific is a priority.

 The Coalition believes APEC must focus on regional trade liberalisation. To this end, early commencement of regional trade negotiations between APEC participants, focusing on both tariff and non-tariff barriers, is essential.

 A Hewson Government will identify specific areas and sectors where regional trade liberalisation is possible. We will initiate negotiations towards specific targets and timetables in order that a comprehensive plan of action can be drawn up by APEC participants so as to achieve concrete goals with benefits to all APEC's participants.

 We believe that 1993 provides an opportunity for APEC to accelerate the pace of its efforts.

 We see that the APEC Secretariat has been created in Singapore, which will provide the APEC meetings and working groups with formal support which has been lacking to date.

 The APEC Eminent Person's Group is also to report to the November meeting of APEC ministers. The Coalition has stated that the resources devoted to the Eminent Person's Group could probably have been more usefully directed into areas

 which would bring about practical trade benefits. However, we believe that since it

 6

 has been created, every effort must be made to ensure that the conclusions of the

 Eminent Persons Group go beyond the rhetorical. The terms of reference for the Eminent Person's Group are focused on the long-term aims of APEC. The Coalition will ensure that Australia's contribution to the deliberations are directed to outlining a detailed plan of action towards practical and achievable goals.

 A Coalition Government will also push for a more explicit business input into APEC. We find it difficult to believe that for over three years, any business input into APEC has had to occur in an indirect manner. The Coalition has said that we will establish an APEC Business Advisory Group in Australia to facilitate this.

 We were pleased to read that the current head of the APEC Secretariat, Ambassador Bodde from the US, has signalled that he believes that APEC needs a greater involvement with the business community and it is worthwhile quoting his words:

 "I like to remind myself and my colleagues that it is not governments that trade; it is business people that trade."

 This is something that the Australian Labor Government seems to have forgotten in its enthusiastic pursuit of APEC.

 This year, it is the turn of the United States to assume the lead in APEC deliberations. The Coalition believes that this is an opportunity for the new US Administration to signal clearly its commitment to trade liberalisation in the Asia-Pacific region.

 We noted that in a recent wide-ranging speech to American University, President Clinton made reference to how APEC could assist to liberalise trade across the Pacific region. We see this as an opportunity to work with the US and other APEC members to explicitly further the goals of regional trade liberalisation in APEC. A Hewson Government will work in APEC preparatory meetings, working groups and ministerial meetings, to further this aim.

 HUMAN RIGHTS

 The Coalition is concerned that Australia is being excluded from the Asia-Pacific regional human rights process as it is currently developing.

 Australia has already been excluded from the regional preparations for the World Conference on Human Rights, to be held in Vienna in June. Instead, Australia has been granted observer status at the Asian region meeting, which is to be held at the end of this month.

 We are concerned for a number of reasons. The first is that under the Labor Government, Australia has not developed sufficiently strong relations with the Asian region to be considered a legitimate player on the issue of human rights. Labor's efforts on human rights in the region have been inconsistent, reflexive and patronising, and it is little wonder that regional countries resent Labor's perceived

 7

 intrusions.

 We are also concerned that the Asian region is developing a position for the World Conference which will put the need for development ahead of the need to respect human rights. Without input from countries such as Australia, which can promote a moderate position which recognises the positive advantages of simultaneous efforts

 at growth and development and respect for human rights, there is a danger that the World Conference will not achieve much of what it has set out to do.

 The aims of the World Conference to review and assess progress in human rights, and to identify obstacles to progress, are worthy of serious pursuit.

 A Coalition Government will support these aims and, in contrast to Labor, also stress the positive advantages of respect for human rights and attempt to develop step-by-step, a regional consensus on the benefits for growth and development which recognition of internationally-accepted standards of human rights can bring.

 To this end, in December 1990, the Liberal/National Coalition proposed the development of regional cooperation on human rights in order to advance respect for human rights in the Asia-Pacific region. The Asia-Pacific region is the only region in the world without such a body.

 We proposed the establishment of an informal regional consultative body with representatives from governments and non-government groups in order to promote a greater understanding of human rights issues and practices compatible with international law.

 We suggested that such a regional group could have a number of aims. It could increase the knowledge of participants of human rights standards and obligations, and promote the adherence of participants to international human rights instruments. It could objectively collect and disseminate information regarding human rights successes and violations in the region. Promoting the benefits of human rights endeavours is very important as respect for human rights should be seen as a positive process, with gains flowing to both governments and individuals.

 We also said that such a group could ultimately work towards a regional human rights convention, a regional human rights commission and possibly a regional court.

 Since this proposal, we have seen consistent violations of human rights, such as in Burma, Vietnam, China and East Timor. Yet we have also seen a movement within the region towards a greater focus on human rights issues.

 A recent UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) sponsored workshop in Jakarta - attended by delegates of thirty governments - reached the conclusion that national human rights institutions would have an important role to play in protecting human rights. Indonesia, Sri Lanka and India all indicated that they

 were in the process of establishing such institutions.

 8

 The workshop also concluded that a step-by-step strategy should be adopted to

 establish regional machinery for the protection and promotion of human rights.

 The Chairman of the workshop recommended that a first step could be setting up suitable sub-regional machinery for human rights information dissemination. This is currently being explored by ASEAN which is expected to report at the next ASEAN Foreign Ministers Meeting mid-year.

 The Chairman suggested that the next step could be the establishment of an Asia Forum to enhance exchange of ideas and experiences in order to promote human rights activities. This in turn could be used to design machinery at a sub-regional or regional level to promote and protect human rights.

 In addition to efforts through the World Conference on Human Rights, a Liberal/National Coalition Government would give priority to exploring these ideas with regional states to assist and enhance a process of cooperation.

 We believe that a consensus approach is very important, but that a consensus needs to be developed which is compatible with basic standards of human rights as enshrined in international law. We believe that the growth and development of the

 Asia-Pacific region will be enhanced by the protection and promotion of human rights.

 ENVIRONMENT

 Another area of priority in a Liberal/National foreign policy - one which the Labor Government has neglected - is participation in regional cooperation on the environment and sustainable development.

 The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), which was held last year, set in place ways in which the international community as a whole could start to address environment issues. However, there was no equivalent agreement on ways to address regional environment issues of concern to Australia and other regional countries.

 The Liberal/National Coalition recognises that the issue of the management of the environment is very difficult, and that there is considerable difference of opinion between developed and developing nations. At UNCED, for instance, developing states argued that they should not be expected to forgo wealth creation through

 adopting the standards of countries which had already gone down the development path. The argument was that commitments of funding and technology transfer should be made before developing nations would commit to environmental priorities.

 Since UNCED, the international 53 member Sustainable Development Commission to implement Agenda 21 has been established. There is still considerable debate on the level of international scrutiny of national policies that the Commission will be empowered to undertake, and the relationship between it and other UN agencies. In addition, the issue of funding to implement Agenda 21 has been contentious, with

 9

 agreement regarding the structure and operation of the Global Environment Facility

 still outstanding.

 It is apparent that international agreement and action on the environment is going to be difficult. However, Agenda 21 is the most comprehensive plan of international action on the environment ever drawn up. It is important therefore to see UNCED

 as the beginning of a process, rather than an end in itself. It is now up to states to translate global objectives into national policies, and cooperate to this end.

 The Coalition recognises that poverty is one of the greatest threats to the sustainability of the environment, and that economic development is necessary to protect the environment. We believe that Australia can play an international role with aid, trade and investment which will encourage sound economic policies and the successful transfer of environmentally relevant technology.

 In addition, we believe that Australia is well placed to encourage the process of cooperation on the environment in our Asia-Pacific region. The Coalition is surprised that at UNCED there was no suggestion that regional bodies be established to continue the process and provide a more focused regional approach.

 A Liberal/National Government will explore with Asia-Pacific states the possibility of establishing a regional body to encourage cooperation on environment issues.

 We would envisage such a body identifying areas of environment management which need attention, together with states which could provide financial, technological or advisory resources, and on this basis then develop regional environment action plans. The process would not be designed to be one of conflict, but encourage a spirit of cooperation where the benefits of development and environment protection could be enjoyed by all.

 We believe there may be scope for such cooperation under the auspices of a UN regional body. ESCAP is one such body, but we believe that the geographic scope of ESCAP is possibly too wide and too unwieldy for effective cooperation on Asia-Pacific regional issues. The Coalition believes that the UN should examine its

 definition of the Asia-Pacific in order for UN regional bodies to be of greater use in addressing issues such as the environment.

 In addition, the Coalition believes there is potential to increase Australia's cooperation with Japan on the issue of the environment, building on shared experiences of working together, such as in Cambodia. Given Japan's prominent position during the UNCED process, a Coalition Government would be prepared to explore with Japan a partnership in support of environmental concerns of the developing nations of the Asia-Pacific region.

 CONCLUSION

 I have dwelt today on five pressing foreign policy issues that a Hewson Government

 10

 would need to address after March 13. These would be addressed simultaneously

 with our efforts to focus Australia's foreign policy on improving our economic and trading opportunities and building strong bilateral ties with our neighbours.

 They are issues which are outstanding in Australian foreign policy and which will demand our attention. Each is important individually and our approach to each represents different aspects of our general approach to foreign policy.

 Australia's effort in Cambodia, for instance, is important for the stability of Cambodia itself and the region, and Australia's interests are directly involved through the deployment of Australian peacekeepers.

 Somalia, in turn, represents an instance outside our region where the pressing humanitarian needs meant that Australia's contribution was necessary and valuable. But we believe that Australia's interests must be realistically assessed before any decision is made on our future commitment to peacekeeping in Somalia and Africa.

 APEC represents another arm of foreign policy. It is an instance where our interests in trade and economic opportunities, and regional cooperation, can be brought together. We believe that Australia can go further in APEC by encouraging it to address regional trade liberalisation which would benefit not only Australia, but all APEC's participants.

 Encouraging regional cooperation on human rights and the environment for the positive benefits which such cooperation can bring is also important for Australia's interests, and for regional stability and development. Yet we will not approach these issues on the grand initiative scale of the Labor Government, rather with a'

 consistency which will bring credibility to our position.

 If Australia is to have an effective relationship with the Asia-Pacific region we need to address not only domestic economic reform and the pursuit of trade and economic opportunities, but also work at the more difficult areas such as human rights and the environment.

 The Liberal/National Coalition believes Australia should be a respected part of the Asia-Pacific region and that our approach to issues of sensitivity needs to be consistent and predictable. It is only through creating confidence in Australia's

 approach that the strong and stable bilateral ties that we wish to build, and on which our foreign policy approach depends, will be able to be achieved.

 11

