---
title: "Australia to accept more refugees"
date: "1993-05-26"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211181395
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1706987%22
---

 3A

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Senator Nick Bolkus Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 B 7/93

 AUSTRALIA TO ACCEPT MORE REFUGEES

 Australia will accept up to 13 000 people in need of humanitarian resettlement during 1993-94, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus announced today.

 "This is an increase of 1000 over the last year's figure and reflects the Federal Government's strong commitment to Australia's refugee and humanitarian programs," Senator Bolkus said.

 Senator Bolkus said the Program comprised three components:

 Refugee, for those persons overseas fleeing persecution and who met the United Nations definition of a refugee;

 Special Humanitarian for those who, while not refugees, had suffered gross violations of their human rights; and

 Special Assistance, for those who had experienced hardship and suffering (for example, groups in serious danger because of conflict) and who had close links with Australia.

 "In determining the figure of 13 000 places overall, I have balanced various factors, including assessments of resettlement needs by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the wide support I heard expressed during my recent community consultations, and Australia's capacity to assist within our international obligations," he said.

 "There are many thousands of people in the world who have been displaced from their homes and for whom resettlement in a third country as refugees is their only option.

 "In recognition, I have decided to allocate the extra 1000 places to the Refugee component, making a total of 4000 places available".

 In addition, 6350 places (increased from 5474) have been allocated to Special Assistance, and 2650 places will be available in the Special Humanitarian category (up from 2475), including an extra 400 for women at risk.

 f

 -2-

 (Last year's total of 12 000 included 1100 places allocated to finalise applications under former policies for residence in Australia on humanitarian grounds.)

 Senator Bolkus said that he had also decided to establish a departmental Task Force to review and advise on settlement requirements for people entering Australia through the Program.

 "It will be headed by a senior officer of my Department and will work in consultation with the Settlement Advisory Council's sub-committee dealing with these matters".

 The Minister said these initiatives complemented measures taken by the Government in January this year to separate the Refugee and Humanitarian Program from the general migration program, and to enhance co-ordination with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Australian International Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB) and his Department

 concerning Australia's response to refugee situations.

 "Australia also provides assistance to refugees and displaced persons through AIDAB," Senator Bolkus said. "Some $50 million has been allocated-for acute humanitarian needs of people this year.

 "I see our overseas aid and humanitarian programs as complementing each other. For instance ., Australia continues to provide substantial assistance, to Indochinese refugees throughout the region.

 "Services for women are a feature of both programs, and the overseas aid program to the former Yugoslavia earmarks special funds for women and children".

 CANBERRA 26 May 1993

 MEDIA INQUIRIES: Minister's Office: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 264 2726

 DIEA Frank Johnston (06) 264 4276

