---
title: "More Australian aid for Somalia"
date: "1993-12-13"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211184084
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1650155%22
---

 /37

 in 173 13 December 1993

 MORE AUSTRALIAN A ID FOR SOMALIA

 Australi a will provide a further $3 milli on for relief activities in Somalia, the Minister for Fore ign Affairs, Gareth Evan s, said today.

 "Australia will provide suppo rt for United Nations agencies, and Australian non government organisations in their efforts to rehabilitate Somalia," Senator Evans said.

 "It is estimated that the combined effects of conflict and drought have resulted in the deaths of 300,000 Somalis.

 "With Australian help, UN agencies and many NGOs are now working to resto re wells, schools, roads and agriculture to help minimise future loss of life,"Senator Ev ans said.

 AID AB will provide $1 million to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to help with voluntary repatriation programs for Somali refugees in neighbouring countries.

 UNICEF Australia will use $900,000 for a project to assist a minimum of 70,000 children in central Somalia. The project will provide textbooks and basic education kits for up to 60 schools.

 Community Aid Abroad will use $300,000 to purchase tools, seeds and fishing equipment for a resettlement program in the Juba valley. The project will help meet the needs of an influx of an estimated 250,000 people by the end of December.

 World Vision Australia will use $425,000 for a p rimary health program near Baidoa. The program will emphasise women and children's health in an a ttempt to reduce mortality rates. A mobile clinic will be established to service about 30 villages. World Vision will also provide health worker training, medical supplies and equipment.

 CARE Australia, the first Australian NGO to establish a perm anent presence in Somalia, will use $330,000 for a community water supply project in the Baidoa district. The project will improve water supplies for 21 villages. -

 The latest fundingbrings total Australian Government aid for Somalia to $11.5 million since 1991.

 CANBERRA

 For further information contact: Kate Wall (Minister's Office) 06 277 7500

 David Jones (AID AB) 06 276 4967

 CO^.siv,O,^' BALI 3-1 PARLIIAN,EE'tiTAPY L1"BABY

 V;11CAH

