---
title: "National Council for International Year of the Family"
date: "1993-07-22"
creators:
  - "Crowley, Rosemary"
source: "MINISTER FOR FAMILY SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211182279
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1610346%22
---

 1y

 h

 1 NEWS

 RELEASE RC 18/93

 Senator Rosemary Crowle

 Minister for Family Services Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Status of Women

 NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF THE FAMILY

 The Federal Minister for Family Services, Senator Rosemary Crowley, today announced the membership of a National Council for the International Year of the Family.

 The Council will be chaired by Bettina Cass, Professor of Sociology and Social Policy at the University of Sydney. Professor Cass AO brings to the Council extensive policy research experience in family and social policy issues.

 Her recent policy work has covered family income support, family and children's services, housing and the family and work and family issues.

 Jennifer Rowe, the previous chairperson of the Council, has stepped down from the position for work and family reasons. Senator Crowley thanked Ms Rowe for her valuable contribution to the International Year of the Family and wished her every success in the future.

 The peak council was formed as part of Australia's commitment to the International Year of the Family (IYF), declared for 1994 by the United Nations.

 Announcing the Council's membership, Senator Crowley said it would aim to stimulate public debate and increase understanding of issues affecting the family. It will consult with the community and liaise with international, national and other

 bodies involved in IYF and related activities.

 "Australia's involvement in the International Year of the Family is designed to encourage community-wide debate about family issues and to stimulate reform of programs and services for families across the country.

 "This agenda signifies the Government's long term commitment to the improvement of family life in Australia," Senator Crowley said.

 "The National Council will address family related issues in a comprehensive manner.

 COF.1,Vj01NWEAL 1 H PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

 _2_

 'It will spur all Governments to review services to ensure they meet the changing needs of families of all shapes and sizes, and from differing backgrounds.

 For more information and interviews contact, Julie Power, Senator Crowley's press secretary on 06 2777240.

 Professor Cass can be contacted on 02 692 2653.

 Thursday July 22, 1993.

 -2-

 'It will spur all Governments to review services to ensure they meet the changing needs of families of all shapes and sizes, and from differing backgrounds.

 For more information and interviews contact, Julie Power, Senator Crowley's press secretary on 06 2777240.

 Professor Cass can be contacted on 02 692 2653.

 Thursday July 22, 1993.

 0

 a

 Minister announces members of National Council for The

 International Year of the Family.

 Family Services Minister Senator Rosemary Crowley today announced the names of the people who have been appointed to the National Council for the International Year of the Family.

 The Council will advise Senator Crowley on a number of issues including the need for services to meet the requirements of all Australian families.

 The Council will be made up as follows:

 CHAIR Professor Bettina Cass BA(Hons 1), PhD, Fellow of the Academy of Social Sciences,AO.

 Bettina Cass is Professor of Sociology and Social Policy at Sydney University. She is also Commissioner (Part-Time) on the Law Reform Commission working in the Reference concerned with legislation on Community Services.

 She has also held the position as a Consultant Director on the Social Security Review(1986-1988).

 She has been the Chairperson of the National Children's Services Advisory Council and Deputy Chair of the Australian Institute of Family Studies.

 Professor Cass lives in Sydney.

 EXECUTIVE Father David John Cappo Assoc.Dip.S.W, B.A.S.W.

 David Cappo is the National Director of the Australian Catholic Social Welfare Commission. He is a former Director of Pastoral Formation at St Francis Xavier Seminary and former Justice of the Peace for South Australia.

 He has worked extensively in the Social Work field in the areas of adoption, fostering, child abuse, marriage and family counselling, crisis intervention, supervision of young offenders, policy planning and development of Social Welfare Programs.

 He is currently a resident of Canberra.

 Mr. Johnson lives in Sydney.

 Mr Stan Kelly

 Stan Kelly is Chairman of Tissus Michels International Pty. Ltd. He is a member of the International League of Societies for Persons with Mental Handicaps, President of the National

 Council on Intellectual Disability, Director of the N.S.W Council on Intellectual Disability,.

 Mr. Kelly is also a Fellow of the Australian Institute of Management, an Honorary life member of the N.S.W Society for Children & Young Adults with Physical Disabilities and is a Justice of the Peace.

 He is married with 4 children, 10 grandchildren and one great grandchild and lives in Sydney.

 Brian Knox, Master of Public Administration (Harvard), BA(ANU) BL(ANU)

 Brian Knox is a Barrister and a member of the Refugee Review Tribunal.

 He has been the Commonwealth Director of Legal Services for NSW, The Principal Registrar of the Family Court of Australia and acting Secretary on the Senate Select Committee on Securities and Exchange.

 Mr.Knox is a consultant for the Australian Police Staff College and for the Civil Aviation Authority, Chairman of the Social Security Appeals Tribunal and is an instructor at the NSW College of Law.

 He is married with two children and lives in Sydney.

 Dr. John Michael Schubert, BE, Ph.D, FIEAust, TTS, CPEng.

 John Schubert, a Chemical Engineer is Managing Director of Pioneer International. He is a member of the Business Council of Australia, Chairman of the Business Council's Taxation Committee, Vice-President of the Australian Mines and Metals Association, a Member of the Board of the Australian Institute of Petroleum, a Member of the Board of the Commonwealth Bank of Australia, a Member of the Board of the Australian Graduate

 School of Management, and the Chemical College Board of the Australian Institution of Engineers.

 He is also a Governing Board Member of Workskill Australia, a Trustee of the Australian Trade Union Program at Harvard Foundation and a National Council Member of the Australian Opera.

 She has been the Executive Officer of the Playgroup

 Association of S.A. Inc, a teacher at the Specific Learning Difficulties Association and Principal of St. Mary's Convent Preparatory School, Cambridge.

 Ms. Simmons is a representative on the Children's Services State Consultative Committee and was South Australian Chair of Children's Week, and a State Delegate on the Playgroup Council of Australia.

 She is married with two children and lives in South Australia.

 Mrs. Jan Sneyd

 Jan Sneyd is the Chairperson of the Upper and Mid North Rural Justice Committee.

 She has also been involved in the provision of resource material to the Social Policy Research Centre, the co-ordination of farm safety education seminars and an

 analysis of the Draft Code of Practice for Child Safety on Farms.

 Mrs. Sneyd is the mother of two children and lives in Booleroo, South Australia.

 Envoy David John Eldridge

 David Eldridge is the Program Development Officer of the Salvation Army State Social Services and Co-ordinator of the Brunswick Salvation Army Community Program.

 He has spent many years working on the issue of homelessness including work with homeless young people, adult singles and homeless families. He has been involved as a committee member on the Burdekin Response Group and was previously Chair of the Victorian Community Referennce Group on Youth Homelessness.

 Mr. Eldridge lives in Melbourne.

 Mrs Ailsa Bond.

 Ailsa Bond, a housewife and Community Pharmacist has been involved with the community for many years. She is a Local Government representative for the South Ward, Beaconsfield Council in Tasmania and is involved with a number of

 organisations including Family Day Care, Waterbird Haven Rosevears, Riverside Community Centre, Tamar River Improvement Planning Committee and the Computer Assessment Team.

 She is Tasmanian Chairperson for the National Consumer Forum

 for the Aged and is a member of the Postal Services

 Consultative Council as member representing rural and isolated Australia.

 Mrs. Bond is the Country Women's Association's member on the National Rural Health Alliance and this year was made Citizen of the Year by the Beaconsfield Municipality Council in the

 Australia Day Awards.

 She is married with six children and eight grandchildren and lives in Launceston.

 "

  International Year. of the Family.

 Australian Families In June 1992 there were 4,586,800 Australian families (ABS).

 AUSTRALIA

 1994

 Marital Status

 Marriage levels remain high, despite a 20 per cent decline since 1966. The major change in marriage patt erns is mar riage at later ages. More than 80 per cent of today's young people want to mar ry and expect their marriages to last.

 60 per cent of people over the age of 15 are married. Around three qua rters of these are first marriages.

 • 85 per cent of Australian families are two parent families, just over half of which have dependent children.'

 Divorce rates have increased significantly since the mid 60's. Around 35 per cent of marriages in Australia currently end in divorce.

 Sole parent families represented 9 per cent of all Australian families in 1992, an increase from 7.5 per cent a decade ago. For almost 90 per cent of these families, women were the sole parent. The majority of sole parent families (more than 80 per cent) are formed following separation, divorce and widowhood.

 The Work Force

 The movement of women into the work force has been one of the most impo rtant social changes in recent years in Australia; from 35 per cent of married women in 1970 to 53 per cent in 1992. This movement has been pa rticularly strong since 1984, for mothers with dependent children in both two parent and sole parent families. A significant number of employed mothers work pa rt-time - 60 per cent of mothers in two parent families and more than 40 per cent of sole mothers are employed pa rt-time.

 In 1991, both pa rtners were employed in 53 per cent of two parent families with dependents, and 39 per cent of those without.

 Of those sole parent families with children under 15 years, 47 per cent of sole mothers and 69 per cen t . of sole fathers were employed.

 Childcare

 In November 1990, over one million families used childcare (preschools, day care, occasional care, family and f riends). The main reason given for using childcare was "work related", although families also use childcare for a range of other family related purposes.

 Ageing Population

 The issue of aged care is becoming increasingly relevant. In 1987 there were 1.7 million people aged 65 and over in Australia (10.7 per cent of the population). In 1991, there were 1.9 million people aged 65 or over (11.3 per cent of the population) and by 2011, the number is expected to be 2.9 million people (13.5 per cent of the population).

 37 per cent of people aged 65 and over who currently live in the communi ty need some form of help from others, and this help is usually provided by family members.

 'Dependents include 15-24 year olds who are studying. Source: ABS and Australian Institute of Family Studies

 Commonwealth Depa rtment of Health, Housing, Local Government and ^^^ Community Se rvices

