---
title: "Australian assistance for Irian Jaya border crossers in PNG"
date: "1993-01-07"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211179673
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1617643%22
---

 No.

 Date

 M3 7- January 1993

 Australian assistance for Irian Jaya border crossers in PNG

 Australia will provide $300,000 to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) program for Irian Jaya border-crossers in Papua New Guinea, the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, John Kerin, announced today.-"At present there are 3,500 refugees from Irian Jaya receiving assistance from

 UNHCR in Papua New Guinea," Mr Kerin said.

 'During the coming year about 2,000 refugees will be relocated from border areas to a settlement at East Awin.

 Since 1984-85 Australia has been the major donor to this UNHCR program providing a total of $7.7 million. In the past Australia has provided about half of the program's annual budget. Through the program, the UNHCR has assisted the refugees with food, transport, household needs, education, agriculture and livestock, and income generation projects.

 "Australia welcomes the move by the Government of Papua New Guinea to assume greater financial responsibility for the refugees.

 "The PNG commitment will now enable the UNHCR to wind down its operations by June.

 With the winding down of UNHCR operations Australia has been enabled to reduce its financial commitment to the program.

 Australian assistance for the UNHCR border crossers program is provided through AIDAB, Australia's overseas aid agency.

 CANBERRA

 For further information contact AIDAB Public Affairs: David Jones (06) 276 4960 or A.H (06) 241 6248

