---
title: "Government to appeal federal court decision on boat person"
date: "1993-08-26"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211182699
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1706924%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC

 AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Senator Nick Bolkus Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 B26/93

 GOVERNMENT TO APPEAL FEDERAL COURT DECISION ON BOAT PERSON

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, confirmed today that the Federal Government will appeal the recent Federal Court ruling in the case of Jia Xin Tang v the Federal Government.

 Mr Justice Neaves ruled earlier this month that the 273 day limit on detention set by Federal Parliament had expired by the time Mr Tang's application for refugee status was refused.

 "The Government disagrees with Justice Neaves' interpretation of the 273-day limit and will lodge an appeal-to the full Federal Court," Senator Bolkus said.

 Justice Neaves found that Mr Tang's continuing detention at the Immigration Reception and Processing Centre at Port Hedland was not authorised. As a result, Mr Tang and 25 other Chinese boat people were released into the community.

 Senator Bolkus said that six other boat people affected by Justice Neaves' decision would be released today from detention in Port Hedland.

 The six are three Chinese and three Vietnamese who arrived in Australia by boat on 4 March 1991 and 26 April 1991 respectively.

 "A detailed examination of the circumstances surrounding the continuing detention of all boat people following the decision of Justice Neaves has cast some doubt on whether the decisions on refugee status for the six people were made within the 273 day period as interpreted by Justice Neaves," Senator Bolkus said.

 "I have therefore decided they should be released into the community subject to certain reporting conditions.'

 Senator Bolkus noted that all boat people in detention, including the 26 Chinese boat people released earlier this month and the six being released today, had been determined at both primary and review stages not to be refugees. They are awaiting the results of judicial review"bproceedings.

 CANBERRA 26 AUGUST 1993

 COMMOMNEALTH

 PARLJAM,NTAp ^I^RAR

 Contact: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860 M1CAH

