---
title: "The challenge of Asia for Australian foreign policy: address to the Australian Institute of International Affairs, Brisbane"
date: "1993-09-15"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211182978
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1642999%22
---

 cji

 M141 15 September 1993

 Attached is Senator Evans's address to the Australian Institute of International Affairs - the 1993 Heindorf Memorial Lecture - entitled "The Challenge of Asia for Australian Foreign Policy."

 Embargoed until delivery, approx 8pm.

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

 A 

 4

 THE CHALLENGE OF ASIA FOR AUSTRALIAN FOREIGN POLICY

 The 1993 Heindorff Memorial Lecture by Senator Gareth Evans, Minister for Foreign Affairs, to the Queensland Branch of the Australian Institute of International Affairs, Brisbane, Wednesday 15 September 1993

 In a few years time, people in the Republic of Australia will look back on the late 1980s and early 1990s as a crucial watershed in Australian history - a period when as a nation we set about, for the first time, to grapple seriously and systematically with our place in the world - and to proceed on the basis that our future lay in geographical reality rather than historical nostalgia.

 Over the past half century, there have been many attempts by Australians to connect with Asia. But up until the early 1970s, with certain notable exceptions, Australian policy makers failed to develop an interest in Asia, or an analytical capacity to understand the change at work there.  Our political, cultural and human relations with most Asian countries, conducted against the backdrop of the White Australia policy, never really got beyond the formative stages, and our economic relationships were overwhelmingly with Europe and North America.

 Nonetheless, some genuine attempts at engagement with Asia were made. Immediately after the Second World War, for example, the Chifley Labor Government gave strong support to the establishment of Indonesia's independence.  The Menzies Governments, and in particular Foreign Ministers Spender and Casey, played important roles in the introduction of the Colombo Plan and the development assistance programs which followed, as well as in the steady growth of diplomatic

 XXVI/93

 2

 relations with both old and newly-emerging Asian nations.

 Trade relations with Japan were actively pursued in the 1960s:

 so much so that by 1970 Japan was Australia's largest trading partner, and has remained so ever since. And of course when the Whitlam Labor Government came to power in 1972, it not only took the major decisions to recognise China and end our entanglement in Vietnam but generally set the conduct of our

 foreign policy on a more independent and regionally focused course.

 Until fairly recently, however, it has been difficult to argue that any really fundamental change of national mindset was underway. I continue to think that one of the really key conceptual breakthrough in the way in which we have come to think about our international role came with the Defence White Paper presented to Parliament in 1987 by the then Defence Minister Kim Beazley. That spelt out for the first time in our history a coherent policy of defence self reliance - being

 able to look after ourselves, at least in all contingencies short of all-out war, without need to rely on our traditional 'great and powerful friends'. The new confidence in our defence capability engendered by the White Paper and its subsequent implementation did, in a very important sense, liberate Australian foreign policy, enabling Australian foreign ministers henceforth to think in a much more free-wheeling way about how Australian national interests might be protected and advanced.

 Bill Hayden's period as Foreign Minister, which coincided with the development and initial implementation of the White Paper, was certainly one of the most fertile and active on record. It saw, among other things, the establishment of a much more balanced relationship with the United States, the beginning of a very active Australian involvement in the international arms control and disarmament debate; the amalgamation of the Departments of Foreign Affairs and Trade into a single new entity; and among other developments in Asia, the establishment of close relations with Vietnam and initial

 3

 attempts to break the awful impasse that had developed over Cambodia.

 In 1989, not long after I became Foreign Minister, international events erupted in a way which very much consolidated the emerging sense that Australia had to find its basic destiny in its own region - and think quickly and comprehensively about how to maximise that destiny. The collapse of Soviet communism and the end of the Cold War forced a fundamental reassessment, in the Asia Pacific region as everywhere else, of security and strategic realities that had derived from the East-West ideological confrontation. The case became compelling for thinking about regional security relationships in a new way, with countries coming to see that their future security was best guaranteed by building multiple layers of interdependence between nations - finding security with others rather than against them.

 We had already been persuaded - certainly by the mid 1980s -about the need to think in new ways about our economic destiny. Slow economic growth in most of the industrialised

 world, contrasted with the spectacular growth that was beginning to take place to our north; the agonising stop-start of the Uruguay Round; and declining world prices for our traditional commodity exports, all led us to realise that we

 needed to restructure in a fundamental way the whole Australian economy, to make us more competitive and outward looking.

 For most Asian countries, the 1980s were a period of unparalleled prosperity as they pursued export-oriented growth policies that saw many of them growing by 8 per cent or more a year. By the mid 1980s it was not just the Australian Government, but the whole Australian business community, that was starting to focus as never before on trade and investment with the region. It took some time for the interlinkages between domestic and external policies to be fully appreciated

 (and there are still those, not least in the Senate, who have

 4

 trouble in understanding how macro- and micro-economic policy, trade policy and domestic prosperity are interconnected). But for the last few years we have been embarked on nothing less than the transformation of the Australian economy, with the primary objective of enabling thereby Australian business to reposition itself to take full advantage of our proximity to the booming Asian markets.

 When one adds together what has been happening across the whole spectrum of Australian external policy - economic and otherwise - it is evident that for the past five years or so we have been travelling at break-neck speed. Many Australians are still coming to terms with the pace of change. So let me take this opportunity to pause - at least for one evening -and ask where have we got to. How deep is Australia's new relationship with its region? What are its most important characteristics? What challenges does it pose for us as we make our way to a new century?

 it should be acknowledged at the outset that there are always going to be some limitations on the extent to which Australia is, or can be, part of Asia.  Geographically - or geomorphologically - we are not so much in Asia , but alongside it. What we are unequivocally part of is the Asi a Pacific region - embracing East Asia, Oceania, North America

 (and, in some accounts at least, the Pacific coast of Latin America as well). Australia was always conscious of itself as, geopolitically, a Pacific nation - with long-established and close relationships with the Pacific island countries, and across the ocean to the United States and Canada. The big change of recent years is that 'Pacific' by itself is no longer adequate to describe either our sense of place, or others' sense of our place: we look out upon the world, and interact with it, not only facing east-north east, but due north as well.

 Demographically, Australia is overwhelmingly more European than Asian, and will remain so. 	 But it is important to

 5

 appreciate how rapidly things are changing as a result of non-European immigration over the last twenty years - and in particular as a result of a generous refugee resettlement policy which has involved us, for example, in being easily the highest per capita recipient in the world of Indo-Chinese refugees. There are already over 600,000 Australians of Asian descent and on present trends, within a generation one in ten Australians are likely to have that heritage.

 Even with these population trends - and with the ever increasing number of Asian students and tourists living and visiting in our midst - it is probably the case that Australia will never 'look' quite as Asian as Japan or Vietnam. But it

 is reasonable to ask the question these days: given the differences in linguistic, ethnic and cultural identity that exist in that huge arc of the earth's surface from Japan to Afghanistan, what is it to be. 'Asian'? Is there really any self-evident reason why, these days, Indonesians should be seen as having more in common with Koreans, than with Australians, or why India should be seen as having more in common with Japan than ourselves?

 The point as we see it, is that there are many factors producing convergence in the way in which countries with hitherto very different backgrounds are seeing issues more the

 same way, doing things more the same way, and developing institutions and processes that are ever more alike.  There are now many factors, in our own Asia-Pacific geographical region, which are working to create a sense of community  that has hitherto been quite lacking - and, moreover, a sense of community that certainly embraces within it countries like our own, as insiders rather than outsiders. This is a theme to which I will return before I conclude.

 Australia's most', developed connection with Asia is economic, and the story is worth telling in a little detail. At one

 Ij

 6

 level we have been doing business with Asia for a very long time, taking advantage in Australia of the natural fit between our raw materials and the needs of North East Asia as it industrialised: Japan has been our biggest market since 1966, and, as I have already noted, our biggest overall trading partner since 1970.  Moreover, Australian technical specialists have long been active in the region, and many scores of thousands of Asians have studied in Australia.

 But having realised a decade ago that, by the continued operation of inward-looking protectionist policies, we were profoundly limiting the opportunity to link our economy more comprehensively to the dynamic growth occurring in Asia. we set about a massive program of structural reform.  The resulting internationalisation of the Australian economy has seen the pattern and direction of Australia's trade change dramatically over the last ten years. Perhaps most important

 in all this is that the share of our output exported has almost doubled to 20 per cent.

 In 1992, Australian exports reached record levels. What was particularly reassuring about this performance was that it was achieved despite recession in a number of Australia's major trading partners, very subdued world trading conditions generally and continued weakness in world commodity prices.

 While merchandise exports continued their rise by 9 per cent after a 10 per cent increase in 1991, it was the performance in the high value-added, sophisticated products area (also known as ETMs or Elaborately Transformed Manufactures) that was most impressive, accounting for more than 80 per cent of the total growth in manufactures exports. Last year, exports of sophisticated manufactures increased by 18 per cent - the third consecutive year's growth of more than 17 per cent. The profound change in the composition of our trade is reflected in the fact that our factories now produce more than our farms.

 F'

 rl

 This export growth is occurring because we are now shifting

 into products and markets where demand is growing rapidly.

 And the Asia Pacific region, particularly East Asia, has been of central importance in this strong trade record. Ten years ago, North East Asian and South East Asian countries between them took less than half of our total merchandise exports; they now take around 60 per cent. These countries now account

 for eight of our top twelve export markets and six of our top twelve import sources. Last year, despite subdued economic activity in Japan, North East Asia took 43 per cent of Australian exports and remained our largest regional market.

 South East Asia was our fastest r n market, increasing by 27 per cent in 1992 and also overtaking in the process the EC as our second largest regional market: this represents a very big change from the late 1970s, when the EC share of our exports was twice that of South East Asia.

 There has also been a broadening in the range of Australian imports from the region, with just on 40 per cent of our imports now coming from East Asia. A decade ago, petroleum dominated our imports from South East Asia. Since then, the share of oil has halved to account for only around one-third of our total imports from that part of the region, with manufactures now being the largest component.  Manufactures have always been our major import from North East Asia, but the trend in recent years is for these to be more and more from the most sophisticated end of the manufacturing spectrum.

 The Australian Government has been supporting in every way we can the new interest by Australian business in our immediate region. An important element in our effort has been the gradual rebalancing in trade promotion resource allocation away from our traditional focus on Europe towards a

 significantly greater concentration of resources in Asia. The Australian Trade Commission - or Austrade - now has fully half

 its total overseas resources concentrated in Asia. Among the newer offices opened have been Austrade-managed Consulates in the important Japanese regional centres of Nagoya, Fukuoka,

 8

 Sendai and Sapporo and in Southern China in Guangzhou, while new Austrade offices have been opened in Pusan, Hanoi, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Surabaya, Brunei and Zhejiang. Since the beginning of last year, we have also substantially increased staff resources at our missions in Jakarta, Tokyo, Bangkok, Seoul and Kuala Lumpur. We have increased staff at the Australian Commerce and industry Office in Taipei, allocating

 additional funds of $A4.1 million over four years to enable the Office to devote more resources to promoting Australia's trade, investment and other unofficial relations with Taiwan.

 So the trade story is an impressive one. When it comes to Australian investment in the region, however, the story is rather less impressive - bearing in mind that trade growth is hard to sustain at high levels unless it is accompanied by major on-the-ground investment activity.  In 1988, the level of Australian investment in Asia was $7 billion accounting for a mere 9 per cent of total Australian investment abroad; by 1992, the level had doubled to $14 billion, growing at an annual average rate of 19 per cent, but still only accounting for just over 13 per cent of total Australian investment abroad.

 While the way in which official statistics are compiled can substantially understate the true level of Australian investment in Asia generally, as well as in specific Asian countries, it is the case that investment levels in Asia are not what they might be, and not what they need to be if bridge-heads are to be established for major new levels of trade growth.

 The Government is doing everything it can to encourage a more confident approach by Australian business to investment in the region. The East Asia Analytical Unit within my Department has, since its establishment in 1991, produced five major studies on economic forces shaping the region and their implications for Australia - eg Southern China in Transition , and South East Asia in th - all of which have been highly publicised and highly regarded in the business

 9

 community: a series of further studies, including on the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) and Australia-Indonesia economic relations, are currently in preparation.

 Two important additional initiatives designed to specifically encourage Australian business to venture north were announced as part of the major $61 million 'Australia in Asia' package of measures I launched earlier this year. The establishment of the new Asia Economic Centre is designed to assist Australian business by providing sharply focused business-oriented economic analysis of specific export and investment opportunities in Asian countries, filling a particular

 information gap which has long existed; the Centre will establish in the process strong linkages with similar research and analysis institutes in Japan and elsewhere, which have long been backing trade and investment activity in the region by those countries.  The other initiative particularly worth mentioning is our funding an inaugural National Trade and Investment Outlook Conference in November, which will be the largest and most important such meeting ever held in Australia, bringing to the country a number of leading business and political figures and focusing, again, particularly strongly on opportunities in the immediate region.

 More generally, Australia's trade diplomacy in recent years has also been sharply focused on Asia.  The most visible manifestation of this was our initiative in launching the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) process in 1989; APEC is

 now accepted both within the region and around the world as the Asia Pacific region's pre-eminent economic forum.  APEC not only embraces the 15 major economies of the region, but builds a very firm institutional bridge across the Pacific in a way that operates as a very useful counterweight to some of the dangerous pressures for division between North America and East Asia, particularly between the United States and Japan.

