---
title: "'The Crown at State level': the Eighth Hugo Wolfsohn Memorial Lecture: Dr J. Davis McCaughey, Governor of Victoria 1986 - 1992: La Trobe University, Melbourne: 12 October 1993."
date: "1993-10-12"
creators:
  - "Mccaughey, Davis"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Victoria"
  - "Governors"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211183297
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/F2UB6%22
---

  LA TROBE lUNlVERslfV  The Eighth Hugo Wolfsohn  Memorial Lecture 

  The Crown  at State Level 

  bY 

  Dr J. Davis McCaughey  Governor of Victoria 1986- 1992 

  The Eighth Hugo Wolfsohn  Memorial Lecture  12 October 1993 

  The Crown  at State Level 

  bY 

  Dr J. Davis McCaughey  Governor of Victoria 1986-1992 

  I S S N  1320-3681 

  The Crown at State Level 

  It is a great honour to be invited to give the Hugo Wolfsohn Lecture. The very  existence of this lectureship is a tribute to Hugo Wolfsohn, even if the perfor-  mance can scarcely be adequate for the occasion. My own association with  Professor Wolfsohn goes back to the early days of La Trobe University, when we  were both members of the University Council. Like everyone else who worked 

  with him, I remember the incisiveness of his contributions to discussions of  University policy, and his wit. I also remember the warmth of his personality. 1  recollect that what may sometimes have seemed to the rest of us as relatively rou-  tine decisions were seen by Professor Wolfsohn as matters which determined and 

  reflected our understanding of the true nature of the University. A refugee from  Nazi Germany, he saw more clearly than some of us that a great institution can be  betrayed in little ways, and that what appear small decisions can have far-reach-  ing and disastrous effects if we do not understand what we are doing. 

  I therefore do not apologise for offering as the subject of this lecture ‘The Crown  at State level’, and for drawing on experience in one part of Australia, the State  of Victoria, for my material. Given what is happening elsewhere in the world, this  may appear a small matter. Yet it is never a matter of indifference how men and  women order their political lives and social relations, however small the unit in  which they operate. 

  Perhaps I may be allowed to make two explanatory points by way of introduction.  The first is this: when I accepted this invitation and the suggested title I had no  idea that the subject would be a matter of so much public controversy at the time  when I would be delivering it. 

  I understand that my one-time colleague, Professor Gordon Reid, Governor of  Western Australia, was to have delivered the lecture on this subject. His early  death robbed us of what would have been a magisterial treatment of the subject. I  felt that, poor substitute, I should at least try to say something about the matter as 

  I had observed it and reflected upon it. I shall not, however, try to relate what I  have to say, for instance, to the report of the committee chaired by Mr Malcolm  Turnbull. I have not had time or energy to read those volumes published last  week; and it is notoriously dangerous, as well as a procedure that would have 

  offended the scholarly conscience of Professor Wolfsohn, to base one’s comments  on journalistic summaries. 

  I am, of course, not deaf to the fact that a great many people are expressing opin-  ions on how or why Australia should become a republic; that no doubt has influ-  enced some of the ways in which I have put things. This leads me to my second  explanatory point: I do not in this lecture use the notion of the ‘the Crown’ with  as its primary focus the relation between the holders of the certain offices in  Australia, Governors-General and Governors, to Queen Elizabeth, but with 

  1 

  The Hugo Wolfsohn Memorial Lecture 

  attention to what the representative of ‘the Crown’ does at State level. I want to  talk about the functions of the Governor. A little more attention to what he or  she does may cast light on what or whom, in practice, the Governor represents. 

  The main part of my lecture will therefore be descriptive; and of course every  description involves some judgments of matters of principle. I cannot conceal  what I believe to be important, nor do I want to. There is no value-free historical  or social judgment. So what you will get is ‘the job of the Governor as I see it’ 

  under three headings: constitutional, ceremonial and social. I hope to show that  these are inter-related. 

  That description may call for some general considerations, what we are pleased  sometimes to call matters of principle; but I prefer to avoid that phrase, since it  often engenders more heat than light. Nevertheless, we can sometimes say that it  would appear to be wiser to go this way than that. 

  In conclusion, I hope to say something briefly about why it is important to have  these functions performed at State level. 

  The constitutional responsibilities of a Governor 

  The Constitution Act tells remarkably little about what ‘The Crown’, a Governor  does. It introduces Part I ‘The Crown’ with Clause 6: 

  The Governor appointed by Her Majesty shall be Her Majesty’s representative in  Victoria. 

  It says nothing about how the Governor is chosen. He or she is in fact nominated  to the Queen for appointment to this office by the Premier of the day. That is a  matter of accepted practice, of convention, if you like (although that word perhaps  requires a little more precise definition). It is not clear to the outsider whether the  recommendation comes from the Premier or the Premier acting on the advice of  his or her ministers, or some of them. After you have the Governor appointed in 

  paragraph 6, you are told what he or she must be paid (in paragraph 7) and what  he and his widow - the language is not quite gender neutral, nor can I be in follow-  ing it - will be paid by way of pension in a rather long paragraph 7A, before you  come to any constitutional requirement of what the Governor must do, namely: 

  8 (1) The Governor may by proclamation or otherwise fix such places within Victoria  and subject to this Act such times for holding every session of the Council and  Assembly and may vary and alter the same respectively in such manner as he thinks fit. 

  The next sub-clause 8(2), in giving the Governor power to prorogue Parliament  and to dissolve the Assembly repeats the rather threatening phrase ‘if he thinks  fit’. Of course, the action depends extraordinarily little - if at all - on what the  Governor thinks fit or otherwise. It depends on two other things: the relation  between the Governor and the Parliament, as understood and protected by many 

  2 

  Dr 1. Davis.McCaugbey 

  conventions in a constitutional democracy, and, secondly, by the letters patent  constituting the office of Governor. 

  Let us take them in reverse order. The letters patent set up an Executive Council  over which the Governor presides, acting as the Governor-in-Council. The  Governor in Council approves matters which legislation requires should be dealt  with by that body; and there is a considerable number of such items. The 

  Executive Council meets at least weekly. The Governor permits those items to go  on the agenda which come to him over the signature of the responsible minister  and the head of the department concerned. Approval is almost automatic, but not  quite. The Governor in Council cannot amend, but has been known to refer a  matter back if there is a doubt about it being in proper order. It may in fact - I 

  have known such cases - violate one of the cabinet’s own rules, such as that which  prevents appointments being made for a date some distance in the future. If that  were possible, a government in the closing days of a parliament could determine  matters which should be left for consideration by the government in power after 

  an election. 

  At first I was inclined to think that meetings of the Executive Council wasted the  time of the ministers concerned. Now I do not think so. It is frequently important  that even matters approved by the cabinet, or decisions made by individual minis-  ters should not be implemented until there has been time for scrutiny, perhaps by  the clerk of the Executive Council, to make sure that what is being proposed does  not have unforeseen implications for other parts of government. 

  This may be the point at which to insert reference to the practice whereby the  Governor must sign legislation passed by the Parliament before it passes into law.  He does so not on the request of the Premier, but being waited upon by the Clerk  of the Parliament. What is being enacted is the law of the land, which has come 

  through Parliament. For better or for worse, the people’s representatives have  passed this legislation. The Governor, in affixing his signature to the bills present-  ed to him, is not simply reinforcing the power of the government of the day. He is  recognising the authority of Parliament. 

  To revert to the letters patent, the clause which sets up the Executive Council  reads as follows: 

  There shall be an Executive Council to advise the Governor on the occasions when  the Government is permitted or required by any statute or other instrument to act in  Council. The Premier (or in his absence the Acting Premier) shall tender advice to  the Governor in relation to the other powers and functions of Governor. 

  This second sentence has been misunderstood. About two-and-a-half years ago, a  distinguished academic lawyer, commenting on this clause, said that it ‘directs the  governor to act as advised by the state’s Executive Council and premier’. It does  no such thing. It directs the Executive Council to advise the Governor to do such 

  things as the law requires. He would be a foolish Governor who would do other-  wise. The second sentence leaves responsibility for tendering advice on other 

  3 

  The Hugo Wolfsohn Memorial Lecture 

  matters to the Premier. It says nothing about the obligation of the Governor  always to accept that advice. It implies, correctly as I think, that the Governor  should not act, presumably on an important or serious matter, except after receiv-  ing advice. It is quite wrong to suggest that the clause says what the Governor 

  must do. It does say what the Premier must do. It is always important to note who  or what is the subject of a sentence. If the Premier’s advice were wilful or injuri-  ous to the office of Governor,. and the Governor had to refuse, that would be a  serious matter for the Premier, who would possibly have to face the consequences 

  at the hands of the people if his advice were ever made known. If the Governor  were stubbornly to ignore the Premier’s advice on an important matter, that  would have serious consequences for him, should the Premier wish to take the  matter further. 

  I should add, in parenthesis, that I had the good fortune to work with two  Premiers who were unfailingly correct in their behaviour, and helpful in their  relation with the Governor. That, as I understand it, is the usual relationship.  Each has his or her own function to fulfil. Good relations between Governor and  Premier can be assisted by regular meetings between the two, which take place  whether or not there are matters of great moment to be discussed. This is a piece  of conventional wisdom enshrined in the practice of the Crown in relation to the 

  Prime Minister in the United Kingdom. 

  It is in the calling of elections and the commissioning of ministers that the  Governor’s constitutional functions are most apparent. Confronted by a hung  parliament or other unusual occurrence, the Governor has to act in full awareness  of constitutional requirements and established precedents.  The smooth transition from one government to another can be assisted by his or 

  her quiet wisdom, and informed mind. There is regularly a somewhat heightened  atmosphere at election time. Someone may have to remind leaders of political  parties that in the interests of everyone power should be passed from one govern-  ment to another with the least possible disruption to the lives of many citizens. 

  Good examples of this happening are to be found in the actions of the Governor  after the election in Tasmania in May 1989, or of the Governor of Queensland  following the resignation of Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen later that same year. 

  Some of the actions to be taken may be relatively small, yet important in their  own way. I remember that when John Cain resigned in August 1990 someone had  to remind ministers that when a Premier resigns his ministry resigns with him.  The Governor had received the resignation of the Premier, on Monday if I 

  remember alright, but he did not accept it until the Thursday, by which time a  new leader of the Party had been elected who could be sworn in as Premier. In  the meantime, until they were confirmed in office or replaced by the action of the  new Premier, the ministers were to remain in their places. The Governor so 

  informed them. I tell that relatively unimportant story to draw attention to a mat-  ter of some importance: the need for action comes in unpredictable ways. It is not  possible to legislate for the unforeseeable circumstance. 

  4 

  Dr J .  Davis McCatrghey 

  It is vital, at least in our system of government, to have someone who is above  party to act in such circumstances as may arise with the wisdom which comes from  acquaintance with the conventions which control the office. For this to occur, the  Governor must have a staff, at least an Official Secretary, who is responsible to the 

  Governor alone, who has the Governor’s confidence, and who has reflected on the  significance of the office. It is not desirable that he should be a member of the staff  of the Premier’s Department. It is desirable that, as far as possible, he should  maintain good relations with senior officers in that Department. 

  In all this, the Governor is acting with the authority which belongs to his office. In  a monarchy he represents the Queen, but in doing so he represents one who her-  self represents and is obliged to defend the interests of people organised in a con-  stitutional democracy. Queen Elizabeth I1 stated this matter unequivocally in 

  Quebec in 1964: 

  The role of a constitutional monarch (she said) is to personify the democratic state,  to sanction legitimate authority, to ensure the legality of its measures, and to guaran-  tee the execution of the popular will. In accomplishing this task, it protects the peo-  ple against disorder.’ 

  Because she has no executive power herself, she can call others to exercise power  temporarily. Prime ministers and premiers are the temporary custodians of  power. Power resides permanently in the people; but the sovereign people could  exercise that power tyrannically. When the Crown acts in the interest of the peo-  ple it does so, not in response to public clamour mediated through opinion polls 

  or the sensation-craving tabloid press. It does so in the interest of the people com-  mitted one to another in a series of constitutional arrangements designed to pro-  tect freedom against any form of tyranny, including that which is to be found in  their midst. The Crown has no power itself except the power to prevent others 

  having absolute power. A constitutional democracy has checks and balances built  into it. So, however they maybe chosen, ministers are sworn into office as for the  time being ministers of the Crown. There is, as Sir George Bowen once reminded  Graham Berry, no such thing as a Berry government, there is only the Queen’s  government. That government may choose men and women to be judges, but  they are the Queen’s judges, and are sworn into office by the Governor. They too 

  are temporary custodians of the law. Their power, like that of premiers and minis-  ters, is a derived power. In a constitutional democracy, men and women do not  grasp power. By whatever process they have been elected into office, the power  which they exercise is a conferred power. 

  That is true of the Crown itself. However the individual reaches that appoint-  ment, by birthright or selection, he or she has to be inducted into office by the  representative of the law (the Chief Justice) or of the official religion of the peo-  ple (crowned by the Archbishop of Canterbury). This leads to the second series of  functions to be performed by the Governor. 

  5 

  The Hugo Wolfsohn Memorial Lecture 

  The ceremonial responsibilities of a Governor 

  Many of the constitutional responsibilities of the Governor are expressed  through, or issue in, ceremonial acts. The Governor opens Parliament, and (as we  have seen) swears in Judges of the Supreme Court and ministers of the Crown. A  Governor cannot escape being a representative person. 

  Mark Francis, in a most informative and stimulating book, Governors and Settlers.  Images of Authority in the British Colonies 1820-60, describes the subject of his  book as a study of ‘the process by which an official was elevated into a symbol’.  The process began a little later in Victoria with the arrival of La Trobe in 1839  and took a little longer; but by and large the story of Victoria’s 19th century gov-  ernors is the same, that of the process by which an official was elevated into a  symbol. The first seven or eight governors were ‘officials’, colonial servants whose  chief responsibility was to help a community of settlers to set up a system of  responsible government. It is probably unnecessary to remind this audience that  they were not military figures sent to impose military rule upon a disorderly  colony. Only one out of the governors of Victoria in the 19th century had had a  military or naval career of any significance, Charles Hotham, and he was a disas- 

  ter as Governor (an office he did not want) and, poor chap, he only lived for eigh-  teen months. 

  Different governors saw their task in different ways, some subtly so. Barkly and  Bowen with clarity saw the function of the Governor as being in Higinbotham’s  phrase ‘the local monarch’. Gradually, as the century drew to its close, the consti-  tutional role of the Governor was paired down until he was just that, the local 

  monarch in a constitutional democracy, a role which was to remain through the  20th century, when he has largely become a symbol. 

  But what does he (or she) symbolise? Whom or what does he or she represent?  The simple answer, too simple, is that the Governor represents the Queen. It was  too simple in the 19th century because the Governor had to find his place within  communities of settlers. He came from outside and had to establish his place  within a society which already had its own social as well as political life. He was 

  actively associated with the routine administration of civil government, and, more  particularly, in the last decades of the century with questions of defence in which  there was an imperial interest, but also with the conduct of ceremonial occasions  at every level in the developing life of the colony. Indeed, he was far more active  in Scores of different directions than the Queen whom he represented, who for  most of her reign did not get around any more than she could help. 

  In the 20th century, the answer is too simple, partly because 20th century gover-  nors have inherited a tradition of availability at a diverse number of points in  society, but partly also because the Queen’s role as a constitutional monarch has  become more complex, as we have clearly noticed in the phrases quoted from her  statement in Quebec in 1964: ‘to personify the democratic state’ and so on. The 

  6 

  Dr J .  Davis McCaughey 

  Governor represents the whole community, organised in orderly fashion to  express its will; and that will is expressed in many ways of a non-political kind. 

  It would not be tolerable that the head of a government, prime minister or pre-  mier, should admit men and women to the Order of Australia. That is not a politi-  cal ceremony, but one to be conducted by someone who personifies or represents  the whole community, which may wish to honour its citizens for a hundred differ- 

  ent reasons. It is, incidentally, therefore appropriate that the honors secretariat is  lodged not in the Prime Minister’s department but in the office of the Governor-  General. 

  Similarly, ceremonies associated with awards to Scouts and Guides, to cadets in  the St John’s Ambulance Brigade and a considerable number of other social  agencies are appropriately conducted by the Governor, or perhaps by his or her  spouse. Where the 19th century had governor’s levees and grand occasions at 

  Government House to which, in Mark Francis’s phrase, the Governor determined  ‘which members of a colonial community were suitable beneficiaries of invitations  to entertainment’, the Governor’s engagement book in the 20th century is much  more concerned with the acknowledgment of groups in society committed to  some social, cultural or economic end. On ceremonial occasions for such bodies, 

  he or she is given pride of place because the Governor represents the whole soci-  ety, which thus recognises the value of the contribution of its parts. 

  In particular, it may be worth mentioning the ceremonial or symbolic significance  of having a so-called head of state at this level in an international setting. In recent  decades, far more heads of other states or countries have visited Victoria than in  any comparable period in the 19th or early 20th century. Who receives them on 

  behalf of the people of this State? The Governor, because he represents all the  people of this State. The Premier of Victoria, of course, has an interest in the visit,  for such visits are not without political significance, and he or she also has courte-  sies to fulfil on behalf of his or her government. The Premier may advise the 

  Governor, indeed has a duty to advise the Governor that a particular visit may  warrant some special attention. He may suggest appropriate ceremonial action by  the Governor, but a wise Premier will recognise that the functions to be performed  by the Governor are different from those which he or she as head of government 

  must perform. Similarly, there has been a growth of visits to Victoria by ambas-  sadors of other countries, after they have been accredited to Canberra. It is the  Governor’s responsibility to see that such visitors are given an appropriate oppor-  tunity to appreciate the total interest of members of this state in his country. That 

  interest may be economic or cultural, may involve those who trade with the  ambassador’s country or those who study its history and life in our universities.  The interest may often be expressed by those who came from the country which  the ambassador represents but who now regard Victoria as home. This is a far cry 

  from 19th and 20th century ceremonies, literally showing the flags of visitors and  of Victoria, side by side; and occasionally this may still have its place. But today it  is much more a matter of constructing the appropriate guest list for a luncheon. 

  7 

  The Hugo Wolfsohn Memorial Lecture 

  Again, the Premier may advise the Governor that it would be in the interest of  the State that he and his wife should visit another country, as I and my wife did on  two occasions to China and on one occasion to Japan. Those visits were State to  State, or State to Province. They were not trade missions, which would properly  be conducted by the minister concerned, but were carried out to improve rela- 

  tions between the two states and communities concerned. 

  The titles of two relatively recent books may focus our minds on the developing  and ever-changing character of the Governor’s role as we have seen it develop in  the Australian colonies and states - certainly as we might observe it in Victoria.  Both deserve more serious attention than 1 have as yet been able to give them.  The first is by a distinguished American historian, Edmund S. Morgan, and is 

  entitled Inventing the People: the Rise of Popular Sovereignty in England and  America.2 We could perhaps benefit from a parallel study for Australia as essen-  tial background to our consideration of constitutional reform. The second is a  symposium edited by Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger, entitled The 

  Invention of Tradition3. Here we have essays by distinguished scholars on the  Highland Tradition of Scotland, the hunt for the Welsh Past, the rituals surround-  ing the British Monarchy, the representation of authority in Victorian India, the  invention of tradition in Colonial Africa and the mass production of traditions in  Europe 1870-1914. Put beside, this Eric Hobsbawm’s book Nations and  Nationalism since 1870: program myth reality4, and one is I suppose comforted or  perhaps discomfited to observe that Australia is not alone in the modem world as 

  a nation in search of an identity, and of ceremonies to express that. 

  Certainly a former Governor can only regret that he had not read or understood  those books earlier. He might have taken comfort as he tried to perform a variety  of ceremonial duties from the evidence that all societies are much more fluid and  changeable than many are willing to admit. A distinguished English Churchman  of my acquaintance once remarked: ‘Those Anglicans who talk about our incom-  parable liturgy are frequently unacquainted with any other’. 

  In a multicultural Victoria, and mindful of the many ceremonies in which one did  take part and others in which one might have taken part, it is at least of interest to  be reminded that the cultural lives of recently arrived immigrants did not begin  yesterday, nor will their traditions die tomorrow. 

  One tradition, it is often alleged, that has done more than any other to unite  Australians in a single ceremony is that associated with Anzac Day. It is even said,  a little rhetorically, that on the beaches of Gallipoli Australia became a nation.  Lord Normanby, Governor from 1879-1884, writing to his successor, Sir Henry  Loch, remarked that ‘it would be a kind of High Treason for a Governor not to 

  attend the Flemington Races’. That obligation, however, withers into insignifi-  cance compared to that rightly felt by Governors towards the Anzac Day march  and ceremonies. In Victoria, at all events it is the one occasion in the year when a  Governor sits for so many hours through a single ceremony, the one occasion on 

  8 

  Dr J. Davis McCaughey 

  which, at the end of the march, he addresses the assembled crowd and, by courtesy  of television, unnumbered viewers in their homes. It is one of the most difficult  things that a Governor has to do. This is a tradition and a ceremony in which the  Governor is involved willy-nilly. It is one which calls for historical description and 

  analysis beyond my powers, and would not be appropriate tonight. 

  I simply draw attention to it because its survival may be significant, however one  explains it. It is curious that almost all the spoken words which support the ritual  are derived from World War I, 1914-18. 

  The social role of the Governor 

  To some extent, this has already been touched upon in our discussion of the  Governor’s ceremonial significance. If we look upon Charles Joseph La Trobe as  the first Governor of Victoria (as I think we should, even though he did not bear  that exact title), then a sense of social responsibility and a determination to visit 

  as many places in the colony as possible were there from the beginning.  Marguerite Hancock has estimated that, in 15 years, La Trobe made 94 journeys  through country Victoria, either on foot or on horseback. He set aside land for  the Botanic Gardens, brought Ferdinand Von Mueller to Victoria, set aside land  for the University, and was instrumental in the establishment of the Melbourne 

  Hospital of which he was the first President. He encouraged Barry in the estab-  lishment of the State Library; and most of the Christian denominations and the  Jewish community were encouraged to build places of worship in appropriate  places. He brought Swiss vignerons to Victoria, thus laying the foundation for the  wine trade. The tradition was quickly established that the governor’s influence  could be felt outside Melbourne and Geelong. By and large, the tradition was  maintained. Most governors went out and about among the people. 

  At the end of May 1890, Lord Hopetoun visited Swan Hill for the opening of the  extension of the railway from Kerang. During the next few days he rode on horse-  back from Swan Hill to Warracknabeal. Over the next few years, he returned to  the Mallee three or four times to observe progress in this relatively-recently 

  opened district. 

  So, in very different conditions, using rather different modes of transport, it is  today. Visits to farms and factories, schools and elderly citizens centres, to shires  and municipalities and the community services delivered close to where people live  and work, acts of recognition of fire and emergency services and public utilities,  acknowledgment of sporting and artistic occasions, taking note of Aboriginal gath-  erings and of the cultural events brought by more recent immigrants, these and a  score of other incidents give credibility to his or her role as a representative person.  Again, representing what or whom? Representing the Queen, formally - although  frequently with messages of goodwill passing to and from Her Majesty. But more  immediately, representing the whole community. When the Governor visits an area 

  9 

  The Hugo Walfsohn Memorial Lecture 

  struck by disaster (as the present Governor has recently done, following the floods  in northern Victoria) he speaks not for the government - he can promise nothing -  but he conveys or does his best to convey the sense that the whole community  cares. He tries to understand, and in doing so, hopes to suggest that others in the  community would wish to understand also. So those terrible experiences of desola- 

  tion, loneliness and the fear that nobody cares are at least diminished. 

  It is particularly important at present for the community to be reminded that poli-  tics is only a part of life. The executive arm of politics, the government, would  seek to interfere too much in the affairs of men and women, over-riding even Par-  liament, threatening the independence of the courts, over-ruling local initiatives 

  in health, education and welfare; and where necessary applying the old adage  ‘divide and rule’ to put services in competition one with another - presumably on  the spurious ground that competition is always better than co-operation. 

  In these circumstances, the Governor has to remember that he is not only a neu-  tral figure (the word is not a good one but I find it difficult to think of a better,  perhaps impartial) in a constitutional democracy, he is also a representative figure  concerned with all the people in a social democracy. Initiatives arise at scores of 

  points where men and women and their children live and try to organise their  lives together. Small ceremonies may well be more important t o  them than the  grander occasions traditionally associated with the office of Governor. The three  roles of Governor are intertwined: each supports the other. The one who is sworn 

  into office by the Chief Justice and opens Parliament is the same as the one who  must sit in a classroom with primary children and plant a tree in the school  grounds, no longer simply to mark that he has been there but to identify himself  with that local community and the whole community in their determination to 

  restore to the land some of its original beauty and to save it from the degradation  which is violating it and threatening to make it useless for our children. 

  I have spent long enough describing what may be all too obvious to many here  tonight. I should, however, like to underline something to which I have alluded in  the last few minutes, namely that we have to do not only with a constitutional but  also with a social democracy. To do so I should like to take two passages from  Walter Bagehot’s celebrated book on The English Constitution, first published in 

  Great Britain in 1867.’ I want to suggest, no more, that what Bagehot has to say  about the constitutional role, responsibilities and rights of monarchy, apply  mutatis mutandis to the social role of Governors in our Australian social demo-  cratic society. 

  Sir Zelman Cowen has, on a number of occasions, expounded most helpfully  Bagehot’s distinction between ‘dignified and efficient parts’ of government, and  has shown the importance of that distinction for the role of Governor-General  vis-a-vis the Parliament and Government of Australia. The dignified parts, 

  according to Bagehot, are ‘those which excite and preserve the reverence of the  population’, the efficient parts are ‘those by which it, in fact, works and rules’. 

  10 

  Dr I. Davis McCaughey 

  The Queen sits at the head of the dignified part of government; and although it is  not strict8 relevant to my theme, I cannot refrain from quoting the opening para-  graph of Bagehot’s chapter on The Monarchy: 

  The use of the Queen, in a dignified capacity, is incalculable. Without her in  England, the present English Government would fail and pass away. Most people  when they read that the Queen walked on the slopes of Windsor - the Prince of  Wales went to the Derby - have imaged that too much thought and prominence  were given to little things. But they have been in error; and it is nice to trace how the 

  actions of a retired widow and an unemployed youth become of such importance. 

  It would indeed be ‘nice’ to trace the influence of Queen Victoria and the future  Edward VI1 on English social life, but not immediately relevant. Better to turn  from the Queen to the colony which bore her name and then the state of Victoria.  There can be no question, I think, that the ‘dignified’ aspect of government and 

  the governing classes was towards the end of the 19th and during the early part of  the 20th century too much concentrated on Government House - the place from  which things were done properly, and in the English style. Writing of the first two  decades of this century, Professor Stuart Macintyre has it right. Despite growing 

  trade with other parts of the world, 

  the ties with the home country were ubiquitous. They began at Government House,  which in each of the state capitals served as the measuring-rod of social acceptability.  ‘These society people are very British’, remarked Sir Ronald Munro Ferguson shortly  after he amved as the new governor-general in 1914, and he added that their ‘exclu- 

  siveness is unmitigated’. A visiting Englishman noted how it was the business of the  aide-de-camp, invariably English himself, to discover ‘who is who in Australia’. By  such means the manners and fashions of Mayfair reached Toorak or VaucIuse.6 

  Bit by bit all that was broken down as the century proceeded on its way, not least  by World War Hand by the last of the English Governors who followed it. Sir  Rohan Delacombe’s (1963-74) visits throughout the State gave a new look to the  role in what was becoming an increasingly diverse social democracy. With the 

  appointment of Sir Henry Winneke (1974) English-ness largely disappeared. The  focus was no longer on how an English Queen (from the passing of the Australia  Act in 1986 to be properly entitled the Queen of Australia) was to be represented,  but how worthy initiatives in the community were to be recognised. This provides 

  a new context for Bagehot’s ‘dignified’ part of government. 

  John Oman, a distinguished Cambridge philosophical theologian of a previous  generation, once remarked that the worst thing a man can do with his dignity is to  stand on it. Dignity is recognised, it is respected. It cannot be claimed. It belongs  essentially not to the official, ceremonial side of life: at least offices and cere-  monies do not create it. It belongs to the social, moral, personal side of life: cere-  monies may recognise it. When in Orthodox Churches the Bishop, is chosen, he is  presented to the people who must cry out axios, he is worthy, So too nomination 

  for awards in the Order of Australia are not promoted by Governors or  Governments: they come from a man or a woman’s peers. Six citizens may say of 

  11 

  The Hugo Wolfsohn Memorial Lecture 

  a seventh, he or she is worthy. The word dignity comes from the Latin word  meaning worth. The really dignified part of life in a social democracy consists of  all those things, some small, some large, which people do in service of their fel-  lows in all the immense variety of our social life. 

  The almost overwhelming burden in a Governor’s life is not that of being ready to  deal with a constitutional crisis should it arise. (I always suspected that it would  not be quite so difficult to deal with it sensibly as some commentators seemed to  think.) The almost overwhelming burden is how to respond adequately and to  encourage appropriately all the many good things which are going on in society,  without having too much regard for political expediency in doing so. 

  This leads into my second, the oft-quoted passage from Bagehot about the three  rights of a constitutional monarch - ‘the right to be consulted, the right to encour-  age, the right to warn’. Perhaps I may quote the whole paragraph in which those  words occur: it calls for serious reflection. Bagehot adds: 

  And a king of great sense and sagacity would want no others. He would find that his  having no others would enable him to use these with singular effect. He would say to  his Ministers: ‘The responsibility of these measures is upon you. Whatever you think  best must be done. Whatever you think best shall have my full and effectual support.  But you will observe that for this reason and that reason what you propose to do is  bad; for this reason and that reason what you do not propose is better. I do not  oppose it, it is my duty not to oppose it; but observe that I warn’. Supposing the king 

  to be right, and to have what kings often have, the gift of effectual expression, he  could not help moving his Minister. H e  might not always turn his course, but he  would always trouble his mind. 

  In the modern world, with the complexity of the processes of government, the  monarch or her representative o r  the so-called head of state (what I call represen-  tative person) cannot expect to be consulted on all matters. He or she can ask to  be informed, and has a heavy burden of seeking out information for him or her-  self. We should, I think, see these three rights not only in a constitutional setting 

  as rights of the monarch in a constitutional democracy, but also as rights and,  therefore, responsibilities to be exercised by a Governor in a social democracy.  He or she must seek to understand what is going on in society around him, must  encourage centres of thought and life relatively independent of government and  may indeed sometimes have to warn. This will be done not only vis-a-vis govern-  ment, but on almost countless occasions on which representatives of many agen-  cies find themselves in the presence of the Governor and he or she with them. 

  Sir Robert Herbert, Permanent Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies 1871-  1892, once commented that as they were released from political pressures and  responsibilities, ‘the Australian Governors “were taking largely to public orato-  ry’”. That is a hazardous calling, but not (I think) one from which there is any  escape. ‘The constraints are, however, well defined by Bagehot. They become 

  responsibilities - to be informed, to encourage, to warn: these three, but the  greatest of these is to encourage. 

  12 

  D t J .  Davis McCaughey 

  Finally, and very very briefly, why must this function be performed at State level?  To some degree, I would hope that the description of the role as I have given it  already answers that question. Put in telegraphic form, we might reply under two  headings: (1) because Australia is a very big country, geographically; (2) because, 

  where you have a seat of representative government, you must have the checks  and balances which go with it. 

  Let me amplify the first of those objections shortly. We all owe an immense debt  to a succession of Governors-General, who have set an example of how the role is  to be fulfilled (and perhaps, in one instance, issued a warning of what not to do).  If, however, we take the third role alone, that of the social significance of the 

  Governor, we immediately see the impossibility of fulfilling those responsibilities  for every state and region in Australia. 

  The issue is not only one of size. There may, I think, be a difference in style or in  what may be undertaken. It is a constant occasion of surprise and admiration that  recent Governors-General have been able to cover so much ground throughout  Australia. Nevertheless, inevitably their visits to states are necessarily confined to 

  a large degree to re-acting to initiatives taken by localities or by organisations  who issue the invitations. Not so state governors. To some extent their programs  also are re-active; but there is room and need for initiatives, seeking visits to areas  recently neglected, seeking out the organisation or group in need of encourage-  ment or about which the Governor wishes to be better informed. 

  A state governor may not be content with making at Government House awards  to firms which have gained recognition for their achievements in export. He may  think it important to visit the factories where the awards were won, and to do  that, like a lot of other things, annually, perhaps up to six factories each year.  When he has done it he does not have to fly back to Canberra. If he visits a school  he may expect a return call from the children of that school on their next visit to  Melbourne; and he, or his wife, may have a regular contact with the teasing social  problems which are apparent both in rural areas and in our major cities. 

  As substantial as these arguments is that which derives from the existence of par-  liamentary government in the states. Wherever you have representative govern-  ment, it is important that those who hold power should from time to time be  reminded that they hold that power as a trust, temporary custodians of authority,  as we have put it. Those who have political power in the states do not hold it from  Canberra (which God forbid!) but from the people of that State: to them they are  responsible, and to them they must give account at the next election. The 

  Governor represents the interests of the people in seeing that their organisation  in an orderly constitution is respected. He symbolises what is of more permanent  significance than parties and their challengeable leaders. The fact that he can only  be removed with the greatest of difficulty emphasises his distinct representative  character. Politicians come and go, people’s interests remain, and must be re- 

  assessed, given expression in varying ways from time to time. 

  13 

  The Hugo Wolfsohn Memorial Lecture 

  We make much of having inherited the Westminster system of government. To  one defect in the Westminster system too little attention has been given (except  perhaps in television programs such as Yes, Minister, Yes, Prime Minister): it is  that it is too much centred on Westminster. It is arguable that two of the most dis- 

  astrous pieces of legislation at Westminster in recent centuries were the two Acts  of Union, the result of which, in one case, was to result in the complete separation  of Ireland from the United Kingdom, leaving disgruntled minorities, and, in  another case, to leave Scotland permanently alienated from England, pyrrhic vic-  tories. The English would have suffered even more from that centralising folly if  the Irish had not retaliated by providing plays for their stages and generals for  their armies, and if the Scots had not got their own back by providing engineers to  run the Empire, accountants to staff insurance companies, and more than their  fair share of leaders in the legal and medical professions. 

  We do not have the luxury of a capital like London; but we do have a federation  of states, each with a history of its own. One hundred years ago those states came  together to form the Commonwealth of Australia. All kinds of factors made that  an attractive proposition at the time, and no one in their senses would want to go  back to states as separate, as were the colonies before federation. 

  But everyone in their senses might be asked whether the beginning of our second  century might be marked by a better way of making federalism work, and amongst  those better ways might be a greater degree of decentralisation. To some extent,  Australia came into being in a period of world-wide enthusiasm for nation-build-  ing; but the enthusiasm has waxed and waned and waxed again. Those who have  read Hobsbawm will have been reminded that the equation state (we should put  commonwealth) = nation = people is a very fragile one. In these circumstances we  would be wise to build on what we have in our inter-related states and Common-  wealth; and that will involve something like the Crown operating at state level. 

  14 

  Dr J .  Davis McCaughey 

  References 

  1. Quoted by Frank MacKinnon, The Crown in Canada, p. 27 (Glenbow - Alberta 

  2. Norton and Company, New York 1988.  3. Cambridge University Press 1983 (Canto edition 1992).  4. Cambridge University Press (Canto, 2nd edition 1992).  5 .  Now conveniently available within an Introduction by Richard Grossman, Fontana 

  6. The Oxford History of Australia, Vol. 4, ‘1901-1942: The Succeeding Age’, Oxford 1986. 

  Institute, Calgary, Alberta 1977). 

  Press, London 1993. 

  15 

