---
title: "Cambodian special assistance category up and running"
date: "1993-12-09"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211184035
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1706959%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC

 AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINI$TER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Senator Nick Bolkus Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 B46/93

 CAMBODIAN SPECIAL ASSISTANCE CATEGORY UP AND RUNNING

 Members of Australia's Cambodian communities have been invited to nominate relatives In Cambodia who may be eligible for permanent residence In Australia through the new Special Assistance Category (SAC).

 'The relevant regulation for this new Special Assistance Category for Cambodians with close links with Australia, which I announced in October, has been gazetted and Is up and running," the Minister for lmmgration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Boikus, said today.

 "Its success now depends largely on the active involvement of the local community."

 To be eligible for permanent residence in Australia through the Cambodian SAC, a person must have been resident in Cambodia for 12 months or more, be experiencing hardship as a result of recent upheavals In that country and have close links with Australia.

 "Many members of Australia's Cambodian community who are either Australian citizens or permanent residents will have close family members who may be able to Join them In Australia under this program," Senator Solkus said.

 "A 'near relative' includes parents, children, siblings, aunts, uncles, nephews or nieces."

 As with all SAC programs, a near relative or community support group in Australia will be required to give a written undertaking that they can offer successful applicants support in their first six months In Australia.

 This support is to help cover:

 food, clothing, accommodation and household goods;

 personal support;

 access to community and public Services;

 language interpretation and securing English language Instruction,

 community Involvement and self-reliance.

 Successful applicants will also need to fund their own travel to Australia.

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

 "The Cambodian community and 

 support groups throughout the country have shown

 great commitment and Initiative in helping new arrivals from Cambodia to build new lives In Australia," Senator Bolkus said.

 "I feel sure that they will be keen to become involved in sponsoring and helping to settle people who move to Australia under the SAC program."

 Senator Bolkus stressed that while many boat people were expected to take up this offer and return to Cambodia for 12 months before migrating to Australia, the program was also available to people who had either returned to Cambodia from asylum centres In other parts of the region, or who had not left Cambodia but had relatives

 In Australia and were experiencing hardship.

 "This category will assist those who would not be able to meet the normal migration requirements and who don't fit into the traditional refugee and humanitarian categories," Senator Solkus said.

 "Applicants will need to meet the usual health and character requirements. If they are Successful, they will enter Australia as permanent residents and can access the full range of Commonwealth benefits on arrival."

 Under the 1992-93 Humanitarian program, about 6,300 places have been allocated overall to the SAC. As well as Cambodia, the category is currently in place for minorities from the former USSR; displaced persons from the former Yugoslavia; East Timorese in Portugal; Sudanese; and Burmese In Burma and Thailand.

 CANBERRA DECEMBER 9 1993

 Media contact: Ruth Dewsbury (08) 277 7860

