---
title: "Separating the fact and fiction of northern defence"
date: "1993-03-01"
creators:
  - "Tambling, Grant"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNITY SERVICES, EXTERNAL TERRITORIES AND NORTHERN AUSTRALIA"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211180627
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1744845%22
---

 Media Release SEPARATING THE FACT AND FICTION OF NORTHERN DEFENCE

 The relocation of an appropriately structured army brigade group to the north will continue under a Federal Coalition Government along with a further strengthening of intelligence and surveillance capabilities.

 The Shadow Minister for Northern Australia, Senator Grant Tambling, today reaffirmed the Federal Coalition's commitment to the north following a misleading report in the Northern Territory News (1.3.93).

 "The Federal Coalition remains committed to the relocation of an army brigade group to the north, however, we believe we can sharpen the defence focus.

 "For example, we will not relocate the leopard tanks because their life-of-type does not extend much beyond the end of the decade.

 "However, we will boost intelligence and surveillance capabilities by fast-tracking the purchase of four Airborne Early Warning and Control aircraft and locating them at RAAF Base Tindal, near Katherine.

 "The decision will result in substantial capital works projects at Tindal, developing the infrastructure to locate the aircraft and crews to provide maintenance capabilities.

 "I am confident that our policy will mean a greater defence presence in the Northern Territory over the longer term. This will mean more jobs and an economic boost for the Territory, particularly in the Darwin and Katherine/Tindal areas.

 "The Federal Coalition also will fast-track the acquisition of up to six Coastal Minehunters to improve our mine-hunting and minesweeping capability, particularly in northern ports which are vulnerable to mining.

 "Our other commitments include more resources for oceanographic and hydrographic studies of the northern coastline, modernising the Fremantle Class patrol boats and developing a new class of offshore patrol vessel.

 COM

 MONWEALTH ... /2

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

 F

 "We will manage the F/A-18 fighter aircraft to extend their life-of-type to 2010, support the modernisation of P3C maritime surveillance aircraft and increase helicopter mobility by purchasing additional Chinook and troop transport

 helicopters.

 "United States aircraft and naval vessels will be invited to make greater use of our facilities and we will develop a proposal for the United States to preposition defence equipment in Northern Australia.

 "We also will give priority to upgrading existing air defence radar units and we will study the need for additional air defence radar units to boost our first line of defence.

 "Yet another priority will be upgrading security arrangements with Australia's neighbours through more training and joint exercises as well as greater co-operation in areas such as maritime surveillance and refugee movements.

 "Members of the Australian Defence Force are sure to welcome our commitment to increase spending on flying hours, sailing days, exercises and training.

 "We have also proposed initiatives to improve the welfare of ADF members and their families in an effort to reduce dissatisfaction with service life.

 "For example, we believe that the Defence Housing Authority should give particular emphasis to the provision of married quarters in areas where home ownership is of little attraction due to isolation or for other reasons.

 "Accordingly, the Federal Coalition will embrace the Federal Government's 1992-93 Budget decision to privatise a proportion of the Defence Housing Authority's off-base housing stock in capital cities and major regional centres and replace it with privately-owned accommodation. This will allow a greater focus on housing in isolated areas."

 ENDS Contact: Senator Grant Tambling 070-521111 Tiz Zeroni 089-813567

 1.3.93

