---
title: "AFP officer join the UN peace-keeping force in Somalia"
date: "1993-05-13"
creators:
  - "Kerr, Duncan"
source: "MINISTER FOR JUSTICE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211181267
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1682057%22
---

 3

 Minister for Justice The Hon. Duncan Kerr MP

 PRESS RELEASE

 13 MAY 1993

 An officer from the Australian Federal Police is to join the United Nations peace-keeping force in Somalia, the Federal Minister for Justice, Duncan Kerr, said today.

 Mr Kerr said that Superintendent Barry Carpenter had recently completed a three-year secondment with the United Nations Border Relief Operation (UNBRO) on the Thai-Cambodian border.

 "His innovative and resourceful approach during that time has reflected magnificently on both himself and the Australian Federal Police," Mr Kerr said.

 "Superintendent Carpenter worked in a refugee camp of more than 200,000 displaced Cambodians where he recruited and trained a police force of 3000, wrote a criminal code and established a court system," Mr Kerr said.

 "So successful has his work been that at the request of the United Nations, Superintendent Carpenter has been further seconded to enable him to take up the position of senior police adviser to the United Nations operation in Somalia under U.S. Admiral Howell."

 Mr Kerr said that of the 11 AFP officers currently in Cambodia, 10 were based at Thmar Puok in north-west Cambodia. The officer in charge of the contingent, Superintendent Bob Bradley, was also the UN Transitional Authority (UNTAC) district police commander, with-the Australians working with police from Germany, Algeria, India and France.

 "The AFP contingent, which took over from an initial group in January, has continued to build on the relationship and trust developed by the AFP officers," Mr Kerr said.

 "The Australian Ambassador has reported that the Australian police appear to be trusted by all factions and have established a police training course for four factions.

 "The UNTAC force commander has also been quoted as saying that this situation of trust is unique in Cambodia, and a model he would like to see followed elsewhere."

 Mr Kerr said the second contingent was now working towards assisting in the conduct of the elections, and police patrols of the Thmar Puok district had commenced this week.

 "While the officers are concerned about the press coverage of incidents in Cambodia, particularly from their families' point of view, they have advised the Commissioner of Police that this has strengthened their commitment to the people of Cambodia, the peace process and the holding of the elections."

 -more-

 Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600 Tel. (06) 277 7260 Fax (06) 273 4136

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MfCAf #

 -2-

 The remaining member of the 11-strong contingent, Superintendent Bill Kirk, was based in Phnom Penh heading the Human Rights Investigation Task Force for UNTAC consisting of 45 police from 23 countries.

 Mr Kerr said that Australia, on request from the UN, would provide six fingerprint/handwriting experts to validate election documents.

 The officers, from the Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria police forces, would be deployed in Phnom Penh from May 21 for two to three weeks.

 Media contact: Peter Robinson 277 7260.

