---
title: "Australian emergency relief for Africa: cholera in Somalia, drought in Tanzania, conflict in Sudan and Rwanda"
date: "1994-04-29"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211184841
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/EJ120%22
---

 M46 29 APRIL 1994

 AUSTRALIAN EMERGENCY RELIEF FOR AFRICA: CHOLERA IN SOMALIA, DROUGHT IN TANZANIA, CONFLICT IN SUDAN AND  RWANDA

 Australia is providing $L7 million for emergency relief activities to counter cholera in  'Somalia drought in Tanzaniay&nd to assist casualties and refugees from civil war in  Sudan and Rwanda, thelvlmister for Foreign Affairs, Gareth Evans, said today.

 “The desperate plight of hundreds of thousands of people in Africa, affected by natural  and man-made disasters, demands that Australia assists international emergency relief  operations,” Senator Evans said.

 “Australians have always taken pride in their willingness to provide assistance to other  people in times of need.

 “While Australia supports diplomatic efforts to find lasting peace settlements, we must  also do what we can to help prevent the avoidable loss of life,” Senator Evans said.

 Funds are being provided through the Australian International Development Assistance  Bureau, AIDAB.

 In Sudan, civil war has destroyed farms and isolated thousands of people from food  sources, leaving them dependent on airlifts for food supplies.

 Australia is allocating $750,000 to the World Food Programme to help continue the food  airlifts.

 An outbreak of cholera in Somalia has killed over 200 people and United Nations sources  say that over 5,500 people are confirmed as having cholera.

 The outbreak is causing considerable concern as the cases are widely spread and  include densely populated areas, such as the capital, Mogadishu.

 Australia is allocating $250,000 through UNICEF Australia for an intensive campaign to  control the epidemic.

 The funds will be used to improve sanitation, coordinate community training and  chlorinate water supplies in affected areas.

 In Tanzania drought has left 100,000 people in critical need of food. Up to 500,000  people are threatened by food shortages.

 The food shortages in Tanzania have been exacerbated by the influx of refugees fleeing  the recent coups and violence in Rwanda and Burundi (November).

 AIDAB is providing $220,000 to World Vision Australia for 375 tonnes of local beans as  food aid and a further 59 tonnes of maize seeds for planting in the forthcoming rainy  season.

 “International aid workers in Rwanda report that they are witnessing one of the most  horrifying human catastrophes they have ever encountered," Senator Evans said.

 “The sheer scale of the disaster requires a significant relief effort from the international  community."

 In Rwanda, Australia is providing $500,000 to help casualties and refugees from the civil  war. AIDAB is dividing the funds equally between the International Committee of the Red  Cross and AUSTCARE for use by its partner agency, Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF).  Red Cross and MSF are the only two aid agencies currently operating in Rwanda. In 

 addition, 13 tonnes of AIDAB-funded Australian-made high energy biscuits are being  provided for international relief activities for Rwanda through CARE Australia.

 CANBERRA

