---
title: "Minister reaffirms stand on asylum seekers"
date: "1994-09-09"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211186196
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D9V10%22
---

 Senator Nick Bolkus

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 B62/94

 MINISTER REAFFIRMS STAND ON ASYLUM SEEKERS

 A boat carrying 31 people has arrived unlawfully at Cape Leveque near Broome in Western  Australia.

 The 31 people comprising 27 men, one woman and three children appear to be in good health.  They are being transported to the Port Hedland Immigration Reception and Processing Centre.

 The unlawful arrivals have told people fishing in the area of Cape Leveque they are from the  Galang Processing Centre in Indonesia.

 Staff from the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs will interview the arrivals over the  next few days to determine where they are from and their intentions.

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Senator Nick Bolkus has foreshadowed legislation  that would prevent people who have had access to the effective protection of the Comprehensive  Plan of Action (CPA) in another country claiming asylum in Australia.

 The Minister announced on 29 August that amendments to the Migration Act would specifically  cover any such people who arrive in Australia from that date.

 The Minister expects the legislation to be introduced to the Parliament in the week commencing  19 September.

 Senator Bolkus stressed the importance of maintaining the integrity of the Comprehensive Plan of  Action. Under the Plan, Vietnamese and Laotian refugees are assisted to resettle in third countries  and failed asylum seekers must return to their country of origin.

 Last month the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs found that 14 people who arrived  in Broome on the 7 July 1994 from Galang did not meet the UN definition of a refugee

 From July 1989 to March 1994, Australia resettled 16,690 Vietnamese and Laotian refugees under  the CPA. A further 1400 are expected to migrate to Australia under our Humanitarian Program  during 1994/95.

 9 September 1994

 Contact: RUTH DEWSBURY 06 277 7860

