---
title: "Federal Court case: Lin Yan and Lin Jing"
date: "1994-07-22"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211185688
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ATS10%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 _  . Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 

 S enator N ick B olkus (06)277 7 qqo 2 2 - 3UL>f W / FEDERAL COURT CASE: LIN VAN AND LIN JING v v

 STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER FOR IMM IGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS, SENATOR^NTCK b o l k u s D

 An undertaking has been given to the Federal Court in Sydney today th a t the  D epartm ent o f Im m igration and Ethnic A ffairs w ill not remove Lin Yan, 11 and  Lin Jing, 8, from  Australia until a further order of the court.

 The undertaking was offered to the court notw ithstanding th a t last night Justice  Gallop in Canberra said that the girls' representative, Marion Le, had no arguable  case.

 Following th a t decision Ms Le lodged a further application the Federal Court,  this tim e in Sydney, seeking leave to appeal Justice G allop's decision.

 As the court has heard, the girls' parents have been aw aiting their return to  China. The girls have told the people caring for them  at Port Hedland th a t they  are looking forw ard to seeing their parents again.

 This m atter can come to a very speedy conclusion if their w ishes to be reunited  in China are acted upon. The reality is th a t both the children and the parents  are perm anent residents o f China.

 I am anxious to avoid a continuation o f the endless merry go round o f litigation  w h ich  can only be to the detrim ent o f the girls' w elfare. I am also concerned  th a t the girls are not used as pawns in a point scoring media exercise against  the Departm ent.

 As all considerations for the girls' application for refugee status had been  finalised, it was proposed they return to China earlier this week. This w ould  have achieved my objective of reuniting them  w ith  their parents as soon as  possible. Developments this w eek in the Federal Court have show n th a t I and 

 my D epartm ent have been unable to achieve this end.

 Suggestions th a t the children be moved to Villaw ood clearly con trad ict Ms Le's  earlier concerns th a t the children stay w ith  their only know n relatives in  A ustralia w ho are currently at Port Hedland awaiting the outcom e o f their ow n  litigatio n. I find these proposals som ew hat puzzling.

 There is a furthe r hearing in the Federal Court on W ednesday, July 27 when a  tim etable w ill be set for the further hearing o f this m atter.

 CANBERRA JULY 22 1994

