---
title: "Refugee decisions for 17 boat people"
date: "1994-08-29"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211186083
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LHU10%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Senator Nick Bolkus Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 B 58 /94

 REFUGEE DECISIONS FOR 17 BOAT PEOPLE

 The Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs has decided not to grant refugee  status to 1 3 of the 17 Vietnamese boat people who arrived in Broome on 7 July 1 994.  The 17 had previously been found not to be refugees through a screening process at  the Galang Processing Centre in Indonesia.

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, said today that  the Galang process had been approved by the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees (UNHCR). The UNHCR, together w ith other refugee spokespeople, had since  urged the 1 7 to return to Galang, where any new information relating to their refugee  claims would be assessed.

 Three of the 17 boat people have been found to be refugees on the basis of new  information that had not previously been available to Indonesian authorities.

 One woman whose own application was refused is a spouse of one of those given  refugee status. A decision on the seventeenth applicant, a man, is expected later this  week.

 Senator Bolkus said that for the first time he had decided to use his powers under the  Migration A ct and issue Conclusive Certificates to stop the people who had been  refused refugee status seeking a review of the decisions by the Refugee Review  Tribunal.

 "It is in the public interest that I exercise this power to maintain the integrity of the  Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA)", Senator Bolkus said. "Under the Plan  Vietnamese and Laotian refugees are assisted to resettle in third countries and failed  asylum seekers must return to their country of origin."

 Legislation foreshadowed last month to prevent people who have had access to  effective protection in a safe third country claiming asylum in Australia will be  introduced into Parliament shortly.

 "These amendments to the Migration A ct will specifically cover people covered by the  Comprehensive Plan of Action and will cover any such people w ho arrive in Australia  from now on," Senator Bolkus said.

 "They will also cover other people who arrive in Australia having been in safe third  countries."

 From July 1989 to March 1994, Australia resettled 16,690 Vietnamese and Laotian  refugees under the CPA. A further 1400 are expected to migrate to Australia under  our Humanitarian Program during 1994/95.

 CANBERRA 29 AUGUST 1994

 CONTACT: RUTH DEWSBURY (06) 2777 860

