---
title: "Learning lessons from Rwanda"
date: "1994-09-07"
creators:
  - "Bilney, Gordon"
source: "Minister for Development Cooperation"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211186185
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR05004754%22
---

 fflMEDTA Minister for Development Cooperation · Minister lor Pacific Island Affairs Gordon Bilney MP MDC 79 7 September 1994

 LEARNING LESSONS FROM RWANDA

 Australian aid to Rwandan refugees is making a crucial difference to living  conditions in refugee camps and in the Rwandan capital of Kigali, Gordon Bilney,  Minister for Development Cooperation, said today. He added, however, that real  problems remain in meeting refugee needs in the medium term and in the  coordination of United Nations and non-government organisations (NGO)  activities.

 The Minister was speaking following visits to refugee camps at Ngara, Tanzania,  and discussions with Australian NGOs, United Nations officials and Rwandan  Government Ministers.

 "With a large number of United Nations agencies, and over 80 NGOs active in  Rwanda, coordination is an immense headache. As a result, not everything that  needs to be done is being done.

 "I have been disturbed, for example, by how long it is taking to restore essential  services like electricity and water supply to Kigali. The UN will need to learn the  lessons of Rwanda by improving its operational response to emergencies, Mr  Bilney said.

 The problem was not so much lack of resources as inadequate organisation.

 Mr Bilney said, "UNHCR is doing a good job of running the Benaco camp, which  holds nearly a quarter of a million people, ably assisted by groups like UNICEF,  OXFAM and CARE.

 "Benaco remains very overcrowded, however, with water supplies dwindling and  inadequate plastic sheeting to protect people from the coming seasonal rains.  Latrines are not being built fast enough, with the possibility of serious outbreaks of  dysentery during the wet season.

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 Heiease

 - 2 -

 "Hundreds of people continue to arrive at the Ngara camps, with the prospect of a  mass exodus from Burundi worrying aid workers.

 "The prospect of long term refugee encampment is focussing attention on  escalating environmental problems. Two thousand cubic metres of wood is being  consumed per week, with the threat of total deforestation of the surrounding region.

 "Ideally the Rwandan refugees would return home soon, but doubts remain about  security in the south-east of the country. Additional , efforts need to be made to  guarantee the security of returnees, communicate accurate information about the  situation in Rwanda to refugees, and counter efforts being made by the defeated  military to prevent people going home, Mr Bilney said.

 In these regards, the efforts of the United Nations and the new Government would  be crucial. Any suggestion of a mass vendetta against Hutu people would ensure  the camps remain for a very long time.

 On a more positive note, Mr Bilney said he was particularly pleased that the  Australian Defence Force medical contingent was receiving high praise from senior  UN officials and the Rwandan Government alike. The special representative of the  UN Secretary General, Shaharyar Mohammad Khan described their contribution as  "invaluable", while Major General Tousignant, Commander of the UN AMIR forces  told Mr Bilney they were "doing a superb job", treating UN forces and NGO  personnel, and providing hospital services to Rwandans through helping restore  services in the Kigali General Hospital. .

 Mr Bilney said that he was pleased to carry with him a message of support and  encouragement for the troops from Defence Science and Personnel Minister, Gary  Punch. As well he delivered four large tubs of Vegemite, which was a gift from  Kraft, and which was warmly welcomed by the ADF.

 Mr Bilney will also visit the World. Vision health clinic and dispensary in Kigali  and the south western town of Butare where the ADF is establishing a medical  outpost, before departing for the International Conference on Population and  Development in Cairo.

 For further information contact:  Allen Mawer (Minister's Office) (06) 277 7660

