---
title: "Major questions surfacing about Government's actions on boat people"
date: "1994-12-29"
creators:
  - "Short, Jim"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211549986
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2179514%22
---

 29 December 1994

 MEDIA RELEASE BY SENATOR JIM SHORT SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 MAJOR QUESTIONS SURFACING ABOUT GOVERNMENT'S ACTIONS ON BOAT PEOPLE

 The admission by Immigration Minister Bolkus that he knew of the potential problem with boat people from Southern China a month ago raises at least two major questions:

 1. Why did he not take action at the time to prevent the potential problem, of which he was aware, from occurring?

 2. If his advice at that time was that there was, in fact no serious problem looming for Australia, how is it that his intelligence sources got it so wrong?

 Either way, Senator BoIkus must provide answers to an increasingly concerned Australia. That concern is shared just as much by Australians of Chinese and Vietnamese origin as it is by all other Australians.

 The Coalition acknowledges that the Government faces a very difficult situation. However, the Coalition believes the Government should be doing much more than it appears to be doing to tackle this problem at its root, that is, by taking all possible steps to discourage the boat people from leaving Southern China in the first place. This will include involvement by the Chinese Government, who accepted these people for

 settlement in China some 15 years ago.

 Prime Minister Keating should be talking to Chinese Government leaders. Senator Bolkus should be in China talking directly with Chinese Ministers and officials.

 It is critically important that the Australian Government does everything in its power to demonstrate to all concerned that it is absolutely resolute on this matter. The Chinese Government, those people contemplating taking to the boats, and those groups/gangs who may be organising the boats, must be left in no doubt whatsoever that Australia will

 not tolerate violation of its borders by illegal arrivals who are not genuine refugees.

 Such arrivals undermine our orderly offshore migration program. Queue jumping of this nature discriminates against all those other people seeking to migrate to Australia, including refugees, who are following the correct procedures of offshore application and assessment.

 Failure by Prime Minister Keating and Immigration Minister Bolkus to act with more urgency risks giving the wrong signal. Australia's signal must be totally clear - that this gravest threat to the integrity of our immigration program for many years will not be permitted to succeed.

 For further information contact Senator Short on 018 558 118. COMMONWEALTH eARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 „

