---
title: "New Settlement Advisory Council sets priorities"
date: "1994-06-30"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211185465
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1UR10%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 }  Senator Nick Bolkus Parliament H ouse C anberra ACT 2600  (06) 27 7  7 8 6 0

 B 4 1 /9 4 Irvvrvxtqra/rvvU -  qjty\  o Icmj rvvgvrVr NEW SETTLEMENT ADVISORY COUNCIL SETS PRIORITIES

 The e ffe c t o f enterprise bargaining on w om en w orkers of non-English speaking   background will be among the issu es addressed by th e n e w  S ettlem en t Advisory   Council to the Federal Government, which met for the first tim e in Canberra today.

 Chaired by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus,   the 1 5-m em ber Council's role is to provide advice from a com m unity perspective   on settlem en t services for migrants.

 "I will be looking to Council to provide advice over the next tw o  years on issu es   ranging from em ploym ent and training - including th e im pact of initiatives  

 announced in the White Paper, Working Nation - to health, aged care and  

 occupational health and safety," Senator Bolkus said.

 The first Council w a s  introduced in 1 9 9 2  as part o f th e National Integrated  

 Settlem en t Strategy, which is a cooperative approach b e tw e e n  Com m onw ealth,   State and Local Governments to plan for the se ttle m e n t n e e d s  of migrants.

 "Council m em bers have been selected for their exp ertise, rather than as  

 representatives of groups to which they may belong," Senator Bolkus said.

 "They include people w h o have worked with r efu g e es, with survivors of torture   and trauma, w o m e n , youth and the elderly. Their exp ertise ranges across  

 education, the arts, health, employment, industrial relations and Local  

 Government."

 Senator Bolkus expressed his appreciation of the important contribution of the   outgoing m em bers of the SAC, w h o s e  terms expired in March this year.

 "I am delighted that the n e w  Council includes both n e w  m em b ers to provide input   on specific subject areas, and four members of th e first Council to ensure  

 continuity" he said.

 A list of Council members is attached.

 CANBERRA 3 0  June 1 9 9 4

 Media contact: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7 8 6 0

 SETTLEMENT ADVISORY COUNCIL

 MEMBERS

 Mr Sauro Antonelli (VIC)

 Mr Paris Aristotle (VIC)

 Mr Chris Christodoulou (NSW) Ms Carmel Guerra (VIC)

 Ms Eugenia Hill (SA)

 Ms Grace Lee (NSW)

 Ms Irene Matthews (TAS)

 Mr Vuong Nguyen (VIC)

 Ms Rita Prasad (QLD)

 Ms Monica Romeo (WA)

 Mr Wasili Salewski (NSW)

 Ms Mary Shiner (NSW)

 Ms Penny Wong (SA)

 Ms Thida Yang (NSW)

 To be advised (NT)

 June 1994

