---
title: "United Nations International Conference on Population and Development"
date: "1994-09-05"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211186156
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MWU10%22
---



Mr Chairman

 My delegation is deeply grateful to Egypt for
offering Cairo as the seat of this conference as for the gracious
hospitality being provided to all.

 I would also like to thank
you, Mr Chairman, and Dr Sadik and the ICPD secretariat, for the
extraordinary work you have done.


Significance of the
ICPD

 We are meeting in the cradle of civilisation to
address issues fundamental to all future civilisations - the issues of
population and development and the challenges they represent.

Our goals are now in sight. To achieve them we will need to ensure that we
work on the text before us and not on abstractions from it.

This conference's significance is not solely attributable to the contents of
its agenda - important and opportune though it is. Above all, its timing is
critical.

 As to the substance of our agenda, clearly we are not
here to address one issue alone - nor are we concerned with a small number
of disparate issues.

 The agenda before us addresses population
and development. We must deal with concerns integral to those issues and
their interaction.

 When we address issues of population, its
growth and projections for such growth, we come to the debate with the
knowledge that, every four days, we add 1 million people to the world's
population of 5.7 billion. We are aware of the impact this growth has on
standards and quality of living and on finite resources.

 In
turn, when we address issues of development we longer do so without
addressing economic growth in the context of sustainable development. Once
again, we know that to so otherwise would impact negatively on standards of
living.

 And, we are well aware that these issues cannot be
addressed adequately if we do not tackle a key concern - the need to redress
gender imbalance. The need to create an environment empowering for
women.

 As to its timing, this conference builds on agreements
reached in Rio, particularly on the concept of sustainable development.
Member nations need to recognise the centrality of individual welfare to the
achievement of such sustainable development.

 On the road from
Rio, we are driving towards other major international events, including the
world summit for social development and the fourth conference on
women.

 We find ourselves in this process at the end of the cold
war. It is a period of transition from the old to the new, a time of rapid
global and regional change and a time when we can focus on building new
societies and relationships free from the internal and external constraints
of the cold war period.

 All of us, both developed and
developing nations, come here with a common goal - to work together and
independently to stabilise population growth.

 It is imperative
that this conference does find common ground, does find areas of agreement
on those areas that are contentious.

 I know that the Holy See
and some other delegations which adopt policies based on articles of faith
disagree with the majority of member nations on some areas of reproductive
health. While such beliefs and the right to hold them must be respected, we
shall fail future generations if this conference does not agree on practical
measures on family planning and women's health. Such a failure would not
only cause human misery but would challenge the very commitment to humanity
which forms an essential part of all such faiths.

 Let me be
clear on this. If there is a genuine wish for consensus there will be a need
for cooperation. That is the inner nature of our shared existence, of our
working together.


Areas of consensus

 Before
addressing the issues before us, let me acknowledge the magnitude of the
progress already made; the principles accepted and the strategies agreed
to.

 The draft program of action recognises the importance of
accessible family planning and its linkages to sustainable
development.

 Importantly, it clearly states the need for family
planning programs to be entirely non-coercive in nature. This cannot be
emphasised too strongly as people must be free to decide the number and
spacing of their children. But they also need to have the means to give
effect to their choices. To fail to recognise this fact would be to deny all
logic. We cannot promise people daily bread and then deny them the flour and
water with which to make it.

 Member nations also appear to have
recognised that the success of population policies depends on: the need for
gender equality; equitable participation by women in decision-making; and
the importance of education, particularly for women and girls. There has
also been agreement on the need To address explicitly the reproductive
health issues of women and the importance of men assuming shared family
responsibilities.

 It is useful to pause to reflect on how far
we have come in realising the rights of women to participate equally in
society.

 Even ten years ago, some of the agreed language in
this document may have been seen as radical, perhaps even threatening for
some, and beyond the expectations of many women. Not only have women been
taking up the rights and roles envisaged in this document but society has
been greatly enriched in their doing so.

 These are all
significant, even historic achievements with language agreed in many areas
breaking new ground. Now is the time to consolidate these achievements and
to this end language which has already been agreed must not be
reopened.


Australia's key objectives

Australia will be working for a strong, forward looking program of action -
one characterised largely by agreed, practical measures linking,
constructively, population, social development and sustainable development.
The program must also respect cultural and religious differences while
honouring internationally accepted human rights principles.

 My
delegation will be seeking to promote access to the widest possible range of
safe, effective and acceptable family planning services to enable women and
men, as a right and responsibility, to choose the number and spacing of
their children, consistent with their individual economic, cultural and
religious circumstances, and to reduce the maternal and infant mortality
associated with high risk pregnancy.

 We will seek to promote
commitment to non-coercive population policies which integrate the delivery
of family planning services with economic and social development programs to
relieve the poverty and disadvantage so often associated with high levels of
population growth, to minimise world demand for abortion and address the
reality of the serious problems arising from unsafe abortion.

Australia supports the way in which the draft program of action presents
abortion - that is, as an important public health issue.

 Family
planning is a universally accepted term. It was adopted by governments in
the 1974 Bucharest World Population Plan of Action. If the concept of family
planning were not to form part of the consensus from this conference, then I
believe its credibility would be deeply undermined.

 These
issues can be emotional ones and have been confused in media reports and
public discussion. For example, this conference is not mainly about abortion
as some reports continue to suggest. In fact, it is sometimes hard to
reconcile such discussion with the document now before us.

 The
Australian position, Mr Chairman, has been informed by a recent independent
report the Australian Government commissioned in 1993 into the linkages
between population growth and the economic development and well-being of
women, men and children in developing countries.

 Australia's
report, I am pleased to say, is available to all delegations to this
conference.

 I believe that its conclusions reinforce and
support the aspirations of this conference, as have the findings of many
reports in the past, including that of the Pontifical Academy of Science
last June.

 At what point do we pay heed to the expert
advice?

 Australia is also concerned that the international
community does not retreat from the understandings reached at Rio, just two
years ago. It therefore attaches importance to the linkages between
population, environment and development being reflected throughout the draft
program of action.

 Mr Chairman

 The United Nations,
through this conference, has the opportunity to be at the leading edge of
public thinking by recognising the unique identity, culture and interests of
indigenous peoples and their need for equitable access at all levels of
society.

 Indigenous peoples are generally among the most
disadvantaged of populations. They deserve special support, aimed at
expanding their choices and opportunities, not just as marginalised and
disadvantaged groups, but as custodians of values and understanding which
bind them in a durable and enduring relationship to the land.

Indigenous cultures such as those of the Australian Aborigines existed in
harmony with the natural world for tens of thousands of years. These were
not cultures of waste and over-consumption. Their spiritual values and
lifestyles appear to have reflected great respect for the living and
non-living elements of the environment which sustained them.

 In
the draft program of action, Australia's interests, and those of many other
countries, are mirrored in the principle on indigenous peoples. Australia
believes, Mr Chairman, that the document would be poorer if this principle
were not to be retained.


Multiculturalism

The draft program of action emphasises the importance of successful
integration of immigrants into the host society.

 Australia
fully concurs with this approach.

 Over the full life of the
United Nations, Australia has actively promoted immigration and refugee
settlement in Australia. Today's resultant population includes people from
more than 130 ethnic backgrounds and over 220 nationalities. Nearly a
quarter of Australia's population was either born overseas or had at least
one parent born overseas. Significantly, Australia is also relatively free
of social tensions resulting from ethnic diversity.

 To a large
extent, this can be attributed to Australia's multiculturalism policies,
policies which are inclusive by nature and which aim to maximise
participation and fair treatment for all.

 This is one of the
key issues to be examined at the 
1995 Global Cultural Diversity
Conference, to be hosted by the Australian Government in April next year
as part of Australia's contribution to the International Year for
Tolerance.

 The conference, to be addressed by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Dr Boutros-Boutros Ghali, will
provide another platform for exchanging ideas and experiences on building
social cohesion in societies rich in linguistic, racial, religious and
cultural diversity. It will also examine ways in which such diversity can be
viewed as a social and economic asset.


Cities and the New
Global Economy Conference

 The draft program of action
emphasises urban development that is both participatory and environmentally
sustainable.

 Australia is anxious to advance these issues and
will be doing so through the 
Cities and the New Global Economy
conference, which is being jointly organised with the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development, to be held this November in
Melbourne.


Conclusion

 Mr Chairman

 We need to agree on a final document which has international
credibility and can be implemented. It also needs to be one which serves as
a stepping stone and not an obstacle for the world summit for social
development and the Fourth World Conference on Women.

 I hope
that this ancient city can again promote real progress towards a more just,
peaceful and stable international community - towards better
civilisation.

 Thank you, Mr Chairman.

