---
title: "Annual conference of Ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs [Communique]"
date: "1994-03-18"
creators:
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211184564
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UFP10%22
---

 (

 COMMUNIQUE

 //■ 2 ,/H  Z <3 ^

 / H c / 6 7 ? C  < v c - T '< v />  Ζ?">ί - / - ί'/ ν 1

 ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF MINISTERS  FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 Commonwealth, State and Territory Ministers, as well as New Zealand's Minister for  Immigration, the Hon. Roger Maxwell, discussed a range of immigration and ethnic  affairs issues in Canberra today, March 18. They were joined in their deliberations  by Councillor Peter Woods, President of the Australian Local Government 

 Association.

 The Commonwealth Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick  Bolkus, said the meetings are held annually and focus on immigration, multicultural  and ethnic affairs issues.

 Senator Bolkus said the Ministerial meeting had been preceded by a meeting of  officials from Australia and New Zealand.

 Ministers agreed to a resolution calling on all Australians to respect our mores and  tradition of tolerance, fair play and non-violent resolution of political and community  conflict. The full text of the resolution is attached.

 Among other issues considered at today's meeting were:

 . the Migration Program for 1994/95

 . the humanitarian program and in particular its role in helping people from the  former Yugoslavia

 . the Migration Reform Act, the provisions of which come into effect on 1  September 1994

 . the November 1993 decisions which allow numbers of certain groups to  remain permanently in Australia

 the national integrated settlement strategy and progress towards the  development and implementation of collaborative settlement plans between  the three spheres of Government

 ESL

 Multicultural affairs

 an ongoing focus on the needs and aspirations of women of non-English  speaking background.

 the Olympics 2000 and opportunities for cooperation between the  Commonwealth, States on multicultural aspects of the Sydney Games.

 The Migration Program

 The Ministers discussed the size and composition of the 1994/95 Migration  Program. Key factors expected to contribute to a moderate upward trend in  migration program numbers including indications of increases in demand for  migration, flowing from a stronger economy.

 The Humanitarian Program

 The Ministers supported a continuing commitment to a substantial Humanitarian  program and the priorities of the Humanitarian program responding as it does to the  need for resettlement of people from the former Yugoslavia while responding to  other humanitarian situations, particularly when people affected have close links  with Australia. -

 They also noted the continuing decline in resettlement of people from Indo-China  and the success of the Special Assistance Category (SAC) for those who have  experienced hardship and suffering and have close links with Australia.

 . the Government introduced a new SAC in October 1993 for Cambodians with  close links to Australia who had been resident in Cambodia for twelve months  before lodging their application. The SAC has attracted strong interest and  600 places have been allocated in 1993/94.

 Migration Reform Act

 The Ministers noted the introduction on 1 September 1994 of the provisions of the  Migration Reform Act 1992 which are designed to clarify aspects of the  administration of migration legislation.

 They noted that the changes will impact on the law and policy underlying the  processes by which people enter, remain in, and leave Australia although the direct  effect on the public is expected to be limited.

 1 November 1993 Decisions

 The Ministers discussed the implementation of the Government's decision to allow  members of the following groups to remain permanently in Australia:

 . PRC nationals in Australia on 20 June 1989 and their family members in  Australia

 . Better qualified asylum seekers who had applied for refugee status before 1  November 1993 and humanitarian temporary entry holders from the former  Yugoslavia and Sri Lanka

 . highly qualified students

 . refugee status holders

 The Ministers noted that the decision honoured a commitment that the PRC  nationals who were in Australia at the time of Tienanmen Square would not be  forced to return to the PRC.

 National Integrated Settlement Strategy

 Ministers endorsed the progress made by Commonwealth/State/Territory Settlement  Planning Committees towards the development and implementation of collaborative  settlement plans.

 In particular they welcomed the improved level of cooperation between States and  Territories in moving towards an integrated and planned approach to the way  settlement services are made available to migrants.

 The Ministers noted that at the next Ministers meeting the Commonwealth would  table a paper presenting the scope and level of Commonwealth services for  migrants including funding allocations. The purpose of the paper would be to  provide a basis for analysis of Commonwealth services to migrants in the 

 Commonwealth, State and Local Government spheres.

 Ministers also noted the progress report on Commonwealth ESL provisions and  agreed that there continue to be ongoing progress reports at forthcoming Ministers'  and Officials' Meetings, particularly in the context of the proposed evaluations of  Commonwealth ESL programs to be conducted during 1994/95.

 Progress in access and equity

 Ministers noted that the next phase of the Commonwealth's plan would be based on  additional consultative and participative processes, and noted the progress in the

 States in developing and implementing a range of plans to improve service delivery. 

 They agreed to exchange information including on best practice.

 Productive Diversity

 Ministers noted the work currently being undertaken by the Commonwealth to  further promote and integrate the Productive Diversity concept in national policies  and programs by Government agencies and industry.

 The international conference on managing cultural diversity to be held in  Sydney in the first half of 1995

 Ministers noted Australia would host the first major international conference of this  kind, which would provide a showcase for Australia's experience in social and  economic aspects of cultural diversity, and discuss overseas experience.

 NESB Womens issues

 Ministers recognised the need to maintain a focus on the needs and aspirations of  women of NESB. They agreed that this issue would be a standing item for each  annual conference of Ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. They will also 

 request that the Ministers' Conference on the Status of Women examine issues  relevant to NESB at its annual conferences.

 Olympics 2000

 Ministers recognised Sydney's Olympic bid as a win for multiculturalism. They  noted that organisers of the bid came to see the cultural diversity of the Australian  community as a plus for the bid and exploited it in their public relations campaign.

 All Ministers agreed on the need for cooperation on the multicultural aspects of the  Games and the Federal Government noted that it had already begun to put in place  mechanisms to facilitate a successful Games.

 Name/Procedures

 Ministers agreed to adopt the name "Ministerial Council on Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs", and to adopt terms of reference and agreed procedural  guidelines. Ministers also agreed that Australian Local Government Association  should have membership status on the Council.

 Next Conference

 The next annual Ministers' Conference will be hosted by the government of Western  Australia in May/June 1995.

 Media Inquiries : Ruth Dewsbury (06) 264 2176

