---
title: "Processing of claims by failed asylum seekers"
date: "1994-07-15"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211185606
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6GS10%22
---

 5 /

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Senator Nick Bolkus Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 B44/94

 PROCESSING OF CLAIMS BY FAILED ASYLUM SEEKERS

 People already found not to be refugees in another country in a process approved by the  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) will not be able to lodge fresh  applications in Australia, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick  Bolkus said today.

 "The Government will act to amend migration legislation to apply to such people from  today’s date," Senator Bolkus said.

 Australia has been a major player in the Comprehensive Plan of Action, under which  refugees are assisted to resettle in third countries, and failed asylum seekers must return to  their country of origin.

 From July 1989 to March 1994, Australia resettled 16,690 Vietnamese and Laotian refugees  under the CPA with about 1400 expected to arrive during 1994/95.

 "The international community has agreed that the country of first asylum conduct the  screening process in association with the UNHCR and according to the UN Convention  definition of ’refugee’," Senator Bolkus said.

 The 17 Vietnamese boat people who arrived in Broome on July 7, 1994 were found not to  be refugees through this screening process at the Galang Processing Centre in Indonesia.

 The UNHCR has urged them to return to Galang, as have other refugee spokespeople.

 "I am concerned that Australia’s policies and procedures of processing refugee claims are  consistent with UNHCR concerns," Senator Bolkus said.

 "For this reason the Government will act urgently when Parliament resumes."

 CANBERRA JULY 15 1994

