---
title: "Asylum seekers sellout"
date: "1994-10-18"
creators:
  - "Spindler, Sid"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214168606
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR06005014%22
---

 Senator Sid Spindler Australian Democrat  Senator for Victoria democrats;

 October 18,1994 94/461

 ASYLUM SEEKERS SELLOUT

 The Government and the Coalition Parties should be condemned for passing a Bill  which delegates Australia's responsibility to assess the refugee status of asylum  seekers to other countries, many of which have legal systems we would not accept as  trustworthy, according to the Australian Democrats.

 'The Government and the Coalition Parties today combined to pass a Bill which could  well result in asylum seekers being sent back by a so-called "third safe country" which,  for instance, could be Thailand or Indonesia, to their country of origin where they may  well be exposed to persecution and even danger of their lives for their political or 

 religious views or activities," Senator Sid Spindler, Democrat spokesperson on Law and  Justice and Ethnic Affairs, said today.

 "Migration Bill No. 4 will enable the Government to designate so-called third safe  countries by regulation and empower immigration officials to not even assess asylum  seekers who reach Australia. Instead, if they have any connection, however tenuous,  with one of these designated countries they will be turned back immediately and 

 delivered to that country.

 'This places Australia in breach of its international obligation under the Refugee  Convention to determine the legal status of an asylum seeker and not to expel or return  such a person to wherever he or she could be under threat.

 "One only has to assume that Indonesia may in the future be one of the third safe  countries and to recall the way Indonesia's legal system has dealt with offences against  East Timor citizens to show how despicable these provisions are.

 The Australian Democrats have supported several amendments by the Opposition  which, according to Senator Spindler, were designed to cover up their appalling lack of  principle but which have not cured the defects of the Bill.

 'The Australian Democrats' amendment to shorten the period for which a safe third  country is designated from three to two years is a very minor even though welcome  improvement.

 "However, on the whole this is a day when members of the Australian Parliament should  hang their heads in shame," Senator Spindler concluded.

 For more information contact Senator Spindler on (06) 277-3640

