---
title: ""The reality of aid", [speech]"
date: "1994-08-24"
creators:
  - "Peacock, Andrew"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "speech"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211186016
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2553033%22
---

 35

 , PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA .A. I.V4 1C=.	I e HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES HON. ANDREW PEACOCK, M.P. MEMBER FOR KOOYONG SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600 TEL. (06) 277 4048, 277 4419 FAX. (06) 277 4990

 LEVEL 16 90 COLLINS STREET MELBOURNE, VIC, 3000 TEL. (03) 650 3455

 FAX. (03) 650 51 1 5

 SPEECH BY HON. ANDREW PEACOCK, MP

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS "THE REALITY OF AIDE 24 AUGUST 1994

 Chairman, Minister, Parliamentary colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen.

 I congratulate the national and international non-government organisations, including importantly ACFOA, for the outstanding contribution to international policy debate represented by their Independent Review of International Aid "The Reality of Aid

 1994".

 This is a well written and thorough report, focusing clearly on the key current issues. The Coalition fully endorses the primary notion outlined in the report that aid should be oriented to the

 provision of basic needs and to progressive broad based growth policies aimed at poverty reduction. Let there be no doubt on this. The Coalition puts poverty reduction at the top of our list of aid priorities.

 The report is very critical of most donor countries in this regard, claiming that all too -often the direction of aid spending does not follow the rhetoric on poverty reduction. That is as true in Australia as elsewhere in the world, even if the Chapter on Australia, drafted by Russell Rollason and Penelope Lee of ACFOA, doesn't put it quite so bluntly.

 As the ACFOA Chapter rightly points out, despite the Government's objections, UNICEF and UNDP conclude that less than 10 per cent of Australia's aid programme is focussed on priority poverty sectors. Within Australia's bilateral countryiprograms, a mere

 1.4 per cent is spent on basic education, only 3.6 per cent is spent on health and 2.5 per cent on water supply and sanitation.

 These are definite wrongs which the Coalition will right.

 IMMIMINN COMMONWEALTH

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY IvIICAH .

 Coalition aid policy has long favoured an increased focus on

 humanitarian concerns and the alleviation of hunger and poverty. This will include both humanitarian relief assistance and the provision of basic people-oriented needs for long term developmental progress.

 The Coalition believes that basic needs (especially of children) such as primary health care and primary education, environmental rehabilitation (including some of the "silent" but critical issues like water supply and sanitation) as well as issues affecting women in development should figure much more importantly in Australia's overall aid program.

 I agree therefore with the recommendation in the report that more investment is needed in human potential.  The democratic transition in many developing countries has brought with it critical new pressures for development cooperation to focus more closely on people, particularly if it is to contribute as effectively as it should to global peace building and prevention of conflict.

 It is my view, for example, that investment in basic education and training should be given higher priority in Australia's development effort.

 According to the Government's own recently issued National Program of Action "Our Children, Our Future", in 1992-93 Australia devoted roughly 1/5th of the aid budget to education and training.

 But most of this is focussed on the tertiary level through scholarship and fee-support programs here in Australia. Assistance for primary and secondary education (combined) has been less than 1% of education-sector aid.

 And, what is even more telling, there is nothing, I repeat nothing, in this National Program of Action that would rectify this. I find this situation disgraceful. And it makes a mockery of the Government's overall response to what matters most from the World Summit for Children.

 Of course, the Coalition also believes that the private sector has a major role to play in international development and there is still an urgent need for freer trade, liberalised market access and deregulation of private enterprise.

 Realistically, "The Reality of Aid" points out that improvements to the world trade regime could bring far greater benefit than increased aid to the low income countries currently so dependent on aid flows. And, I would add, there is a need to attract to these countries a greater proportion of global investment.

 I also agree with the thrust of the report that there is a need to encourage small as well as large-scale enterprise and to increase the overall scope for employment.

 2

 Another issue tackled in the report is the growing share of

 global oaA now being devoted to humanitarian relief spending. The report shows vividly that the numbers of people affected by conflict and disaster have increased from an average 50 million a year in the early 1970s to over 320 million in 1991. And over the decade to 1992, refugee numbers have more than doubled.

 In our country, spending on humanitarian relief has tended not to increase to the same extent as for other donors. Indeed, in the view of the Coalition, the Government needs to do more in this area.

 The report rightly points out that NG0s, along with the military, are increasingly being called upon to play a critical role in implementing the relief effort.

 I take this opportunity to applaud and thank the NGOs for the spirit and courage they repeatedly demonstrate in troublespots around the world. I anticipate a continuing trend for civil and military agencies to work together in humanitarian relief, perhaps with increasing frequency. I agree with the thrust of

 the report that there is a need for closer co-ordination between the two, in an integrated, overall approach.

 The report touches on the issue of the appropriate balance between multilateral and bilateral aid. The report points out that payments to multilateral organisations are being scrutinised as never before as donors increasingly examine their contributions to multilateral agencies on a case by case basis.

 While the Australian Chapter tends to the more negative view, the Overview Chapter of "The Reality of Aid" tends to highlight the positives of multilateral aid, i.e. on average, better targeted on the poorest countries; in theory better insulated from narrow commercial or political interests; less administratively costly.

 Some in the audience will be aware of my recent criticism of the Government for failing to publish the results of its recent multilateral aid effectiveness review. Mr Bilney had agreed, in response, to publish this report. That was some time ago. I

 still haven't seen the report. Obviously, however, this will, when published, throw important light on the effectiveness of Australia's aid contributions through the multilateral channels

 and better inform public debate on this issue in Australia.

 I am interested that "The Reality of Aid" reports that the Australian Government is concerned that payments to development banks are at the expense of aid to other areas such as refugees

 and women's programs. If the Government has indeed come to this conclusion, I see it as even more vital that the Government make public the results of its own effectiveness review.

 According to "The Reality of Aid", the determining factors in deciding between multilateral and bilateral aid are "quality of aid management" and "the degree of commitment to poverty reduction".

 3

 Australia 

 doesn't score highly on either of these issues. I continue to be so disturbed by ongoing reports of inefficiency in Australia's aid program that I have called for a independent review of the entire Australian development co-operation program.

 The report makes an interesting comment about politicians increasingly lacking confidence and appearing nervous about the volume of their aid budgets.

 Well this is hardly surprising, is it, for some. Over the last ten years of Labor Governments, the aid budget in Australia has declined; declined per capita; declined as a percentage of per capita income; declined as a percentage of GNP; and declined as a percentage of total Federal Government expenditure.

 It's hardly remarkable that "The Reality of Aid" is expecting a fall in real terms in the volume or the percentage of GNP for a number Of countries, including, of course, Australia.

 Let me conclude by drawing attention to the two main conclusions of "The Reality of Aid" report. The first conclusion is that "donors appear to be failing to live up to their commitments on aid volume". There can be no doubt about this one. This conclusion applies, without qualification, to the Australian Government.

 The second conclusion is that governments are not making the transition from rhetoric to action on poverty reduction.

 Again, I believe, as I have shown, this conclusion holds water in the present Australian aid program.

 I repeat my view that the time has well and truly arrived for a full-scale independent review of the entire Australian aid program.

 4

