---
title: "Government funds vital Rwanda projects"
date: "1994-08-02"
creators:
  - "Bilney, Gordon"
source: "Minister for Development Cooperation"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214128351
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR05004763%22
---

 5H

 !

 . Minister tor Development Cooperation · Minister for Pacific Island Affairs 

 Gordon Bilney MP

 Minister for Development Cooperation, Gordon Bilney, today announced the Government  would fund three emergency relief projects in Rwanda - totalling $1.7 million - through the  Australian Red Cross, Community Aid Abroad and the World Food Programme.

 The Minister said funding for the proposals would be allocated from the Government's $6.5  million emergency relief package for Rwanda announced by the Prime Minister last week.

 "The projects address the highest priority needs in Rwanda," M r Bilney said. "Clean water,  sanitation and basic food supplies are still urgently needed as thousands continue to die in  camps with appalling sanitary conditions."

 "However the international relief effort is starting to have some effect on the plight o f the  refugees as agencies distribute increasing volumes o f supplies and equipment."

 C om m unity Aid A broad will receive $435,000 for water supply activities in the Benaco  camps and nearby areas in Tanzania. Under the program the lake, which is supplying the  current system and likely to run dry within weeks, will be replaced by groundwater. Funds will  be used to install boreholes, construct water truck loading platforms, water treatment systems, 

 storage tanks, and pumping equipment.

 The program will be implemented by OXFAM International, Community Aid Abroad's partner  agency in the field. It will also train local personnel in technical and managerial aspects o f the  program and includes counselling and education for traumatised children in the camps.

 T he A ustralian R ed Cross will receive $300,000 for the placement o f Australian personnel -  such as medical specialists and sanitation engineers - in international Red Cross operations in  Rwanda and at Goma in Zaire.

 MDC 66 2 August 1994

 GOVERNMENT FUNDS VITAL RWANDA PROJECTS

 COMMONWEALTH  

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH  J

 Release

 T he W orld Food P rogram m e will receive $1 million in answer to requests for donors to fund  urgent food purchases. The donation will be made under the United Nations Consolidated  Inter-Agency Appeal for Rwanda.

 Australia is providing around $47 million to relieve the plight o f Rwandans. The Federal  Government has provided around $35 million through aid and defence packages and a further  $12 million has been donated to public appeals being run by non-government organisations.

 The Government is also considering further proposals for Rwanda relief projects by Australian  non-government agencies which are likely to be announced later this week.

 F o r fu rth e r inform ation: M inister's office

 R ichard M oore  06 277 7660 AIDAB RWANDA M ED IA  CEN TRE  06 245 4200, 245 4201, 245 4202, 245 4203 

 A ustralian Red Cross 

 ' 03419 7533

 Com m unity Aid A broad  03 289 9444

