---
title: "Double dissolution trigger on the way"
date: "1994-11-09"
creators:
  - "Spindler, Sid"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214168751
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR06005007%22
---

 Senator Sid Spindler Australian Democrat  Senator for Victoria  DEMOCRATS 

 & &

 9th November, 1994 94/509

 Double Dissolution  Trigger On the Way The Government has potentially established the first trigger for a double. .  dissolution by bringing the Migration Bill No. 3 into the Senate and having it  rejected.

 "In fact this is the only plausible reason for the government bringing a bill before  the Senate which in all material aspects is similar to Bill No. 2 which everyone  advised the Government would be rejected," Democrat Law and Justice  Spokesperson Senator Spindler said today.

 "The Bill is designed to retrospectively authorise detention of asylum seekers and  remove the right to obtain compensation for unlawful detention—even as the  matter is before the High Court with an unfavourable decision expected by the  Government," Senator Spindler said. .

 "To pass this Bill would be to condone an executive government changing the  law to avoid legal liability.

 "The Bill offends against the principle of the separation of powers, against the  right of citizens to obtain just compensation when property or a right to property  is appropriated by government.

 "It was clear that it would not be passed by the Senate and that the only reason it  was brought in was to provide the double dissolution trigger.

 "No wonder Senator Bolkus predicted that we will be seeing this Bill again—The  Government will have to bring it back in 3 months to have it rejected again to  complete the trigger," Senator Spindler concluded.

 For further information, call Senator Sid Spindler on (06) 277 3641.

 -sassu

