---
title: "The 'reel' endangered species."
date: "1994-09-21"
creators:
  - "Beddall, David"
source: "MINISTER FOR RESOURCES"
subjects:
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "Indonesia"
  - "International cooperation"
  - "Refugees"
  - "GILLARD, Julia"
  - "STONE, Sharman, MP"
  - "HANSON-YOUNG, Sen Sarah"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211186302
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/31W10%22
---



"We need to keep an eye on our fish stocks if we are to continue to benefit
from the wealth in our seas," Minister for Resources, David Beddall said
today.

 "While many of our fish stocks are fully exploited the
status of some are still poorly understood. Importantly, because of
Government management we have haltered decline in some significant
fisheries, such as the southern bluefin tuna."

 These are some
of the findings of a study by the Bureau of Resource Sciences (BRS)
entitled, 'Fishery Status Reports 1993'.

 "This publication
provides scientific assessment of Australia's major fisheries and reflects
the current knowledge of the biology of fish stocks and the dynamics of fish
populations," Mr Beddall said.

 "The Fishery Status Reports
indicate that of the species or species groups covered, 4 are over-fished,
11 are fully-fished, 6 are assessed as under- - fished and the status of 10
is uncertain or unknown."

 The Report suggests that increasing
demands on Australia's fisheries resources and changing, management
strategies are placing greater emphasis on the need for stock assessment
advice.

 "Since many of Australia's valuable fish resources live
far offshore or at great depth, there is a lack of adequate information for
a comprehensive assessment of their status," Mr Beddall said.

"In spite of the uncertainty in our basic information, I am particularly
pleased that our most valuable finfish export, the southern bluefin tuna,
for which severe catch limits have been adhered to by trilateral partners
Australia, Japan and New Zealand, is only now showing some tentative signs
of recovery.

 "If we can overcome the problem of increasing
catches of southern bluefin by nations other than the trilateral partners
and bring about global restraint, then the recovery of this stock to its
full potential will bring a significantly higher return in the future.

 "In several other fisheries where over-fishing has been a problem,
the Australian Fisheries Management Authority (AFMA) and the industry have
initiated major re-structuring that should result in a positive response in
the health of the stocks for this $1.4 billion industry," Mr Beddall
said.

 Further information:

 Minister's Office:
Tamara Johnson   06 277 7440     015 266 370

 Department (BRS):
Derek Staples    06 272 4754

 NB: Copies of the publication,
'Fishery Status Reports 1993' are available from the Publications Officer,
Bureau of Resource Sciences, (06) 272 5978.

 FISHERY STATUS
REPORTS 1993

 OVERVIEW

 Some of the more important
fisheries and the issues facing them include:

 NORTHERN
PRAWN:

 The Northern Prawn Fishery (NPF) is the most valuable
fishery managed by the Commonwealth and is considered to be fully exploited.
The common banana prawn and two species of tiger prawn account for almost
80% of the catch.

 Fishing for banana prawns is highly seasonal
and lasts only a few weeks in April-May each year. The annual abundance of
banana prawns is highly variable and linked to rainfall.

 The
focus for stock assessment and management for the NPF has recently been on
the tiger prawn fishery. Fishing for tiger prawns begins each year as catch
rates in the banana prawn fishery decline. Assessment of the NPF indicates
that, although there are other possible explanations, tiger prawn
recruitment in the mid-1980s was low as a result of overfishing. There was
also clear evidence of overcapitalisation, with too many boats operating in
the fishery.

 The Australian Fisheries Management Authority and
the fishing industry instigated a major restructuring of the fishing fleet
that has taken place to reduce fishing capacity and improve profitability.
Indications as to whether or not tiger prawn catches will reach predicted
long-term levels will not be available for several years.

SOUTHERN BLUEFIN TUNA:

 The adult biomass of southern bluefin
tuna (SBT) is at its lowest level ever and is below levels considered to
indicate sustainability. The catch restrictions that have been in place
appear to have halted the decline. Some positive signs for the future of the
stock are evident from recent catches, including a sequential rebuilding of
the abundance of juveniles. However, increasing SBT catches by countries
outside trilateral arrangements between Australia, Japan and New Zealand is
a serious obstacle to achieving global restraint. SBT catches by vessels
from Taiwan and Indonesia are approaching 2000 t and are now significant
compared with the 11750 t currently allowed by trilateral quota
arrangements.

 To ensure sustainability, a truly global
restraint in SBT catches is seen to be essential given the present high
degree of uncertainty about the future of the stock.

 SOUTH EAST
FISHERY:

 The South East Fishery (SEF) is an important component
of the Australian fishing industry, taking the largest tonnage and supplying
most of the fresh fish for Sydney and Melbourne. It is a multispecies trawl
fishery harvesting more than 80 species. Because of over fishing of some
species and the worsening economic situation of the fishery, a system of
individual transferable quotas (ITQs) was introduced, covering 16 species by
January 1992.

 ITQ management requires a quantitative assessment
of the status of each species for which a quota is to be set. Targeted
research is urgently required to redress the lack of information for several
species. Because of their importance, separate status reports have been
written for two species in the SEF, gemfish and orange roughy.

Gemfish occur in waters off Australia and New Zealand. Available evidence
indicates that there are two stocks in Australian waters, one to the east of
Bass Strait and another to the west. All available evidence points to a
dramatic decline in the recruitment of young fish of the Eastern gemfish
stock in the late 1980s and assessments suggest that the stock may continue
to decline in the near future, even in the absence of fishing. The current
total allowable catch has been set at zero to protect the stock, but a limit
per fishing trip of 200- 300 t (depending on the time of year) is permitted
to allow for unavoidable by- catch.

 Orange roughy is a deep-sea
species fished mainly at depths of 800 m to 1000 m, where aggregations
occur. The species is long lived (in excess of 100 years of age) and slow
growing, taking at least 20-25 years to reach maturity. The low productivity
of orange roughy suggests that they can sustain harvest rates in the order
of only one to five per cent of the unfished stock. Recent high catches in
the SEF have been of accumulated stock of old fish and indications from the
most recent assessments are that the stock is now fully exploited. The
assessment suggests that sustainable yield from the presently known stock
may be in the order of 2000-3000 t.

 SOUTHERN SHARK:

 The Southern Shark Fishery catches several temperate species of
shark. The annual catch of the two major species, school and gummy shark, is
about 3000 t carcass weight. Management of the fishery is complicated by
several factors: the fishery operates across the waters of several States
and in Commonwealth waters; two main gear types are used (gillnet and
longline); and sharks are also taken as by-catch of trawling in the
SEF.

 In 1993, assessments of gummy shark indicated that in Bass
Strait, the major fishing area for gummy shark, catches are close to
sustainable levels. School shark status continues to be assessed as
seriously over exploited. The sustainable yield estimate of 550 t represents
a 50% reduction in current catches across the fishery.

