---
title: "Details of Australia's humanitarian program for 1994/95"
date: "1994-08-02"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211185790
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/19T10%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE Senator Nick Bolkus

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC   AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME   MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600   (06) 277 7860

 B49/94

 lUcKmugyrv DETAILS OF AUSTRALIA’S HUMANITARIAN PROGRAM FOR 1994/95

 The special needs of women refugees in danger of victimisation, harassment or serious abuse  have been recognised with 100 extra places for Women at Risk in Australia’s Humanitarian  Program for 1994/95, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Bolkus, said  today.

 "Australia’s Woman at Risk category acknowledges that women refugees are often in a  particularly vulnerable situation," Senator Bolkus said. "I am pleased to confirm that  Australia will offer resettlement to 500 women at risk this year, compared with 400 in  1993/94."

 Australia will offer resettlement to a total of 13,000 people under its Humanitarian Program  in 1994/95, with 7000 of those places set aside for refugees and special humanitarian cases.

 "Indochina, the Middle East and the former Yugoslavia will be the priority areas for refugees  and special humanitarian entrants," Senator Bolkus said.

 In addition, Australia offers resettlement to vulnerable groups with close family or  community links to Australia under the Special Assistance Category (SAC).

 In 1994/95 there will be Special Assistance Categories for people displaced from the former  Yugoslavia (3,300 places), minorities of the former USSR (750 places), Burmese in Burma  and Thailand (500 and 100 places respectively), Sudanese (300 places), Cambodia (600 

 places) and a total of 250 places for two SACs for East Timorese - one operating from  Portugal, and a second from Macau and Mozambique.

 Senator Bolkus stressed that resettlement was not the solution to many humanitarian problems  - including the current crisis in Rwanda.

 "In Rwanda the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR’s) main goal is  to repatriate the refugees to their homeland in safety and dignity," he said.

 "Nevertheless, the Australian Government is monitoring the situation and would be prepared  to consider those refugees identified by the UNHCR for urgent resettlement, if resettlement  in Australia is seen to be the most appropriate solution."

 Senator Bolkus said the Government had also indicated to the United States that it would be  prepared if necessary to accept a small number of Haitian refugees with good prospects of  resettlement in Australia.

 "More than a third of the 13,000 places in the 1994/95 Humanitarian Program will go to  people from the former Yugoslavia, with 900 Refugee and 600 Special Humanitarian places  in addition to the 3,300 places under the SAC," Senator Bolkus said.

 To facilitate the reunion of more recent arrivals from the Former Yugoslavia with those still  displaced overseas, the Migration Regulations will be amended to bring forward the date by  which the applicant’s near relative in Australia has to be a permanent resident or Australian  citizen, from January 1992 to June 1993.

 Senator Bolkus said that more than 1,300 refugee places have been allocated for Indochinese  who have been screened in as refugees under the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA).

 "Australia has contributed $6.7 million to the CPA since 1989/90, and has already resettled  more than 17,000 Indochinese refugees from camps throughout the region," Senator Bolkus  said.

 An initial allocation of 1,220 refugee and special humanitarian places has been made for the  Middle East.

 The main focus will be on Iraqis, comprising Christians, Kurds and Shi’ite Moslems. Five  hundred places have been allocated for the last group from Saudi Arabia’s Rafha refugee  camp. The program also enables the resettlement of Afghans, Iranian Ba’hais and other  deserving cases submitted by the UNHCR.

 CANBERRA AUGUST 2 1994

 Contact: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860

