---
title: "Address ... [at the] Award of the Melbourne University Human Rights Prize"
date: "1994-09-08"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211186199
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/F7V10%22
---



EMBARGOED UNTIL 8.00 PM

 Human rights law was unknown as a
discipline when I was a law student in the 1960s, and wasn't much better
appreciated when I tried to sneak it in around the edges of the
constitutional and administrative law courses I was teaching in the 1970s.
But times have changed. Courses in human rights law are now being offered by
most law faculties around Australia - and what's more, have become one of
the most popular elective courses among undergraduate and graduate
students.

 The Human Rights Law Prize sponsored by the firm of
Lucas Baron through Melbourne University reflects this tremendous, and
growing, interest. It has gone from being a Victorian competition to a
national one in only a few years and is attracting essays of outstanding
merit. Many of this year's entries - not least that of the winner, Alice
Palmer, on the subject of asylum-seeker detention - are likely to make a
valuable contribution to public debate and understanding on human rights
issues in Australia. I would like to commend all those students who
submitted essays, and both Lucas Baron and Melbourne University for the work
they have done in raising the profile of human rights law through this
prize.

 The role which governments seek to play in promoting
human rights observance is subject to intense, but not always clear-headed
and value-free, examination by the press and a number of other sections of
the community. This is understandable. Human rights issues involve real
people in often distressing situations, and, by their nature they raise
emotional issues, and incline people to be judgmental about government
actions, to weigh them exclusively against some kind of moral rather than
policy scale. Any government's handling of human rights issues constantly
requires a fine balance between, and judgment about, when to act and how to
act, and how forcefully and publicly to act. As I hope most of you would
agree, these judgments are ones about which perfectly reasonable people are
bound to differ from time to time - and about which unreasonable people are
often able to have a field day.

 I would like to take this
occasion tonight to try and broaden the understanding that exists in
Australia of the present Government's human rights policy, and deal
squarely

 with some of the misconceptions which, now and again, acquire
new vigour: for example, that in pursuing our policies we tend to be
selective or inconsistent, or that we are prepared to compromise on human
rights or allow them quietly to drop off the agenda whenever other national
interests -particularly commercial ones- are at stake. Let me at the outset
state as clearly and as unambiguously as I can that we do have a strong
commitment to the fundamental human rights and freedoms set out in the
Universal Declaration and subsequent Covenants, and are not reluctant to
argue in defence of those rights, consistently and forthrightly, whenever
and wherever we see them at risk.

 
The Universality of Human
Rights

 In the aftermath of the horrors of World War II, the
community of nations - reassembling as the United Nations - indicated in the
clearest possible terms that the promotion of human rights was to be made
one of the cornerstones of the new international order. In simple but
eloquent language, which still resonates powerfully five decades later, the
Preamble of the UN Charter set out the determination of the peoples of the
world "to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women", as well as
the "promotion of social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom". In the half century since then, the nations and peoples of the
world have gone on to develop a complex and viable system of principles,
legal regimes and machinery to promote human rights and protect groups and
individuals from disadvantage.

 The scale of human rights
violations that unhappily continue to occur often provokes despair, a sense
that the world is incorrigibly insensitive to the rights of its citizens,
that governments are weak and that efforts to promote human rights will, in
the end, be futile. But there have been improvements in human rights
standards and conditions over the years which should serve to confirm, and
spur on our commitment. Political developments in Latin America, Eastern
Europe, Central Asia and now South Africa have brought fundamental freedoms
to millions. Colonialism is a thing of the past. Racism is everywhere
challenged. And the rights of women and of indigenous peoples are
acknowledged and promoted to a greater extent than they have ever been.
Human rights are now recognised as an integral part of national and
international activity, and international scrutiny of a country's human
rights performance is generally regarded as legitimate. Indeed, world
attention and activity on human rights is on a scale unimaginable fifty
years ago. But we are of course insistently reminded of just how much more
remains to be done. The bloody brutality of Bosnia, and the horrifying
genocide in Rwanda, are only the most recent compelling reminders of the
need for the international community to grapple with the problem of human
rights at the most basic levels of all.

 Defining 'human rights'
has kept philosophers busy for centuries, and defining the particular human
rights which the international community should have some responsibility to
advance and protect has kept lawyers, politicians and diplomats busy for
decades. The 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the two 1966
Covenants on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), and Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (lCESCR) - which together make up what is often called the
International Bill of Rights - sought to define the proper scope of
international human rights concerns once and for all.

 But the
competing ideologies of the Cold War ensured that for a generation the
international human rights debate was stalemated in an ultimately sterile
dispute over whether "liberal" civil and political rights or the more
"collectivist" economic and social rights should be accorded primacy. A
sub-set of the argument, which has still had resonance in the post-Cold War
world, is the cultural relativist approach pursued by many developing
countries - portraying human rights, and particularly civil and political
rights, as Western liberal constructs of little relevance to non-Western
societies. Even though the overwhelming majority of States have adopted the
two Covenants, and even though the customary international law status of key
elements of the Universal Declaration has long been acknowledged, this has
not prevented states from engaging in endless debates on which of these
rights should have priority - or, sometimes more subtly, which should be
first among equals.

 It is to be hoped that these issues have at
last been laid to rest once and for all by the Vienna World Conference on
Human Rights last year: the 1993 Vienna Declaration, emerging from that
Conference after a long and tortuous process of negotiation, clearly
reaffirms that all human rights are equal and indivisible, and that there is
no hierarchy of rights. Moreover, governments of the world affirmed at the
Vienna Conference that cultural differences could not be used to justify
abuses of human rights:

 
While the significance of national
and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and religious
backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of states, regardless of
their political, economic and cultural systems, to promote and protect all
human rights and fundamental freedoms.

 What this means is that
human rights, people and governments around the world are inextricably
interrelated. Human rights apply to everyone, and all states have the
obligation to promote and protect them.

 It is interesting to
find that governments that abuse human rights rarely reject the
applicability to them of the provisions of the Universal Declaration: their
usual defence is to deny that abuses occur, thus implicitly acknowledging
the validity of the provisions. The reality is that there is no significant
value or cultural system anywhere in the world which does not aspire - at
least publicly - to increase respect for human life and freedom from fear
and want. If it is accepted that the life, health, dignity and worth of
individuals is not a purely Western preoccupation but a truly universal one,
then it is incumbent on every country's government to recognise that it is
obliged to defend these rights. Urging respect for human rights is not a
matter of patronising Western cultural imperialism; it is a universal
obligation.

 
Australia's Approach to Human Rights

 Why, nonetheless, it might be asked as a matter of real politik,
should governments bother to pursue these rights in the international arena,
given that such issues are always likely to be sensitive in the country the
subject of attention, and that even their successful pursuit is likely to be
marginal to one's own country's strategic, political and economic interests?
One answer is that for a country like Australia, human rights policy
involves an extension into our foreign relations of the basic values of the
Australian community: values at the core of our sense of self, which a
democratic community expects its government to pursue. Another is simply
that governments like ours believe that a moral obligation is its own
justification, and that a commitment to good international citizenship
demands no less than acting to help secure universal adherence to universal
rights.

 But the pursuit of human rights in this way need not be
entirely selfless. An international reputation as a good international
citizen on these issues probably can be helpful to a country in pursuing its
other international interests. But, more importantly, there is a real sense
in which, by embracing the cause of those who have been denied their rights,
we also guard and reinforce the nature of those rights themselves. The
historical record shows clearly enough that rights not defended are rights
easily lost.

 We have long acknowledged that human rights lie at
the heart of stable and tolerant societies, which in turn provide the
cornerstones for a stable and peaceful international order. But the recent
horrors of Rwanda and Bosnia have forcefully reminded us that - as the
drafters of the UN Charter and the Universal Declaration knew only too well
from bitter experience - peace and stability are very much dependent on the
observance of human rights.

 If the international community is
serious about addressing the incidence and brutality of modern conflict, in
particular conflict within states, it must be prepared to recognise that
security in the post-Cold War period is as much about the security of people
as about the integrity of borders and the security of states. This will
require acknowledging that a country which systematically disregards human
rights, ignores the rule of law and fails to strive for equitable
development and distributive justice is showing the clear symptoms of a
state heading towards breakdown and civil strife, often on the verge of
unleashing the demons of ethnic and religious hatred. It is time for the
international community to recognise that strategies, both international and
internal, to ensure the observance of human rights have a preventive
security dimension, and should be seen as just as much part of the
international security repertoire as preventive diplomacy, peace keeping and
- in extreme cases - peace enforcement.

 So much for why
Australia seeks to promote internationally recognised human rights. How do
we - and should we - go about achieving that goal?

 Many
Australians concerned about human rights abuses overseas feel it necessary
to give immediate and robust expression to their strength of feeling, and
regularly demand that their Government does likewise. This is a natural
reaction, and on occasions strong public statements are what is required.
And there are other occasions when nothing less than sanctions - whether
military, economic or human contact related - have been required:
particularly where a united approach by the international community has made
such pressure reasonably likely to bear fruit. However there are a great
many situations where such measures are more likely than not to exacerbate
the problems in question, and at the same time reduce any influence
governments may have in helping the people they are trying to help.
Governments always have to take into account the consequences of their
actions: we don't have the luxury of being able to indulge only our
emotions.

 Australia's policy approach in recent years to the
pursuit of our human rights objectives can most succinctly be described as
based on a combination of principle, pragmatism and patience:


Principle
means taking seriously the
universality of the values set out in the Universal Declaration and
reaffirmed at Vienna last year. As I have already made clear, we subscribe
to the view that concern for values such as life, health and the inherent
dignity of all individuals is, and should be, a universal preoccupation.
'Principle' also means promoting all human rights equally, resisting any
purported hierarchy, and maintaining an absolutely consistent and
non-discriminatory line, whatever the character of the country in question
or the nature of our political and economic relationship with it.


Pragmatism means simply pursuing human
rights in a way which is the most productive. Being influential in achieving
human rights objectives requires being aware of the totality of issues which
make up any particular bilateral relationship, and being able to put those
human rights issues in a context which is not seen by the other country as
one-dimensional or out of proportion to the other elements in the
relationship. We have become acutely aware over the years that, particularly
when dealing with sensitive issues in Asia, what matters is not so much what
is said, but how it is said. This may require systematically pursuing quiet
dialogue and persuasion in the context of broad multi-dimensional
relationships, rather than noisy drum beating, however much gratification
that might generate at home. At the end of the day, what is crucial is not
what makes us feel good, but what enables us to achieve progress for those
about whom we are professing concern.


Patience essentially involves recognising that many of the
problems that exist with civil and political rights in developing countries,
particularly in Asia, are likely to be transient in nature. Economic
liberalisation will necessarily drag political liberalisation along in its
wake - as economic growth loosens authoritarian levers over employment and
income; as it expands trade, travel and access to foreign information; and
as it produces a better educated and more self-confident population more
willing to make organised demands for less corruption, more free speech, and
- sooner or later - more political participation. Recognising the
inexorability of such progress does not, however, mean not taking any action
to help accelerate the process. If countries feel confident enough - or are
encouraged from the outside - to make the change to political
liberalisation, and can do so in less than one or two or three generations,
then so much the better.

 
Australia's Human Rights
Diplomacy

 Against this background, the Australian
Government employs a wide range of strategies - both bilateral and
multilateral - for carrying forward its human rights policies. We over and
again raise particular cases with other governments, based on the best and
most credible information available. We try to engage in systematic
dialogue, through expert delegations and the like with those countries in
our region who have a troubled human rights history. We make clear our
willingness to expose to international gaze our own efforts to grapple with
some intractable human rights concerns, including those associated with our
own indigenous people. We make public statements in Parliament, the media
and international forums to help bring international pressure to bear on
governments that commit gross violations of human rights. We work
assiduously to shape and promote international human rights treaty regimes.
We try to encourage the establishment in other countries of effective
national human rights institutions.

 Let me add just a little
more detail about some of these activities, because I don't think their
scale is at all well understood.

 In terms of bilateral
representations, Australia is probably one of the most active countries in
the world. This year alone, the Australian Government has so far made 319
representations. In 1993 we raised 534 individual and group cases with
ninety countries in all regions, in addition to our pursuing cases from
previous periods. Since 1987, when my Department first started maintaining a
register of human rights representations, the Australian Government has
raised over 3000 individual and group cases. Such representations are
undertaken at all levels of government, from the Prime Minister down, as
well as through normal diplomatic channels. Most of the cases we take up
have been referred to the Government through a unique arrangement with the
Amnesty International Parliamentary Group, while many other cases are
brought to our attention by diplomatic and media reporting, as well as by
concerned individuals and groups in the community.

 Our
bilateral efforts are reinforced by an activist multilateral human rights
agenda. Both in the UN Commission on Human Rights and through the General
Assembly, we have sought to ensure that all states adhere to existing human
rights standards; that the UN pursues violations of human rights; that the
UN's human rights machinery is effective; and that appropriate new human
rights standards continue to evolve - eg the work to which we are now
contributing on a Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. We have
promoted improved staffing and funding of the UN's human rights program and
will continue to do so. We have consistently worked for new and more
effective UN human rights mechanisms, including most recently through our
support for the establishment of the office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Last year, we made a substantial contribution to the UN
Voluntary Fund for Technical Assistance, used to support national human
rights infrastructures which contribute to human rights awareness and
education, and the administration of justice. Australia's commitment to
these goals and our energetic and constructive approach has earned the
respect of other countries and of NGOs from all regions.

 With
our Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, the Government has worked
assiduously to promote the establishment of national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights, on the basis that positive action
at the national level is the surest means of improved human rights
observance. We have provided advice to Indonesia, Thailand, Latvia and
Russia, to name a few, and while there is still a long way to go, it is
significant that human rights commissioners have been appointed in Indonesia
and India, and that Papua New Guinea has recently announced it will follow
suit.

 Much of this multilateral activity - on national
institutions and technical assistance - is practical and preventive in
nature, aimed at bringing about changes in attitudes that will prevent
future acts of human rights abuse. Similarly, Australia's aid program, as
pan of a coordinated and integrated foreign policy, also makes a real
contribution to the protection and promotion of human rights in our region.
Some of our activities focus specifically on human rights, while all others
have the potential to further economic and social rights, including the
right to work and the right to development. Every effort is made in the
development and design of our aid projects to take account of human rights
issues, participatory development and good governance - all of which are
fundamental to the sustainability of development programs.

International Obligations and Domestic Law

 I should add,
finally, a word about Australia's human rights treaty obligations and their
impact on domestic law. My starting point is a firm belief that the United
Nations human rights treaty system is one of the great achievements of the
international community of the post-War period, one which provides a clear
standard to which all states should aspire and to which all states should be
held accountable. It has set standards which have changed the world's
perceptions of the value of human life, and which are central to the
international community's pursuit of "better standards of life in larger
freedom".

 There can be no question that Australia's own
interests clearly lie in securing a strengthened and respected international
human rights treaty system. This is why we work both for the widest possible
adherence to these instruments and for effective compliance by all, and why
we strive for the improved efficiency and effectiveness of the treaties'
monitoring and individual complaints processes. But we cannot expect the
benefits of such a system to be delivered free of obligation to its members.
We, too, must ensure that our own standards conform to those that we and the
international community have agreed are fundamental to human rights
observance. We must be prepared to open ourselves to the same scrutiny we
demand of others. Our credentials to comment with authority on the
performance of others will inevitably be affected by our own compliance, and
indeed by our willingness to be seen to be complying.

 No
country is completely free in conscience and deed from human rights abuse;
all must work together toward better standards of behaviour. By
acknowledging shortcomings and opening itself to outside inspection and
criticism - as we have done in Australia - a government can promote the sort
of healthy dialogue on human rights which is the strongest basis for
achieving progress in the long run.

 The conflict between our
obligations under the ICCPR and Tasmania's intrusive sexual practice laws is
therefore an important test for Australia. But we should be clear about the
issues at stake. It is not about the undermining of Australian sovereignty
by a faceless UN body: Australian sovereignty is exercised solely and
squarely by duly- elected Australian governments, and the implementation of
treaty obligations as Australian law is a matter solely and squarely for
duly-elected Australian Parliaments. The Covenant, like the Universal
Declaration before it, provides expressly for the right to privacy. We must
uphold that right if we are to have credibility internationally as a
defender of human rights. To do otherwise would do little justice to the
honourable role which successive Australian Governments have played in
securing the observance of human rights internationally, and undermine our
capacity to act as effectively internationally in the future.

The Opposition and some States have talked as though "States rights" should
take priority over human rights. When that argument is heard in
international forums, when abuses of fundamental human rights are being
discussed, it is usually the abusers who are speaking. The lCCPR offers
protection to our own citizens, as it does to all the citizens of the world.
Our own Constitution unequivocally enables the Commonwealth Government to
give effect in domestic law to the standards set out in the ICCPR, and we
should not hesitate to rely upon it to legislate accordingly.

The Tasmanian case is just one instance in which we see the continuing
interaction of domestic and international human rights activity. Australia
has an obligation as a good international citizen to promote improved
standards internationally, and to implement international standards
domestically. We also have an obligation as a responsive government in a
democratic society to maintain close contact with the Australian community,
so that its concerns and aspirations are well reflected in the Government's
activity. As a Government, we will continue to meet these obligations
unequivocally.

 We believe in the universality and
indivisibility of human rights, and see them as providing governments and
their peoples with "the quintessential values through which we can affirm
together that we are a single human community", to use the words of the UN
Secretary-General. We will continue to work in ways which put effectiveness
above rhetoric, and emphasise a constructive approach to dialogue and
institution building. And we will maintain our resolve to promote human
rights with absolute consistency in all available forums, without
double-standards.

