---
title: "Australian government assesses latest Rwandan refugee relief needs"
date: "1994-07-15"
creators:
  - "Bilney, Gordon"
source: "MINISTER FOR DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AND PACIFIC ISLAND AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214128275
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8GS10%22
---

 

 15 July 1994 

 Australian government assesses latest Rwandan refugee relief needs 

 Australia is urgently assessing the needs of the latest flow of refugees from the  conflict in Rwanda to determine a further emergency relief package, the Minister  for Development Cooperation, Gordon Bilney, said today.  

 AIDAB, Australia's overseas aid agency, is sending an emergency relief officer to  the border area to assess the new needs in conjunction with UN and other  agencies.  

 In April, immediately after conflict first broke out and the refugee flows started,  the Australian Government was quick to respond with $1.5 million for  international emergency relief efforts.  

 "An escalation in fighting has forced up to one million people fleeing from  Rwanda into Zaire," Mr Bilney said.  

 "More than half a million refugees are now on the road seeking refuge.  

 "Overnight more than 100,000 new refugees fled into the border town of Goma  in a desperate bid to find safety.  

 "This dramatic turn of events is creating a huge challenge for the international  relief effort.  

 "Already reports suggest that some 2.6 million people have been displaced by  the conflict and half a million have died since the conflict began.  

 "Existing operations for refugees must continue, while the needs of the  thousands more now on the move must be anticipated.  

 "Australia is urgently assessing the situation and liaising with the United Nations  High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other international relief  agencies. 

 "As soon as the latest emergency needs have been assessed I expect to make  an announcement on further Australian assistance," Mr Bilney said.  

 Even though the UNHCR has a contingency plan for an additional 500,000  refugees and its staff are working around the clock, the latest refugee flows  could be a logistical nightmare.  

 "Australia supports the United Nations call for the warring parties to guarantee  the safety of innocent people fleeing the conflict and to allow international relief  agencies access," Mr Bilney said. 

 "AIDAB is working closely with the key international aid agencies and Australian  non-government organisations to help ensure a rapid, coordinated response to  the latest refugee needs." 

 CANBERRA 

 For further information contact: 

 Allen Mawer (Minister's Office) (06) 277 7660 

 David Jones (AIDAB) (06) 276 4967 

 

