---
title: "Government inaction over Rwanda"
date: "1994-07-19"
creators:
  - "Peacock, Andrew"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211185644
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2553027%22
---

 31

 A HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600 TEL. (06) 277 4048, 277 4419 FAX. (06) 277 4990

 HON. ANDREW PEACOCK, M.P. MEMBER FOR KOOYONG SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 LEVEL 16 90 COLLINS STREET MELBOURNE, VtC. 3000 TEL. (03) 6$0 3455

 FAX. (03) 650 5115

 PRESS RELEASE BY HON. ANDREW PEACOCK, MP SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 GOVERNMENT INACTION  OVE R RWANDA

 The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Hon. Andrew Peacock, today criticised the Government's response to the tragedy of Rwanda. Seen against the background of the massive refugee exodus to Zaire, the Government response had been weak, dilatory and indicative of a failure in coordination between the Ministers

 for Defence and for Foreign Affairs.

 Mr Peacock said that the violence inside Rwanda seemed to have largely subsided. Save for the French-protected "Safe Zone", it appeared that the Rwanda Patriotic Front (RPF) was in control of the country and that it was taking steps to re-establish a political administration. Under these circumstances, the need

 for a UN military presence in Rwanda itself has been overtaken by that for the urgent provision of humanitarian relief to Rwandan refugees especially in Zaire, Mr Peacock said.

 Mr Peacock welcomed Mr Bilney's 18 July announcement of additional humanitarian relief for Rwandan refugees, and urged the Government to keep the situation under review so that further assistance could be provided as required. But he questioned the Government's consideration of the dispatch of an ADF medical team to Rwanda. Where would such a team be located, Mr Peacock asked? Whom would it treat? Would not resources required to deploy the

 team, presumably to Kigali, be better spent on international civilian relief efforts to help the refugees in Goma?

 Mr Peacock said that the delay by the Government in deciding how to fulfil Australia's international responsibilities in Rwanda had been scandalous. As early as mid May, Senator Evans had said that the Government was looking "very sympathetically" at UN requests for assistance in Rwanda and that it had decided "in principle" to help. On 21 June, Senator Evans had said that Cabinet would be considering the issue in a matter of days, only to be rolled by Senator Ray.

 Mr Peacock said that a full month later, the Government is still considering its position and now looks set to take a decision that has been overtaken by events. It was all very well for Senator Evans to pontificate about the UN's weaknesses and the need for it to take pre-emptive action to avoid tragedies such as Rwanda. But the Government's own record over Rwanda showed that the causes of UN ineffectiveness could also be sought closer to home, Mr Peacock said.

 COMMONWEALTH

 Melbourne, 19 July 1994 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 MICAH

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT NICK HORDERN ON ( 6) 277 4419

