---
title: "Speech [at the] Northern Territory Football League Aboriginal All-Stars v Collingwood Ball."
date: "1994-02-11"
creators:
  - "Keating, Paul"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211184389
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/25X66%22
---

  PRIME MINISTER 

  c 

  - 

  SPEECH BY T?IE PRIME ?IiNISTER, THE HON P-3. KEATING, HP   NORTHERN TERRITORY FOOTBALL LEAGUE   ABORIGINAL ALL-STARS v COLLINGWOOD BALL 

  As   the football experts are prone to say - there's a lot 

  hanging on this game tomorrow. 

  But it's not so much on who wins or loses. 

  it seem8 to me, 

  Both sides, 

  are already the winners - simply for 

  playing the game. 

  It also seems to me that they are sides with something 

  very basic   in common: I mean they both know what it is to 

  do it hard in the world. 

  Collingwood, the greatest sporting club in Australia, 

  grew up In a poor working class area of Melbourne. They 

  were social underdogs who became sporting top dogs. 

  Collingwood succeeded because it tapped the spirit of 

  people whose circumstances might easily have drained the 

  spirit from them. 

  The Collingwood Football Club gave them a collective 

  strength. 

  It gave them the means by which they could know 

  aucces6. The spirit was there - it just needed a vehicle 

  for its expression. 

  The All Stars have much in common with this story. They 

  have been drawn from the ranks of those Australians who 

  have been denied a lot of the good things In Australian 

  life - and subjected to a lot of the worst things- 

  They too might easily have given in to their 

  circumstances. 

  But the All Stars - like the teams in the Territory from 

  which many of their players are drawn - are proof of 

  their willingness to overcome the odds. The team is an 

  expression of the spirit and the potential of Aboriginal 

  Australia- 

  Like Collingwood, the spirit is there - it only needs the 

  vehicle for its expression. 

  2 

  I 

  will come back to the football in a moment- 

  And before you murmur - what would this character from 

  Bankstown and Canberra know about Australian Rules? - I 

  have to remind you that in March last year, almost alone 

  among the tipsters, I said that the winner of the 1993 

  Brownlow Medal would be Gavan Wanganeen. 

  And Nicky Winmar was my second tip. 

  Nicky Winmar's gesture of defiance at CoNingwood is 

  destined to be legendary. 

  In my view It was a great 

  gesture. 

  Yet there were other gestures in last year's football 

  season which were, in a sense, just as significant 

  because they spoke of success. 

  There was Gavan   Wanganeen with the Brownlow Medal in his 

  hand. There was Michael Long with the Norm Smith medal - 

  and the Premiership Cup above his head. 

  And there was the gesture of Allan McAlister coming to 

  the Territory to meet the Aboriginal community, to talk, 

  to learn, to come to a new understanding. 

  Tomorrow's 

  match builds on all those events. 

  And let me say now there will be other winners to come 

  out of this weekend's events. 

  Pre-eminent among them will be the City 

  of Darwin. 

  Hundreds of thousands of Australians will be watching 

  this historic match. I am sure it will not fail to enter 

  the minds of most of them that Darwin was the place which 

  had the national vition and character to make it happen. 

  Darwin 

  and its people. 

  Standing here in a dinner suit on a night like this I 

  realise that among the many attractions of Darwin must be 

  the climate. 

  It is a wonderful climate for politics. I mean the sort 

  of climate   in which no politician would dare to make a 

  long speech. 

  Most of you will know, I hope, that I am a politician who 

  is inclined to take a national view. I tend to think of 

  Australia as one nation. 

  The details of what I mean by that would take too long to 

  describe at a ball In tropical heat - but in short it 

  means that whatever the difference In geography and 

  experience, or colouq or creed - whatever the degree of 

  our attachment to the place in which we live - we are all 

  3 

  Australians, and think of ourselves as Australians, and 

  do better in the world and by each other when we work 

  with a common national purpose. 

  That means, among other things, that while the place I 

  come from is very different to Darwin, Darwin's 

  experience is part of mine. When Darwin succeeds we all 

  share in that success. When Darwin's spirit rises so 

  does the spirit of Australia. 

  And Darwin's spirit Is most definitely rising. 

  This has 

  always been a frontier town - but never more so 

  than now. It is in the forefront of the great change 

  which is taking place in Australia. 

  It is our gateway to Asia, a place with a vital role to 

  play in our economic development, and in our cultural and 

  social development. Darwin, after all, has always been 

  multicultural, it has always had multiracial sport - it 

  has set the example for the rest of Australia. 

  As I said, Australia is undergoing a profound change: in 

  the way we do things, in the direction of our thinking, 

  in the way we imagine ourselves and our role in the 

  world. 

  They say you can't write hlstoiy until you are far enough 

  away to see the shape of events. Up close, in the midst 

  of the fray, it's all a bit of a blur. 

  But in the last twelve months I reckon we've all felt it. 

  You could sense the change in the last year or so - as if 

  the tide had imperceptibly turned - and was now running 

  our way. 

  Just now we are starting to see evidence of it in the 

  figures. You can see it on the score-board. 

  It actually u a bit like a football match There is 

  that moment when you feel the game change. 

  And I truly believe the game has changed between black 

  and white Australia. 

  This game is evidence of it. In that sense the score is 

  already on the board. 

  It's hard to say precisely what the turning point was. 

  I know that Kevin Sheedy and the Essendon Football Club 

  played a role with their recruiting campaigns 

  and their 

  regular pre-season games in Darwin - and last year's 

  Premiership was proof that there was wisdom as we11 as 

  justice in the policy. 

  I think they deserve enormous credit for their 

  initiative. 

  And of course there is one other person who deserves a 

  lot of credit - Nicky Winmar. 

  Think of what one gesture of defiance triggered - a 

  national debate on racism in sport and a new recognition 

  of the role Abotlginals play in Australian sport. 

  Not to mention a horrible succession of mysterious 

  Collingwood defeats. 

  Along the way, things also went wrong 

  for Nicky and St 

  Kilda; Allan McAlister came to the Northern Territory: 

  Essendon, with a sizeable crew of Aboriginal players, won 

  the premiership: Michael Long won the Norm Smith medal;   and my March selection, Cavan Wanganeen, won   the   Brownlow. 

  ft has all ended up here - with this historic match. 

  And it all happened In the International   Year of the 

  World's Indigenous People - and the year of Mabo. 

  So the game, as I said, has changed. 

  There is a change in mood and awareness. 

  And with the Mabo decision there Is a change in law - and 

  let me tell you that despite all the arguments, all the 

  understandable anxiety, all the negotiation which is 

  still to take place, the Mabo legislation puts right an 

  historic wrong and there is no going back on that. 

  I am very much aware of how far there is to go. 

  I am also aware that very often the sentiments expressed 

  by politicians seem out of touch with social and economic 

  reality - out of touch with the complexities of life as 

  it is really lived in Australia. 

  It is our duty to get in touch with those realities and 

  fashion policies accordingly. Ultimately the trick 

  is 

  always to put the right people and the right money in the 

  right places. 

  But it & also necessary to state the principles: not 

  because one ever believes that they can be translated   into a perfect reality, but because they are necessary 

  values and ambitions for a nation to live by. 

  They are the nation's articles of faith, the code we live 

  bY= In some countries they are written into 

  constitutions and bills of rights: here they are 

  unwritten, but they are just as powerful. 

  5 

  I am talking about ideas like a fair go for all, support 

  for the underdog, tolerance of difference, respect for 

  those who by their own efforts have succeeded against the 

  odds. 

  Every one of those principles on which we pride ourselves 

  declares that racism is abhorrent - everywhere, Including 

  football fields - or tennis courts, or athletics tracks. 

  It is abhorrent to our best traditions and the best 

  traditions of sport. 

  I was at a function at the Australian War Memorial during 

  the week - the opening of an exhibition of drawings done 

  by children in a Jewish ghetto in Poland during the war. 

  All but a handful of 17,000 children in the ghetto were 

  killed in the Auschwitz extermination camp. 

  I mention this only as a background to words which a 

  survivor of the ghetto used in a speech at the war 

  memorial - to summarise, he said what an extraordinary   gift the tolerance and freedom and democracy of Australia   had been for refugees like himself. 

  He also 

  said that democracy and tolerance were more 

  deeply embedded in the fabric of Australian life than 

  anywhere else in the world. 

  His words were very moving. They were a reminder that 

  those intangible things like tolerance and fairness are 

  real, especially to people who have been denied them. 

  It was a reminder   of how vital to our national life and 

  character these values are - how jealously we should 

  defend them- 

  I would like to think that tomorrow's contest is part of 

  that defence. 

  That's why I: said at the beginning that, however close 

  the contest on the field and whoever wins, the teams are 

  both winners. 

  I hope - and I think we all hope - that in due course it 

  will be seen that they were both playing on the same 

  side. 

  In fact I think all Australians can be winners from this 

  weekend's events. If we all want to be. Xf we all are 

  prepared to enter into the spirit of It. If we all see 

  It as a step along the way - a highly symbolic step - 

  towards reconciliation between black and white   Australians. 

  L congratulate Tony Shaw and the NTFL, and Allan   McAlister and the Collingwood Football Club for all they 

  have done. 

  6 

  I also want to pay tribute to Maurice Rloll, coach of the 

  All-Stars, former great player and for years now in the 

  Northern Territory and throughout Australia a hero and 

  role model for Aboriginal people. 

  And finally, let me wish the players the very 

  best of 

  luck. 

  DARWSN   11 February 1994 

