---
title: "Appointments to Refugee Review Tribunal"
date: "1995-09-06"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211192930
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LIG20%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

  Senator 

  85/95 

  ick BolKus  Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860 

  APPOINTMENTS TO REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL 

  The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, announced today the  appointment of eight new members and the re-appointment of one member to the Refugee  Review Tribunal (RRT). 

  The RRT was established in June 1993 under the Migration Act 1958 as an independent  review body empowered to reconsider decisions on refugee status applications. Tribunal  members are appointed to the RRT by the Governor General after endorsement by Cabinet  for terms of up to five years. Members can be appointed as full-time members or part-time  members. 

  Ms Clare Byrt, Ms Margaret O'Brien and Mr Bruce Haigh have been appointed as full-time  members, and Associate Professor Jock Collins and Ms Marie Coleman have been appointed  as part-time members in NSW. Mr Brendan Kissane and Ms Eilish Cooke have been  appointed as full-time members and Ms Sophia Panagiotis has been appointed as a part-time  member in Victoria. 

  All of the appointees have either legal qualifications , experience working in the refugee field,  or relevant experience in the public sector. The appointees were chosen from a field of 190  applicants . Their appointments run from 6 September 1995 to 6 September 1997. 

  Mr John Pomeroy has been re-appointed as a part-time member of the RRT in NSW. Mr  Pomeroy was originally appointed to the RRT in September 1993 as a full time member for  three years. Mr Pomeroy has recently resigned his full-time position but had requested that  he be considered for re-appointment to the RRT as a part-time member. 

  The Tribunal is now constituted by 1 Principal Member, 42 full-time members and 17 part " time members. Professor Leroy Certoma resigned from the position of Principal Member  of the Tribunal on 23 August 1995. Mr Murray Gerkens, the member administrator , will  act in the position of Principal member until a new appointment is made. 

  CANBERRA 

  Contact: 

  6 SEPTEMBER 1995 

  Ruth Dewsbury  062777860 

