---
title: "Immigration screening failures undermine public confidence"
date: "1995-04-21"
creators:
  - "Short, Jim"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187834
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2993051%22
---

  SEN JIM SHORT MELE. ID:034196350 

  Senator Jim  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs  & 

  the Leader on Multicultural Affairs 

  21 8PR'95 10:55 No.001 P.02 

  ho rt 

  lMEA 34/95 

  IMMIGRATION SCREENING FAILURES UNDERMINE PUBLIC  CONFIDENCE 

  The number of spectacular failures in Australia's i111mit:,rration screening  procedures that have come to light recently arc nndennining public  confidence in the integrity of the system. 

  To name but a fow of the more publicised failures: 

  • 900 East Timorese being granted visitor visas to enter Australia -apparently without serious scmtiny - only to subsequently apply for  refugee status once here. 

  • the grant of a business migration visa to Jqabal Mohamed Memon, an  Indian businessman well known as a suspected major drug dcolcr and  linked to terrorism involving the death of 300 people in a bombing  incident.. 

  • several visits to Australia by the leader, Shoko Ashara, and Jmmerous  members of the Japanese doomsday cult, AUM (Supreme Truth).  allegedly responsible for the poisonous gas attack on a Tokyo subway  station, during which visits they set up an Australian outback b

  • the regular entry on visitor visas of Japanese organised crime figures.  The Austra1ian .Federal Police have identified the increased infiltration  of overseas organised crime groups as one of the most significant t1ueats  that Australia faces. A senior leader of one of Japan's largest organised 

  crime gangs the Yamaguchi Gurni, was a regular visitor to the Gold  Coast before his visa was eventually cancelled after public outrage. 

  • the permanent entl'y to Australia of a number of Afghanis who were  members of the bruta1 secret service (Khad) of the fonner Soviet backed  Najibullah regime. 

  If. 

  .SEN JIM SHORT MELE. ID:034196350 21 APR'95 10:55 No.001 P.03 

  • the entty of internationally wellknown fraudulent casino players.  Pasquale Battaglia and Francesco Baioni, who have repmtcdJy been  deported from several other countries. 

  Despite persistent questioning, the Inunigration Minister, Senator Bolkus,  has failed to provide satisfactory answers to the obvious and serious  questions these screening failures raise. How could these mistakes occur? 

  The Department and the Minister ~ with some justification w both argue  strongly that Australia's universal visa system is the essential tool that  guarantees the integrity of our orderly imm1gration probrram and the  sovereignty of our national borders. 

  However, these claims run the risk of ringing very hollow in the face of  repeated startHng breaches of that system. 

  The Coa1ition has been concerned about the administration of the  Department oflmmigration and Ethnic Affairs and, through it the operation  of our entry programs, for several years. Our concern has been increased  considernbly during the period in which Senator Bolkus hns been the  Minister. 

  There is no doubt that mistakes, failures and inefficiencies in  administration by the Department, and the Minister's extraordinary  incompetence and political manipulation - even hy Labor's standards - has  eroded conununity confidence in the migration process, and has weakened  community support for Australia's 1mmigratio11 programs.   

  21 Ap1il 1995  Melbourne  For further infonnation contact Senator Sho1t (03)417-1499 

