---
title: "Refugee treatment a human rights disgrace"
date: "1995-02-08"
creators:
  - "Spindler, Sid"
source: "Office of SPINDLER, SEN SID"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211186942
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2908120%22
---

 13,

 *....*

 8th February, 1995 95/48

 Refugee treatment a human rights disgrace Following the Coalition parties' backdown on last year's retrospective Migration Legislation (No. 2) of 1994, the Coalition parties are now also supporting the Government's Migration Legislation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 1995, a Bill which should have been thrown

 out by the Senate, according to the Australian Democrats.

 This latest Bill represents a low point in Australia's treatment of refugees, Senator Spindler, Democrat Spokesperson on Law and Justice and Ethnic Affairs said today.

 The Bill recognises China as a 'safe third country for Sino-Vietnamese people fleeing China, and will mean that as a group, these people will be sent back without the individual assessment of their refugee status as required under international law.

 In earlier boat loads most of the asylum seekers were found to qualify as refugees because "they had a well founded fear of persecution." Many of the refugees were expelled from Vietnam, but once in China were denied housing registration, food, education and medical services. Recently, many have had their houses demolished.

 "The Keating Government is now prepared to send back all such asylum seekers and to do so by retrospective legislation to include the people who arrived even before the Minister thought of this legislation.

 "The fact that Australia is prepared to sign an agreement that describes China as a haven from human rights abuses speaks volumes about this government's attitude towards refugees, and the Coalition parties will rue their support for such a blatant disregard of China's human rights record.

 "The one concession to fairness is the vague possibility that the Minister may exercise his discretion in a particular case."

 "But there is no requirement for the asylum seeker to be told about this avenue and the Nlinister is not obliged to consider it and there is no avenue for review. Indeed, departmental officers routinely fail to advise applicants about their right to legal advice under the Migration Act 1958.

 "This is now the 5th Bill in the last 12 months shortly to be followed by a further two in an effort to nullify the courts' attempts to maintain due legal process in Australia's refugee policy which has become a disgusting shambles.

 "The Coalition parties should have joined the Australian Democrats in opposing the Bill, but unfortunately it would seem that Mr Howard is happy to lend his name to this disgraceful treatment of Vietnamese and Chinese refugees," Senator Spindler concluded. COMMONTivEk. um

 L.TAiMENTARY LIBRAR1

 For more comment, call Sid Spindler on (06) 277 3643

