---
title: "Lebanon: towards a brighter future: opening address to Lebanon Beyond 2000 Conference, ANU, Canberra, 8 September 1995"
date: "1995-09-08"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211193059
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D4J20%22
---

  Department of the Parliamentary Library  Information Storage and Retrieval System Page 1 

  Lebanon: towards a brighter future: opening address to Lebanon Beyond  2000 Conference, ANU, Canberra, 8 September 1995. Sen Gareth EVANS.  Press release 

  The text of this press release has been scanned electronically from the original. Freedom from errors  or omissions cannot be guaranteed. 

  Three visits: three snapshots. 

  In 1968, my first visit to Beirut, strolling around the Place des Martyrs, on a balmy  August evening, buying a shwarma and some felafel at a little stand next to a movie  theatre on one corner of the square; eating it on a bench watching the world amble by -Maronites, Sunnis, Shiites, Druze or whoever -relaxed and serene. 

  Then in 1992, going back to Beirut for the first time since the 1975 civil war had begun,  and before anyone was really sure it was over; driving back to the Place des Martyrs  area, just to the east of the Green Line dividing a by now shattered city; and seeing, in  the square I remembered so vividly, nothing but a line of rubble around its edges:  totally, utterly, comprehensively destroyed. 

  Then in July 1995, with Immigration Minister Nick Bolkus for the reopening of the  Australian Embassy in Rue Bliss; going back again to where the Place des Martyrs had  been; seeing this time a vast construction site, complete with huge billboards picturing  what the reconstructed square and indeed whole port precinct would before long look  like; with the construction process only being held up by a massive archaeological effort  under way to reveal, map and to the extent possible preserve, that extraordinary series  of layers of history - from Phoenician to Greek to Roman to Byzantine to Arab to  Crusader to Ottoman -which have always made this coast, and the country which has  inherited it, such a very special place. 

  The most successful countries in the Middle East will be those with a clear vision of  themselves after the peace process, and the sense of purpose to reach that vision -through all the bumps and by-ways that lie ahead before that process is complete. 

  These qualities are readily apparent in Lebanon today. There two months ago, I  couldn't help but be impressed by the vibrancy of the economic regeneration taking  place, and the rebuilding of Lebanon's political institutions now under way. Nor could I  be anything but impressed by the sense of purpose and optimism that is guiding  Lebanon's redevelopment, and the new sense of confidence that appears to be emerging  in all areas of Lebanese society. 

  It was this sustained improvement in Lebanon's political, security and economic  circumstances, which led the Australian Government to reopen the Australian  Embassy in Beirut. Our decision to re-establish an official diplomatic presence reflects  our confidence in Lebanon's future and our support for the Lebanese people's efforts to  rebuild their country. It is a major step forward in the development of our bilateral  relationship: I will come back shortly to talk about how we might develop that  relationship further in the context of Lebanon's revival. 

  Page 2 

  Of course Australian support for the aspirations of the Lebanese people is not new.  Right back at the beginning in 1943, the Australian diplomat - and later Foreign  Minister and Governor-General-Richard Casey, played a critical role, in his capacity  as representative of the British War Cabinet in the Middle East, in demanding that the  French honour their earlier promises and grant Lebanon its independence. Nuclear  testing is not the first issue on which we have strongly differed with the French ... 

  In more recent times we have been making very clear over several years that we oppose  any activity in Lebanon by outside forces which compromise Lebanese sovereignty . We  have consistently supported international efforts to enable the Lebanese Government  to exercise its sovereign rights without hindrance. We see this as an indispensable  component of a just and lasting peace settlement in the Middle East. Australia  recognises, in particular, that the implementation ofUNSCR 425, and respect by Israel  and Lebanon for each other's legitimate security needs, will be essential elements of a  settlement between the two countries. 

  Australia will continue to oppose violence in southern Lebanon and along Israel's  northern border. We deplore all violence against civilian targets and UN peace keepers.  The increase in acts of aggression in southern Lebanon since the beginning of this year  has been particularly disturbing. We have called upon Israel and Lebanon to work to  lower tension in the region, and to concentrate on bringing about a negotiated  settlement. 

  Australia has supported efforts toward the reconciliation of formerly opposing  Lebanese groups and the strengthening of the Lebanese state in line with the Taif  Accords. We believe these Accords offer the most promising basis for dealing with the  political, social and religious challenges facing Lebanon. As political and economic  regeneration continues, the capacity of the Lebanese government to embody the spirit  of the Lebanese people will be further strengthened. 

  One of the trickiest challenges confronting Lebanon is the future of the Palestinian  refugees . Australia supports the right of return of Palestinian refugees as detailed in  UNGA Resolution 194, which also of course mentions the alternative of compensation.  But we acknowledge the di.ffi.culty of implementing the resolution except in the context  of a comprehensive regional settlement -and it will be a difficult enough issue to resolve  even in that context. Until that settlement is reached, and indeed beyond that time,  Australia will look to Lebanon to adhere to its humanitarian responsibilities towards  the Palestinians within its territory. The memory of Sabra and Shatila will not be  lightly erased, and it's up to every relevant party, group and government-not only in  Lebanon but in the wider region - to help find a just future for the dispossessed  Palestinians. 

  What of the larger peace process, then, and the prospects for a durable and  comprehensive regional settlement? 

  Since my last visit to the Middle East in May 1992, very considerable headway has  obviously been made. The Oslo Accord, the Declaration of Principles between Israel  and the PLO, and the establishment of the Palestinian Authority have changed the 

  Page 3 

  political face of the Middle East. I don't think it is naively optimistic to believe those  changes are irreversible, even if the way ahead is still full of frustration and peril. 

  One by one, albeit with varying degrees of reluctance and anxiety, Arab states are  gradually forging ties with Israel. There is a new sense of openness and cooperation in  the region. Jordan, for example, has repealed domestic laws directed against Israel and  will host the region-wide Amman Economic Summit in late October this year. Egypt " Israel relations have improved to the extent that an oil refinery joint venture is  currently under way between the two countries. Relations between Israel and Oman,  Tunisia and Morocco continue to progress. And for all practical purposes, as Arab  countries continue to upgrade their relations with Israel, the last vestiges of the Arab  boycott are being swept away. 

  While these developments are obviously heartening , significant obstacles to peace  remain. In the Israel-Palestinian track, the current stage of negotiations addressing the  conditions for the election of a Palestinian Council have yet to be finally bedded down .  And none of the much more difficult final status issues, including Palestinian  statehood, settlements, refugees and Jerusalem have even begun to be addressed. 

  In the Syria-Israel track -with which progress on Resolution 425, and Lebanon more  generally is, as we all know, inextricably linked-the record of progress to date is at best  mixed. The window of opportunity that has enabled movement in some areas of the  peace process is closing as elections draw closer in Israel and the United States. It will  be harder for Yitzhak Rabin to hold his fragile Labor coalition together as the  temptations of electoral grandstanding grow stronger. And US decision-making on any  matter of domestic political sensitivity -as the Middle East always has been -is likely to  be out to lunch once the primary season commences, if not before. The peace process has  not been a great respecter of deadlines so far, but that is becoming more a matter of  concern than it has been. Of course sitting and waiting is an option -and is one that has 

  appealed to both Syria and Israel more than most others -but there is an obvious risk, if  the political landscape changes next year. It will not be a matter, then, of living with a  manageable status quo, but rescuing something from a downhill landslide . 

  The task, as it has been from the outset, is to encourage the parties to move beyond  defensive power politics towards a cooperative approach to problem solving, and a wider  vision of what might be achieved in the region of which they are all historically fated to  be part. The task is to win acceptance for the idea that the future lies in cooperative  security -with its emphasis, among other things, on achieving security with others  rather than against them. 

  Australia has continued to do whatever we can to encourage that approach in every  dimension of the peace process. I don't wish to overstate our involvement in, or impact  on, that process. Australia has not been a party to the Arab-Israeli conflict, and we are  unlikely ever to be able to play a major diplomatic role in mediation or the like. But we  have been, and are now still, prepared to participate in a way that is commensurate  with our resources to facilitate, as best we can, the process of reconciliation between  Israel and its Arab neighbours. To do this effectively we need an understanding of the  problems that face the Middle East, and to be engaged in the institutions and processes 

  Page 4 

  that are working to solve them. 

  I have always believed that a lasting vision of peace must properly embrace the entire  Middle East, because the region's economic, social and security problems are  interlinked. That is why the multilateral arm of the peace process is so valuable. It  brings together most of the regional parties to the peace talks, a wide variety of Arab  states and non-regional states which feel able and willing to contribute to the building  up of regional networks. 

  Australia has contributed significantly to peace building at state level by our active  participation in two of the multilateral tracks of the peace process, namely the Arms  Control and Regional Security (ACRS), and the Water Resource Working Groups. We  look forward to the day that Lebanon participates in these multilateral elements of the  peace process, and is also able to benefit from the discussions and projects that they  initiate. 

  In addition to our participation in the peace process, Australia is providing personnel to  both the Multinational Force and Observers (MFO), and the United Nations Truce  Supervision Organisation (UNSTO). The MFO in particular, which is presently being  commanded by an Australian, and which I had the pleasure to visit in the Sinai in July,  has been a low cost success story. It has enhanced communication between Egypt and  Israel and has provided an important underpinning to peace between both countries.  We have made this long-standing commitment of Australian military personnel as a 

  good international citizen, and as a country with a sincere interest in seeing a more  cooperative approach to security in the region. While it is premature to make any  commitment at-this stage, Australia would certainly give sympathetic consideration to  any request to participate in a peace keeping capacity on the Golan Heights in a mission  based on the MFO model, if such an invitation were to be extended. 

  More broadly, we will continue to urge all sides to consider constructive ideas on  political issues and call on all parties to the conflict to respect their international  obligations. During my July visit to the Middle East, I took the opportunity to remind  all participants in the peace process that Australia regards a commitment to meeting  these obligations as a vital part of continued progress toward a durable peace in the  region. I also made, as you would expect, direct and firm representations on human  rights issues to all sides: there is still plenty to be concerned about in this respect. 

  Even with so much in the peace process still so unresolved, the challenge of rebuilding  Lebanon economically is being met with great enthusiasm and success. Economic  growth reached 8.5 percent in 1994 and is predicted to run at around 8 per cent in 1995-6. It is especially encouraging that economic growth in 1994 was largely generated by  investment, a development which bodes well for growth in the future. Investment in  industrial machines and equipment, for example, is reported to have exceeded US$130  million in 1994, compared to US$2 million in 1990. The consumption of cement has  increased by 700 per cent over a similar period. 

  While figures such as these are unlikely to be sustainable in the long-run, they point to  the potential that currently exists in Lebanon for outside investors and traders. I was 

  Page 5 

  therefore pleased to see a significant commercial presence - over 200 Australian  business delegates -in Beirut at the time of the reopening of the Australian Embassy,  with some returning to Lebanon at the invitation of the Lebanese Government. 

  Evidence of confidence in Lebanon's economic and commercial future is plentiful.  International banks are establishing offices in Beirut, having recognised the potential  that exists for Lebanon to regain its status as regional financial centre. A project to  reestablish the infrastructure of the commercial area in Beirut began in January 1995  and is expected to be completed in three years. Growth in sectors such as real estate,  banking, industry and tourism is also a cause for optimism. 

  To finance its rapid development, Lebanon has a ready source of investor capital in its  own Lebanese diaspora -important given that funds from Gulf countries have not been  so plentiful as in the past, and that international aid donor attention has tended to be  focused on the Palestinians. According to the Central Bank of Lebanon, the diaspora  holds capital reserves of some US$35-40 billion. So far only US$3 billion of this amount  has been deployed in Lebanon. The construction sector, pursuing both private and  public projects, will remain an important vehicle in the repatriation of such capital. 

  Another sign of confidence has been the return of tourism to Lebanon. In 1994 there  were more than 350,000 non-Syrian visitors to Lebanon, particularly from Jordan,  Germany, France, Italy and Japan. The substantial Australian presence in Beirut for  the reopening of the Embassy will, I hope, kick-off a similar resurgence in Australian  tourism. 

  Lebanon's reconstruction offers trade and economic cooperation opportunities for  Australian business people prepared to engage seriously with the Lebanese market.  The Australian Government is looking to the Australian Lebanese community in  particular, with its language and cultural skills and commercial contacts, to exploit  openings for Australian business. 

  The reopening of the Australian Embassy will itself provide new opportunities to  expand trade. At present, our two way trade is small. In 1994, total Australian exports  to Lebanon were $A6.8 million, while imports were only $A3.2 million. Market  opportunities in Lebanon, however, are sufficiently promising to justify the  establishment of an Austrade office, and such an office will open in Beirut this  December. Marketing staff from Austrade's Riyadh office have recently been in  Lebanon assessing the situation and evaluating potential opportunities. 

  The Australian Embassy in Beirut and the Austrade office will closely monitor  economic developments and help Australian companies pursue commercial  opportunities. The Lebanese Government has plans for massive expenditure over the  next decade for the rehabilitation of central Beirut and major projects involving  electricity services, telecommunications, building and roads. Opportunities arising out  of this type of development will be the most important element in our developing trade  relationship. I look forward to Australia further developing its reputation in the Middle  East as a reliable supplier of high quality goods and services, particularly in the high  technology end of the market. 

  Page 6 

  Australian business interest in opportunities in Lebanon is already apparent. The  Australia Lebanon International Business Council delegation, led by Mr Anthony  Khouri, was in Lebanon at the time of the opening of the Embassy on an exploratory  business mission. Next week Michael Rizk will lead a delegation to Lebanon under the  auspices of the Australian Lebanese Chamber of Commerce which will cover a variety of  products and industries. The Australia Arab Chamber of Commerce is encouraging its  members to investigate opportunities in Lebanon, particularly in infrastructure and  development. The task now is for Australian companies to get themselves short-listed  as potential goods and services suppliers for contracts in Lebanon, so the Australian  Government can provide focused support for bids at senior levels. 

  It is also heartening to see events taking place that demonstrate the enthusiasm and  confidence of the business community in Lebanon in our trading relationship. The  Syrian-Lebanese Trade Fair, to begin in Sydney in about two weeks, is an important  example of this. 

  The building of a substantial trading relationship between Australia and Lebanon will  be assisted by the strong connections that exist between our two countries. The profile  that Lebanon enjoys in the minds of Australians is greater than any other Arab country.  Australians admire Lebanon's rich and ancient history, touched as it has been by nearly 

  all the great civilisations of the past. We have welcomed the presence in Australia of  over 200,000 Lebanese and their descendants. 

  The Australian Lebanese community has played an extraordinarily positive role in  building and maintaining linkages between Lebanon and Australia. Lebanese  Australians have brought with them notable contributions to Australian society in  business and commerce, politics, education, sport and the arts. They have maintained a  strong commitment to their adopted homeland while also cherishing their cultural and  ethnic heritage. We are delighted that they have done so, giving tangible expression to  what Australian multiculturalism is all about. This retention of a sense of Lebanese  identity means that, quite apart from anything else, the Australian Lebanese  community should be at the forefront of the efforts of Australian business in realising  the potential for greater trade and commercial links between both countries, and we  warmly encourage them to play that role. 

  This conference represents a valuable opportunity to examine in more detail the themes  I have outlined here, and no doubt quite a few others as well. I wish you every success  as you debate and reflect upon the prospects for a country with strong historic and  contemporary links to Australia. Lebanon is a microcosm of the potential as well as the  perils of the emerging Middle East. If it succeeds, Lebanon will serve as an example of  what can be done through enterprise, political courage and the commitment of its  citizens to forging a reinvigorated society. 

  I believe Lebanon will succeed. It needs the support of its neighbours and its expatriate  communities. And it does need to examine its domestic institutions, and the challenges  it faces in terms of the development of civil society. This conference will contribute to  that process, helping to define the pathways Lebanon needs to follow to achieve the 

  Page 7 

  future it so richly deserves-and to enable us, all once again, to enjoy eating shwarma on  balmy evenings in the Place des Martyrs. 

