---
title: "Australia's humanitarian program increases by 2000 places"
date: "1995-10-24"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211195024
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RAK20%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  Senator Nick Bolkus 

  BI06/95 

  M INIS TER FOR IM MIGRAT ION AND ETHN IC 

  AFFAIRS AND MINI S TER A SS IST ING THE PRIM E 

  MINISTER FOR MULTICU LTU RAL AFFAIRS 

  Parliam ent H ouse C anberra ACT 2GO O 

  (06) 277 7860 

  AUSTRALIA'S HUMANITARIAN PROGRAM INCREASES BY 2000 PLACES 

  Australia will increase its Humanitarian Program for 1995/96 by  2000 places, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Senator Nick Bolkus, announced tonight. 

  The extra places for people from the Former Yugoslavia will bring  the total number of places in this year's program to 15,000. 

  "Australia has been in close contact with the united Nations High  Commissioner for Refugees on how best to respond to recent events  in the Former Yugoslavia," Senator Bolkus said. 

  "The Government is pleased on United Nations Day to be able to  respond to the UNHCR's international appeal for increased  assistance in resettling people in urgent need this financial  year. 

  "This will mean that more than 7,500 former Yugoslav nationals  will be resettled here in 1995/96. They will join around 14,000  people who have fled to Australia since conflict began in the  region in 1992." 

  The increase is made possible by bringing forward places from the  1996/97 program. The places will be spread evenly across the  three components of the Humanitarian Program - the Refugee  Program, the Special Humanitarian Program and the Special  Assistance Category for the Former Yugoslavia. 

  "Australia's Humani tar ian Program is already the largest per  capita resettlement program in the world," Senator Bolkus said.  "Its success also lies in its flexibility, enabling us to respond  quickly to changing international needs." 

  CANBERRA OCTOBER 24 1995 

  Contact: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860 

