---
title: "New directions for Australia's aid program"
date: "1995-03-02"
creators:
  - "Bilney, Gordon"
source: "MINISTER FOR DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AND PACIFIC ISLAND AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187216
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/T4520%22
---

 Minister for Development Cooperation · Minister tor Pacific Island Affairs  Gordon Bilney MP MDC 16 2 MARCH 1995

 NEW DIRECTIONS FOR AUSTRALIA'S AID PROGRAM

 In his annual aid statement to Parliament today, Gordon Bilney, Minister for  Development Cooperation and Pacific Island Affairs, highlighted significant social  sector developments in Australia's overseas aid program.

 "In the 1993-94 budget, we trebled expenditure on the population sector with a  four-year $130 million initiative. To ensure the effectiveness of this initiative, the  Government commissioned an independent inquiry into the links between  population and development", Mr Bilney said.

 "The results of this inquiry have helped AIDAB to develop a range of principles  which now guide the aid program's population activities. Amongst the most  important of these principles is that access to safe and effective family planning  services is a fundamental right; and that women should have access to a wide range  of reproductive health services and should participate fully in defining the services  they need. Above all - and I emphasise this most emphatically - coercion has no  place in Australian aid program's family planning activities."

 Mr Bilney also drew attention to developments in health sector assistance.

 "Funding for health was given a major boost in the 1994-95 aid budget with the  introduction of a four-year initiative targeting four priority areas - malaria, polio,  neonatal tetanus, and HIV/AIDS. The initiative involves additional funding of  $110 million over four years nearly doubling Australia's current spending on health  under the aid program."

 Mr Bilney also announced that education assistance was being reviewed with a  view to increasing support for basic, technical and vocational education. The  refugee and relief program had been reviewed in the light of increasing numbers of  emergencies, and opportunities to increase assistance were being explored.

 Mr Bilney emphasised that aid responses to humanitarian emergencies were only  one part of a strategy that was also directed to addressing the underlying causes of  dispute and conflict.

 CANBERRA For further information contact:  Allen Mawer (Minister's Office) (06) 277 7660

 Release

