---
title: "International Forum on the Indian Ocean (IFIOR)"
date: "1995-06-11"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211188681
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DKA20%22
---

  11 June 1995 

  INTERNATIONAL FORtJIm INDIAN OCEAN REGION (IFIOR) 

  Atxached is Senator Evans’s keynote address to the International Forum on the Indian Ocean   Region, Perth, B 1 June 1995. The address is entitled Indian Ocean Regional Cooperation.   Exploring the Possibilities. 

  EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY: 9.00PM APPROX. 

  INDIANAXR&!GIONAL OOPERATION.LO~ 

  . 

  1TNE 

  Keynote address by Senator the Hon Gareth Evans QC, Minister for Foreign Affairs,   to the International Forum on the Indian Ocean Region, Perth, 11 June 1995. 

  This Forum is a remarkable event. This is not just because it involves a joint venture   between the Keating Government nationally and the Court Government in Western   Australia, although connoisseurs of Australian federal politics will well understand   how momentous an achievement that is! It is of course because this is the first really 

  inclusive conference ever held to consider the possibilities for closer Indian Ocean   regional cooperation, bringi:ng together - from no less than over 23 countries around   the Indian Ocean rim, 122 highly expert and highly experienced participants from   three different sectors - government, business and academic. 

  The Legacy of the Past 

  Until very recently, this Forum simply would have been unthinkable. The tensions of 

  the Cold War, and those generated by apartheid in South Africa, complicated political   relationships between many of us. And economic relationships were inhibited in all   sorts of ways, not least by South .Africa’s isolation, India’s inward-looking policies and   Australia’s focus on developing its links in East Asia and across the Pacific: with the   three major economies of the region thus preoccupied, trade, investment and economic 

  cooperation links between &l of us remained thin and sporadic, certainly by   comparison with other regions. The level of intra-regional trade around the Indian   Ocean is still just: 20 per cent; for the Asia Pacific economies around the Pacific   Ocean, by contrast, the relev,ant figure is 66 per cent. 

  Nor was there much in the way of human and cultural contact between us, except in   our various sub-regions. There had been such contact in ancient times: the world’s   earliest urba,: ciT liddle East, the Gulf littoral and South Asia - were 

  linked by seabc ~ ul,~ for some 4000 years in fact, the Indian Ocean was   thf -le of a ‘lLv vnvork of trade and people-to-people links. But with the 

  coming of the Europeans in the 15th Century, this largely self-sustained and tightly   interwoven economic, political and cultural world began to unravel. Indian Ocean   economies were restructured to meet extra-regional imperatives - most often as 

  [XIV.1951 

  2 

  peripheral suppliers of raw materials for the industrialised areas of the north. And this 

  erosion of any sense of regional cohesion was maintained even as the European   presence fell away in the post Second World War years. Cold War superpower rivalry   becamie a key element, inhibiting the evolution not only of cooperative security   arrangements (with the languishing of the Indian Ocean Zone of Peace (IOZOP)   proposal being the most obvious example), but of any particular region-wide vision in 

  other contexts as well. 

  There certainly have been some concrete attempts over recent decades to develop   regional cooperative processes, but they have to date been fairly narrowly focused,   with no broad, inclusive grouping yet emerging. There are effective bodies embracing   sub-regions - the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), the 

  Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) and the Southern Africa Development Community   (SADC for example - but th’ese do not reach out more widely. The few attempts at   region-wide arrangements have not made much progress. The Indian Ocean   Commission (IOC), which was formed in 1982 with the general aim of fostering   economic development through regional cooperation, has a membership confined to   the island entities of Mauritius, Madagascar, Seychelles, Comoros and Reunion. And   the Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation Council (IOMAC), which was 

  established in 1990 to provide a framework for dealing with marine resource, science   and environment issues, and wlhich now has six member countries (Sri Lanka,   Pakistan, Mozambique, Kenya, Indonesia and Mauritius), has been slow to gather   momentum. 

  Apart from all the historical considerations I have mentioned, an obvious reason for   the slow progxess hitherto of any moves to re-establish some sense of cohesion in the   larger Indian Ocean region has been its sheer diversity. It contains states as large as   India, with over 900 million people, and those like the Seychelles with less than 

  80,000. Its economies range in size from over (US) $250 billion for Australia and   India, to less than $400 million for the Maldives and Comoros. Its income levels   range from $15,000 per capital in Australia and the United Arab Emirates to less than   $250 in Mozambique, Tanzania, Madagascar and Bangladesh. 

  Opportunities for the Future 

  The legacy of the past, as I have described it so far, hints at what might be possible for 

  Indian Ocean cooperation in the future, but doesn’t give us any particular grounds for   optim.ism about our chances of getting there. There are some new forces now at work,   however, which have opened up a world of far-reaching new opportunities. 

  3 

  Three developments have been particularly significant. First, the ending of the Cold 

  War and its attendant superpower rivalry has removed a significant obstacle to intra-   reg:ional cooperation. Seccndly, a number of regional states have embarked on   programs of reform and are opening their economies to external competition, with   India leading the c.harge. And thirdly, South Africa has been welcomed back into the 

  inte:rnational community as a democratic state and an important regional player.   Certainly the sense of community among the Indian Ocean littoral and island states is   still weak when compared, fijr example, to the economic and other ties that draw the   countries of the Asia Pacific together, and the continuing difficulty of developing a 

  dialogue on economic, security or any other issues in the Indian Ocean region should   not therefore be underestimated. 

  Nevertheless I firmly believe - and am strongly reinforced in that belief by my recent   regional travels, which have taken. me to eight Indian Ocean countries in the last three   weeks; - that the prospects are now better than at any time since the end of World War   II for developing (particularly in an economic context, but not confined to that) a new 

  era of Indian Ocean cooperation. 

  The emergence of regionalism in the Indian Ocean would certainly not be before time.   Nor would it be in any sense unusual, judged against developments in other regions   around the world. Many states have come to recognise how effective regional   coo:peration can be for advancing a broad range of national interests. They have found 

  new economic complementarities., and ways of expanding trade and investment with   their neighbours. They have found mutual advantage in discussing policy problems,   like refugee flows, health issues, environmental pollution, terrorism and narcotics   trafihcking, which cross multiple borders. They have found it useful to discuss ways 

  of achieving and maintaining peace and stability within their regions, against both   military and non-military threats to security. 

  Across the world, the tempo of regio nlt;c.q has been increasing rapidly since the end   of the Cold War. New regional ai lllients are emerging, and existing arrangements   are growing stronger as regional .ests seek and acquire fuller expression.. Europe   has the European IJnion and the Organisation on Security and Cooperation in Europe   (OSCE). Afric.a has the Organisation of African Unity and the SADC. The Asia 

  Pacific region has Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and the ASEAN   Regional Forum. And, of ccurse. South Asia has SAARC, and South East Asia the   Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN). Australia itself has its Closer   Economic Relations (CER) arrangement with New Zealand. 

  4 

  These creations - EU and OSCE, OAU and SADC, NAFTA and APEC, SAARC and 

  ASEAN, and others as well - have a number of features in common, quite apart from   the alphabet soup appearance of their titles. They have usually begun in quite modest   ways, and with limited aims: ,the EU, for example, currently the world’s most   devel’oped regional grouping., started life in the 1950s as a relatively simple agreement 

  on coal and steel. Beyond such ‘beginnings, habits of cooperation and dialogue have   developed as participants have gained confidence in regional processes and in each   other. New opportunities for cooperation have suggested themselves and the regional   relationships have developed new, diverse, layers of networks. 

  Evolving regional structures and processes have accelerated the emergence, at a less   tangible level, of 8 sense of community among their respective populations. That   sense - a feeling #of identification with the region and its constituent cultures and   peoph~s - grows from the increased contact and knowledge that the formal 

  arrangements bring. Tourism, business travel, education, new information technology   and the ever-increasing cross-linking of trade and investment all drive this growth   along. 

  Successful regional arrangements tend to be, by nature, inclusive in their approach to   membership, within the obvious limits of the strength of the basic adhesive which   binds their members together. They tend also, often if not invariably, to be   heterogeneous, accommodating wide differences in size, economic strength, religion 

  and culture among their members. They operate to a large degree by consensus,   accepting the critical importance of ensuring that development proceeds at a pace, and   in directions, that all members are comfortable with. And they are almost invariably   multi-,tracked, advancing through the efforts not only of governments, but of a range   of othler players as well, i:ncluding business associations, and academic and research 

  institutions. 

  XT !f! PI- “1 to suggest that regionalism’s growth will be at the expense of global   worse, will result in the emergence of a world-wide tribalism based   -ally-antagonistic regional groupings. For one thing, different regional   groupmgs are not mutuall!i exclusive: rather they are linked together by the   overla:pping memb’erships of their constituent states, in rather the same way that the 

  five Olympic rings overlap. Most nations maintain a multi-dimensional international   focus, reflecting such basic factors as history, the nature of the economy, geographic   location, and ethnic, religious and. linguistic makeup. They are usually engaged with   different groups of states simultaneously, allowing them to identify with more than 

  5 

  one region or sub-region. The linkages produced in this way should be seen as a 

  source of strength and openness in each respective regional grouping - ensuring that   they do not become inward-‘looking, as each member has regard for the other regional   associations of which they are simultaneously members. 

  Australia is itself a case in point. We strongly identify with the Asia Pacific region,   but certainly don’t m ident.@ with that grouping. Geographically, we have a strong   regional and institutional attachment to the South Pacific group of nations. Within the   South Pacific, we are an ‘Austr’alasian’ country, bound intimately to New Zealand   through the comprehensive CER free trade agreement. In the context of the countries   to our north, with whom we are becoming ever more strongly integrated, we are 

  Corning to see ourselves, and be seen, as a country of the “East Asian Hemisphere”.   And, Iof course - as I hope this Forum proves beyond doubt - we are increasingly now   not just looking north and east in defining our geographical identity, but west as well,   to the Indian Ocean region. Australia can give weight and value and commitment to 

  all of these group relationships, old and new, and to others as well, without in any way   prejudicing or undermining our sense of identification with any of them. And our   experience in this respect should be no different in kind from anyone else?. 

  Th:is Forum and the Way Ahead 

  How then can we best set about the task of building regional cooperation in the Indian 

  Ocean region ? That is, of course, what this Forum is all about, and that is why you are   all here. There is a need fol- some creative thinking, new ideas and a willingness to   look at new ways of doing things, if we are to develop a cooperative approach which   is appropriate to the Indian (Ocean region. In the process we need to allow a lot of 

  ideas to flourish. Above all, we need to open up a dialogue and think through   concepts and directions - without necessarily making assumptions, at this stage, about   what the end product might look like. The need for the moment is not so much for a   decision-making process a:s an exploratory IX-O-ass. 

  In order to give the greate-+ possible ,tieas to flow freely, we have 

  deliberately designed this 1 as a “S;~:CUIIU il.&K” rather than as a “first track” or   inter-governmental dialogue. The essential nature of “second track” activity is simply   that all particip,ants in it attend in their personal - that is, non-official - capacities. This   allcws for open anld frank discussion, without the requirement that participants reflect   national positions, and without p#articipants being committed to particular outcomes. 

  One particular virtue of second-track process is that it allows government officials to 

  6 

  be exposed to a wide range of business and academic (and other officials’ personal)   ideas without feeli.ng compelled to stake our firm positions, or resist some looming,   binding outcome which is not agreeable. The ideas which emerge can be accepted or   rejected or modified by governments later, as they choose. Second track dialogue is   now a widely accepted feature of dialogue in many parts of the world, in particular in   the Asia Pacific :region. For instance, meetings hosted by the tripartite Pacific   Economic Cooperation Council (PECC), or strategic studies think-tanks, have been 

  able to explore what are sometimes thought to be adventurous options for economic   and security policy development:, this has been important both in the lead-up to the   establishment of new struclures,. the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)   process and the ASEAN Regional Forum @RF), and in generating new ideas for them   to consider. 

  There is a natural and logical interplay between first and second track processes,   which can work just as well here in the Indian Ocean region as it has in the Asia   Pacific. We already have :had .the beginnings of a first track, inter-governmental   process established with the meeting in Mauritius in March this year of government 

  represlentatives (in some cases accompanied by private sector and academic experts as   well) .Srom seven Indian Ocean countries - Australia, India, Kenya, Mauritius, Oman,   Singapore and South Africa, on the very welcome initiative of the Government of   Mauritius. It wa;s a meeting which canvassed many of the issues you will be 

  addressing here in Perth over the next two days, but with a particular focus on   eco.nomic cooperation. It produced a Joint Statement with a clearly defined set of   Principles, Objectives, and i?uture Plan of Action involving the establishment of a   Working Group. 14ustralia was a keen participant in the Mauritius meeting; we are   committed to the intergovernmental process initiated there: and we want to make it 

  work. We see this Perth Forum not as in any way competitive with it, but   complLlementary to it. In particular, we see this Forum as an important source of idea   for the Mauritius process, not least because it will draw on the expertise and   experience of many more people from so many more countries. We do hope that,   sooner rather thar In+-- it will prove possible to expand the Mauritius process itself, 

  so that it emt , not just a representative cross-section of governments in this   region, but all .#c who are keen., and have something, to contribute to this evolving   process of region building. 

  Befiore: exploring what direclions we might take after this Forum, let me say a few   words - from an Australian Government perspective - about our hopes and   expectations for the next two days. 

  7 

  As you know, a broad agenda has been developed for the meeting, embracing first, 

  economic issues, includin,g existing trade and investment linkages, existing economic   cooperation, obstacles and opportunities for enhancing trade and investment, and ways   of moving economic cooperation forward; and secondly, gther issues, including   education, environment, maritime cooperation and securiq. While I don’t want to in   any vr’ay pre-empt the Forum’s deliberations, let me say just a little more about two of   these areas: the ce.ntral agenda item, economic cooperation, and what seems to be the   most sensitive item, security cooperation. 

  We anticipate that the economic agenda of the Forum will focus on the regional   impact of the emergence of the global marketplace, the need to be equipped to   compete in it and implica.ticns of this for domestic economies. You could usefully   discuss the impact of regional countries’ Uruguay Round commitments, and the role   the World Trade Organisatj.on (WTO) can play in further encouraging trade and 

  stimulating growth in the region. With the quickening pace of growth in key markets   around the region, business is placing a high priority on trade and investment   liberalisation and facilitation. and on business networking. This Forum, with its broad   businfess representation and inclusive approach to participation, can play a key role in   identif$ng areas where gove:mments need to play an early supportive role. 

  Your discussions could also help to identiQ the sectors and areas of government   activity where regional business could benefit most from a region-wide cooperative   approach and go on to suggest options for productive regional collaborative activity.   The early indications are thsit the: economies of the region could benefit particularly 

  from Icollaborative effort in the areas of customs cooperation, telecommunications,   tourism and human resources development. I am pleased to see that the Indian Ocean   Tourism Organisation (IOTCl) wi:!l meet in Perth immediately after the Forum, with a   number of the same participants and an agenda focused on encouraging cooperation in 

  pro-moting tourism into the region. 

  Understanding as we do the many sensitivities which exist on cecurity issues we   haven’t wished to ,give security any particular emphasis a drum. The primary   focus will very definitely be on economic and related Y. It is proposed that   security issues will be discus:sed primarily in the context of‘ exploring the applicability   to this region of dialogue structures of a kind which have been, in recent years, 

  evolving elsewhere. Certainly we don’t want any divisive debate on currently   sensitive bilateral problems. But while security issues will occupy only a small   proportion of this Forum’s deliberations, we would be pleased to see the opportunity   taken here for participants 1:o st,srt thinking about a constructive, forward-looking 

  8 

  agenda for the region, beginning perhaps with areas of likely broad agreement as a 

  basis for approaching later, when greater confidence and understanding exist, the more   difficult issues. 

  Particular security issues which, in this context, seem appropriate for discussion here   include maritime resource protecuon; the safety of sea lanes and seaborne commerce;   anti-piracy measures; the UN Agenda for Peace issues (including peace keeping and   preventive diplomacy) as the:y relate to the Indian Ocean context; and, as I have said,   the experience elsewhere in developing patterns of security dialogue at the regional 

  level, including the ASEAN Regional Forum and the Organisation of Security and   Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Building on the experience of other regions, it may   be that the Forum will want to encourage the development of consultative and research   linkages among think-tanks. universities and institutes of international affairs and   stra.tegic studies in the region. Our experience in the Asia-Pacific region is that second 

  track dialogue, embracing academics and officials in their personal capacities, has   contrilbuted to a greater :sense of mutual understanding and, ultimately, a greater   willin;gness to discuss and get progress on some of the more difficult security issues of   the region. Progress may be very slow - and I fully expect it to be in the Indian Ocean   region - but there is benefit to be gained from this approach and no reason why our   positive experience in the Asia Pacific cannot be repeated in this part of the world. 

  After Perth, what? All of us will have, I hope, new food for thought as a result of the   contacts made, the discussi0n.s pursued and the ideas generated here. Australia has not   approached this Forum with any preconceived views about outcomes and future   directions, but there are nonetheless some obvious possibilities which suggest   thems8elves. and which have been the subject of some discussion already in the lead-up   to this meeting. 

  It s~eems likely., for a start,, that wre will see, before the week is out, the formation of   two’ new institutional arrangements - the Indian Ocean Rim Business Forum and the   Indian Ocean Research NQ+-’ ark -.-’ 2 concepts have already been explored around   the region, with enc er recent months. If established, these new 

  strucmres ” .;I1 have 1 .I’ own right in, respectively, developing business   views 01~ x. nal cooperation m economic matters and providing a network to draw   regional researchers together and create a capacity for carrying forward ‘second track’   policy development: they will be crucial building blocks for broader forms of regional 

  cooperation which might dev’elop in the years ahead. 

  9 

  It rna.y also be that there will be interest in formalising, as an ongoing structure, at   least .the economic component of this Forum, by establishing an Indian Ocean regional   equivalent to the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council (PECC) - which began in   1980 as a tripartite discussion forum for government, business and academics, and   which generated many of the ideas which have now been taken up with the 

  establishment of APEC. An “IOECC” - Indian Ocean Economic Cooperation Council,   to give it a working name - would take the establishment of formal functional bodies   in the: business and research streams one step further. Such an arrangement - which I   would see as dealing exclusively with economic matters - would formalise and carry 

  forwalrd the economic agenda of this Forum. It would be inclusive in its country   me:mbership, second-track in character, tripartite in its participation and consultative in   its style. Such a body could pla:y an important role in generating and refining ideas   which could in turn lay the basis for more formal inter-governmental economic 

  cooperation, perhaps on the APEC model. An IOECC would therefore be   complementary to the Mauritius process of inter-governmental cooperation in exactly   the same way that I have suggested this Forum will be: feeding unofficial ideas and   proposals into an official process. 

  Another outcome of this conference could always, of course, be a decision to hold an   “IFIOI:R 2” - a second conference, or indeed a whole series of them - covering the same   kind of broad agen.da you have before you this week. Personally, I would tend to see   this as being of rather less value than establishing a tripartite second-track 1OECC to 

  deal specifica1l.y with regional economic cooperation; and pursuing other areas of   cooperation through other re:levant functional streams, in particular the proposed new   Business Forum and Research Network, but also through sectoral organisations like   IOTO., and possibly existing structures like IOMAC as well. 

  Australia believes ‘very strongly in the value that not only governments and business,   but research institutions, can add to our emerging regional cooperation. For this   rsason I am pleased to announce tonight the Commomrsalth of b T%rar I ’ -0rt for   the establishment of a new Indian Ocean Centre here 1. .ovide 

  funding of $A250,000 for this firrancial year, ancl Q;A2CIO,OCt ale next two   financial years, for a centre of excellence on _ cl-i into u~c; muian Ocean region.   Premier Richard Court’s S’tate Government will contribute generous accommodation   and furnishings for the Centre in Perth’s Central Business District. The Indian Ocean   Centre will help the academic community in Australia to advance “second track” 

  regional cooperation by producing high quality work in specialised areas often through 

  10 

  collaboration with scholars in the region outside Australia, and by pursuing the agenda 

  of regional dialogue by hosting events such as conferences, seminars and workshops. 

  With this week’s Forum, f;Bllowing as it does hot on the heels of the Mauritian   Government’s Indian Ocean Rim Initiative, I am convinced we are now launched on   the path toward genuine and! effective regional cooperation in the Indian Ocean. We   must 

  .be under no i.llusions about the magnitude of the task ahead of us, or believe that   new arrangements for coope:ration can somehow come into being overnight or without   a lot of hard work. But this meeting is an important, path breaking, way of taking the   process forward. There will be excellent opportunities over the next two days to refine   and develop our thinking, ‘to examine new complementarities, to understand each 

  other’:; views and ideas, and to explore the possible fnture shape of our shared region.   These are big goals, but I know we have between us the goodwill, the expertise and   the creative imagination to make them come to pass. 

  So 

  lelt me, in conclusion, throw out a challenge. The descriptions ‘North Atlantic’ and   ‘Asia .Pacific’ these days conjure up images of strength, of alliances, of cooperation, of   prosperity and economic dynami,sm. For too long the Indian Ocean has, in contrast,   been .the Forgotten Ocean, .the Ocean Where Time Stood Still. Each of us today, 

  individually, has the chance to rise above these conventional habits of mind, to reach   towards a new and pr0misin.g fiture for the countries whose shores this great ocean   washes. It needs some imagination, some real flair, to envisage what cooperation   among us can achieve in thi>, new era. But the prospects are real. I hope that here in 

  Perth we can summon up enough boldness to make this meeting just as historic as it   can possibly be:. 

  * * 

