---
title: "Early childhood years: problem or resource? [University of Melbourne] Inaugural Professorial Lecture."
date: "1995-07-27"
creators:
  - "Raban-Bisby, Bridie"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Early childhood education"
  - "Child development"
  - "Primary education"
  - "Living standards"
  - "Literacy"
  - "Poverty"
  - "Parents and schools"
  - "Teachers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211190346
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FMF26%22
---

  inaugural.doc 

  Early Childhood ‘Years - 

  Prdblem or Resdurce? I 

  Page 1 of 13 

  Inaugural Piofessorial Lecture 

  by Professor Bridie Raban-Bisby   Mooroolbeek Chair of Early Childhood Studies   27 July, 199.5 

  Introduction 

  A wide rarge of issues will be discussed in this paper which are related. It begins with a   description. of the global background against which our concerns and understandings about very   young chilldren can focus. This description will highlight the links between the developing and the   developed world and will underline how our concerns for all children’s progress are closely linked   across continents. For instance, with issues of poverty, disadvantage and the development of   literacy, or perhaps more importantly, the development of literate ways of thinking. 

  Some of the issues which are touched on will be dealt with in broad brush strokes, while others   are sketched out in fine detail. This is because it is in the minutiae of everyday that we are coming   to understand and illuminate our Ideveloping knowledge concerning the progress young children   make, both through the early years of life and on into the early years of schooling. I am reminded   here that th.e international definition of the early years of childhood spans the ages 0 ‘- 8 years. 

  Development issues across the world 

  The first need is to address those global issues which should support, inform and, indeed, haunt   all our work with young children. Some notes fi-om the 1994 UNICEF Report on The State of the   Worlds CtJldren are worthy of reflection. This report gives us snapshots which illustrate global   achievements and concerns. It has many messages. One of these messages states that while   common everyday malnutrition is shocking in both scale and severity and indicates that while   only 1% or 2% of the world’s children exhibit visible signs of malnutrition, an estimated 190   million children under the age of 5 years are chronically malnourished. They are locked early into   a pattern of ill health and poor development. The problem is most widespread close by in South   Asia, home to half the world’s malnourished children, some 85 million. 

  The report continues by stating that because mothers lack iodine, at least 30,000 babies are still-   born each year and over 120,000 ,are born mentally retarded, physically stunted, deaf-mute or   paralysed. :Lack of iodine locks whole communities into poverty and underdevelopment, less able   to learn as children and less able to be independent in their adulthood. It also states that every   minute, a newborn baby dies of tetanus infection which could be prevented by tetanus vaccination   and clean birth practices. 

  As the world enters its second decade of fighting the AI.DS epidemic, news is bleak for the   world’s children. In several African countries AIDS is overtaking measles and malaria as a leading   killer of children, and hard-won gains in reducing child mortality are being reversed. In addition,   it is children, not soldiers, that are the casualties of modem war. In the last decade alone, an   estimated 1.5 million children have been killed in armed conflicts. A further 4 million have been   disabled, maimed, blinded, or otherwise brain-damaged. At least 5 million have been refugees and 

  12 million .more have been uprooted from their communities. Much larger numbers have seen   their health, nutrition and education suffer as conflicts have dfestroyed crops, infrastructure,   clinics, homes and schools. 

  Against this background of need and preventable human damage and loss, the developed world   throughout the 198Os, funded military spending close to one trillion dollars a year. It may 

  04/08/1999 

  inabgural .dc c 

  Page2of13 

  reasonably be assumed that if one half or even one quarter of these colossal resources had been   intelligently devoted to such purposes, then we could now be living in a world in which mass   hunger, malnutrition, preventable disease, illiteracy, rapid population growth, and a deteriorating   global env:ronment would be problems of the past. 

  Poverty, disadvantage and the role of education 

  The essence of this UNICEF report rests on the spiral of firstly, population growth, secondly,   poverty anld thirdly, environmental stress. These three issues are inextricable linked, each feeding   the other, and locking the poorest people of the world into a cycle by which poverty forces   growing numbers of people into environmentally vulnerable areas and the resulting environmental 

  stress becomes yet another cause of their continuing poverty. The cost of rectifying this   stranglehold of disaster has been calculated as one tenth of 1 % of the world’s annual economic   output. ‘A I-are bargain’ says James Grant, executive director of UNICEF ‘and one the world   cannot afford to miss’. 

  However, growing poverty is not confined to the developing world alone. A growing proportion   of the world’s richest nations are also experiencing an increase in poverty. For instance, while   America’s economy grew by 20% in the 198Os, some 4 million more American children fell into   poverty. In total, 1 in 5 youngsters now live below the povertli line in the USA. In Britain during   this same period of time, the number of children below the ‘oi’ficial’ poverty line (10% or 1.4   million in 1979) has increased three times to 4.1 million (32%). Overall, 25% of the population of   England now live below the poverty line. 13.9 million people are described in this way as earning   less than half the national average income. In addition, during this period of time in Elngland,   there has been a fall in real terms for the poorest families. The poorest 10% have experienced a   fall of 170/ in real income between 1979 and 1994. The richest 10% have seen an increase of 62%   in their real income during this same period of time. 

  Both systematic research (Wilkinson 1994) and experience inldicate that the greater the divisions   in a society, the worse it performs economically and social disruption increases. Standards of   health are affected and life expectancy is reduced. It is chilling to note, therefore, that the life   expectancy of adults in England began to fall in the mid-1980s. Like decreasing health, lack of   education conspires to tighten the hold of poverty. Highlighting this point, many studies,   particularly those conducted in thle developing world by the World Bank in recent years, have   demonstrated the positive effects of educational advance (Corney 1992). Overall increases, for   instance, in levels of literacy and in primary school enrolment have been found to be strongly   associated with greater economic equality as opposed to economic division (UNDP 1992). Other   studies show that the economic returns from investment in primary education exceed those of any   other kind Iof investment in the developing world. 

  Such conclusions confirm what common sense suggests - that better educated people can   participate more fully in the process of technological change and development, and are better able   to raise their own incomes and contribute to the health of their families and the economic   development of their nations. Poor quality education or no education at all, denies knowledge, 

  choice and opportunity, rendering people less able to make informed decisions about their own   futures and less prepared to adapt to the many changes which lie ahead. The knock-on effects for   communitiles and for societies is clearly enormous. 

  Educational achievement in primary schools 

  It is pertinent here to remind ourselves of Professor Hill’s lecture in this series when he   summarised patterns of, for instance, literacy development in Victorian schools (Hill 1995). He   found that it was possible to identi@ several key trends, and I mention two: 

  l the rapid rate of learning over the early years of schooling (Prep - Year 3), and   l the increasing spread of performance as students progress through school. 

  I interpret these particular key trends in two ways. Firstly, the,y reinforce what we already know   about very young children, that it is fi-om birth to 8 years of age that the period of fastest 

  04/08/1999 

  in&gural.doc 

  Page3of 13 

  development takes place during any lifespan, a fact which must never be ignored. Secondly, that   the vast range of abilities among our five year old children needs to be addressed during the pre-   school years in positive and creative ways. 

  From Peter Hill’s data, if this gap in achievement between chl.ldren, especially in the area of   literacy, isI not addressed early in school experience or, more advantageously, before schooling   begins, then we see this divide widening to the detriment of large numbers of our youngest school   students. If children are behind others at 5 years of age, they slip further behind as schooling   continues. In this respect, early literacy is a crucial indicator of success and progress both for   developed and developing world indices. Because of this, it has become increasingly important to   identify and collate any understandings we have which help us reduce that gap between children   as they grow and develop through their early years of life. 

  Cost-benefit of pre-school education 

  During the 1960’s and 1970’s, it was believed that pre-school educational experiences per se   would lead to increased attainment later in children’s school careers (Smith and Bissell 1970). But   these studj es of Head Start evaluations saw any gains lost during the early years of schooling   (Smith and James 1977). Clearly., an input - output model of development was found to be   insufficient to make a long-term and lasting impact on children’s lives. This failure to find long   term impact of early education has not been confined to the United States. Work reported by   Porter (1982) in Australia and Myers (1992) on the developing world have reached similar   conclusions. 

  However, during the 1980’s, as a result of the rigorous meta-analysis reported by Sylva (1992;   1994a) of 11 carefUlly designed research studies of the impact of high-quality compensatory   education programs in the USA (Lazar and Darlington 1982), positive results were found to be   achieved. :[n this re-analysis approximately 2,000 people with pre-school experience, and their   controls, were located. Their histories were documented and they and their families were also   interviewed. Results from these landmark studies (Sylva 1994-b) showed that attendance at   excellent, cognitively-orientated pre-school programs was positively associated with later school   competence., 

  The most carefully designed of th,ese 11 studies was the Perry Pre-School Project and in order to   review this study, 123 disadvantaged children were followed up at the age of 19 years (Berrueta-   Clement 11984). An associated cost-benefit analysis showed that for every dollar invested in the   pre-school program, at least $4.13 (after adjustment for inflation) had been returned to society.   These calculations were based on the financial cost to society of indices such as juvenile   delinquency, remedial education and joblessness - set against the running costs of an excellent   pre-school program. Further analysis of these data when the same sample of young people were   27 years of age confirmed this finding, increasing the cost-benefit analysis to $7.16 returned to   society for every dollar invested in the pre-school program (Schweinhart and Weikart 1993). This   economic analysis also estimated the return to society of taxes from the higher paid jobs which   these young people were securing as a result of their higher than expected educational   achievements. 

  There have been other cost-benefit analyses carried out on pre-school intervention studies, also in   America. One study (Bamett and Escobar 1990) presents data from a pre-school intervention   curriculum (Wiess 1980) and another from a comprehensive daycare program for disadvantaged   families (Seitz, Rosenbaum and Apfel 1985). Both studies showed that the costs of the program   were more than offset by savings later on in the children’s schooling and medical care. Research   conducted in Australia (Anstie et al 1988) focussed on the loss of skills and subsequent earnings,   with consequent decrease in tax payments, of mothers who take long periods of absence from the   work force. In this event they become progressively less effective contributors to the family,   community and society at large. This Australian research also pointed out that in any one year, for   every dollar spent on child care there was a net addition to the budget of $1.56. Cumulations over   several years of the pre-school period would increase this benefit proportionally. 

  In addition, research Tom Sweden (Andersson 1992) found daycare experience gave children a   better start in school. In this study progress was monitored until the children were aged 13 years. 

  04/‘08/ 1999 

  inaugural .dloc 

  Page4of13 

  The highest performance in school tests and the best emotional adjustment was found in the   children who had experienced the most daycare, even before the age of one year. Studies like   these demonstrate for the first tirne that quality early education can change the course of children’s   lives, especially those from disadvantaged backgrounds. Also they show that such efforts can   benefit sof:iety in tangible ways. - 2 

  The nature and impact of quality provision 

  However, not all studies indicate the unfailing benefits of pre-school provision (Clark 1988).   Because of this, studies have been deliberately conducted of children from different forms of   provision (Howes 1988; 1990); in these studies half the children were enrolled in excellent centres   and half in poor ones. For the purpose of these investigations ‘high quality’ centres were 

  characterised by the following: 

  l stable child care arrangemlents such that children interacted with just a few primary care   givers in any one day,   0 low staff turn-over, 

  l good staff t raining in child development, and   l low adult:child ratios. 

  The children enrolled in the higher quality centres did better later on both educationally and   socially. Those enrolled in poor quality centres, especially before their first birthday, did   particularly poorly at school. They were distractible, low in task orientation and had considerable   difficulty getting on with peers. More recent well-controlled studies point in this same direction   (Field 199 1). 

  With respect to the continuing advantages experienced by those attending specific pre-school   programs, persuasive explanations have been provided for such remarkable results (Berueta-   Clement et al 1984). For instance, certain high-quality pre-school programs have measurable   effects on intellectual perfomlance on entry to school. It was hypothesised in addition, therefore,   that this increased performance vvas in turn responded to by participating teachers, leading to   greater school commitment and better achievement. The critijeal point in this causal chain for   altering the life chances of children was seen to be their intellectual gains at the start of schooling. 

  However, as Kathy Sylva has pointed out, other research casts doubt on this theory (Sylva 1992).   In a later study (Schweinhart et al 1986) three different curricular were compared; children from   the Perry Pre-school Project (or High/Scope program), with a. ‘free play’ program and with a   formal, behaviouristic training program. All three programs were compared for later school   impact. Each of these programs were found to enhance intellectual performance on entry into   school. But a follow-up at the age of 15 years showed that the children in the formal program   engaged in more anti-social behaviour and had a lower commitment to school at this later age.   Therefore, it is not raised intellectual performance at sc.hool entry on its own which impacts later   school success, because this was not found to be the case for those children from the overly-rigid   adult-dominated program. 

  In following up an alternative theory further for explanatory power, work in Britain (Jowett and   Sylva 1986) compared working class children from two pre-school environments. The first   program was run by early years professionals who favoured ‘guided play’ with little adult   domination and more adult extension and support of children’s own play. The second favoured 

  ‘free play’ punctuated by adult-led games and stories run by voluntary helpers. The findings from   this comparative study showed clearly that children who had attended the pre-school program   oriented to guided play were more independent and ready for school than those who came from   the regime: of free play punctuated by adult-led activities. They concentrated better, their play was   richer, and. they approached adults as resources for learning rather than sources of help. Most   importantly, they opted for difficult, educational activities when allowed to choose what to do. 

  Similar findings were identified by a more recent study in the, USA (Marcon 1994) where first   grade results indicated increased academic and social alchievements for those children whose pre-   school teachers espoused active-learning programs of ‘guided play’. 

  http://www.edfac.unimelb.edu.au/lectures/dean_lec/BRB text.html - 04/‘08/ 1999 

  inaugural.dcc Page5of13 

  Developing intellectual skills and high self-esteem 

  Working with older children (Dweck 1986; Dweck and Leggett 1988), Carol Dweck and her   colleagues have found that children responded with two very diffeient’pattems of behaviour when   given tasks to which there were no solutions. ‘Mastery’ oriented children, as she calls them,   maintained. a positive orientation to the task and continued to employ problem-solving strategies.   They were observed to monitor their strategies and maintain positive affect throughout. From   interviews it was clear that they saw difficult problems as challenges to be mastered through   effort. In contrast, children who were characterised as ‘helpless’ in orientation began to chat about   irrelevant topics when they were faced with difficulties., they showed a marked decline in   problem-solving effort and also exhibited negative affect. These children appeared to view their   difficulties as signs of their low ability; they rarely engaged in self-monitoring or self-instruction. 

  Some of my own research sheds further light on these results because it focuses on data collected   from much younger children (Raban-Bisby in press). The starting point for my study was the   close observation of twenty children at the time of school entry, and the marked ways in which   they differed, right from the first lday in their classrooms. Some of them, when asked, were certain   they could read and write and were keen to take every opportunity to demonstrate their abilities.   These children were observed to be confident, risk-taking and persistent in their efforts towards   literacy. Other children appeared to lack this confidence. They were diffident concerning their   abilities and avoided opportunities which they felt might expose their anticipated difficulties. 

  While this range of expressions of their abilities on school entry is not in itself a surprising   finding, what is remarkable is that in the case of two of the children in particular, neither of whom   could read and write in any formal sense, they presented in school at opposite ends of this   confidence continuum. Both girls were matched for socio-economic background and family   membership and it could have been expected that their pathway into success at school might also   be similar. However, this was not found to be the case. 

  In a further investigation of the tape-recordings collected in their homes between the ages of 3 and   a quarter and 5 and a half years of age, these two girls were found to have experiences which   contributed to their differing development of confidence in whatever they did. One child was seen   to have the advantage over the other and this was captured in the positive friendliness which 

  character&d her experience of pre-school life. The other child was not so fortunate and appeared   to either cause trouble or find herself in trouble most of the time during these pre-school years.   Repeated experiences of these kinds before starting school saw these two girls at different ends of   the confidence continuum and, as might be expected, in the follow-up studies at 7 years and 9   years of age (Raban 1984), the increasing gap between their literacy abilities saw one child being   referred for special education while the other kept up with her peers. 

  More recent research concerning older children during the early years of schooling has been   conducted 

  by Kathy Walker (in prep), a research student in the Department. Her findings illustrate   that children in multiage classrooms (Prep - Year 2), for instance, exhibited more confidence than   their peers in single age groups. If this sense of confidence and high self-esteem are key elements   in later school success, then findings like these which either promote or sustain these   characteristics need to be considered more widely. 

  The positive conclusions to be drawn from the studies reported here are not new. In 1985 Michael   Rutter concluded that ‘the long term educational benefits stem not from what children are   specifically taught but from the effects on children’s attitudes to learning, on their self esteem, and   on task orientation.’ A decade later, Kathy Sylva (1994a) indicates that the most important impact   of early education appears to be on children’s aspirations for education and employment, their   motivations and on their commitment to school. 

  What is it that children learn as development takes piace? 

  One of our significant understandings is that learning ta'kes place within a social context where   interaction is a potent force for the realisation of these positive attributes which lead to later   school success. Not only do children learn in this way to enter the intellectual lives of others, they 

  04/08/1999 

  i naugural . dclc 

  Page6of 13 

  also learn to regard themselves highly through the views of o thers and to believe in their own   competence and in the role which! others take in helping them achieve their goals. 

  Vygotsky (1962) has shown how adults have a prominent role to play in these social interactions   for learning. Sharing with more knowledgeable others provides the supporting framework and the   foundations for the development of the distinctly human forms of mental fknctioning. In   focussing on cognitive development in an important sense it is the capacity to use signs which   stand in place of ideas, objects, experiences and the like, which distinguishes humans from   animals and this is the account of development which Vygotsky chooses to stress. Using signs, he   maintains, restructures mental processes and behaviour and leads to further learning and   development. This means, for example, that learning to write marks the beginning rather than the   end of a developmental phase. Literacy is seen here not just as a set of skills to be mastered, but as   a mental functioning which actually structures and organises specifically literate ways of thinking. 

  Because of’this impact on thinking, literacy is seen as intimately bound up with later school   success and, therefore, without literacy, progress in school becomes impossible and again we will   see students fall further behind with their studies, not necessarily because they can’t read or write,   although this is important, but because they can’t think in appropriately literate ways. Teaching   the alphabet, phonic skills, punctuation or any other impoverished view of early literacy, which is   common currency in contemporary Britain for instance: is rejfected here. What needs to be   focussed 

  on is the power for development and for educational progress, both in the developing   and in the developed world school systems, which sees literacy in its fullest sense continuing to   be a concern, especially the complex roots of its development in very young children. 

  Learning to express themselves through a variety of symbolic languages like painting, drawing,   dance, movement, role play etc. illustrates clearly the ways in which very young children come to   know, come to make knowledge their own and make sense of-their world. It is in these particular   ways that c,hildren, in using signs and symbols which stand in the place of objects to assist their   thinking, demonstrate their learning and later intellectual development. Colleagues in the   Department and at the Abbotsford Children’s Centre are currently engaged in an exciting project   which is addressing this development directly through the process of emergent curriculum in   which, from one point of view, the roots of early literacy are yet another symbolic language which   is being observed through the children’s development. 

  Development of literacy during the pre-school years 

  We now understand that coming to know the nature and uses of literacy does not occur in a   vacuum. It depends on living in am environment where writing and reading are important; it   depends on interactions with print which are a source of social and intellectual pleasure for both   young children and those around them (Raban 1991). Researchers have pointed out that 

  awareness of forms, functions and uses of print provides not   just the motivation, but the backdrop 

  against which writing and reading may be learned. The notion of emergent literacy, therefore,   pays homage to what we know about children’s interactions with the world of print, and the kinds   of support and guidance which adults give in directing children’s attention to print and their role   in demonstrating the functions of literacy. 

  Most of this functional and experiential learning takes place in the pre-school phase and we have   been gaining in our understanding from observations of young children. In the most successful   contexts, we have been finding out ways of replicating this kind of environment for our children   during the pre-school years. This is because the likelihood that children will succeed in learning to   read when they enter formal schooling depends most of all on how much they have already 

  learned about reading before they get there. Varying rates of development have been shown to   depend on experience of print and. the quality of the feedback from others which children receive   to their endeavours to make sense of the print which surrounds them. These observations have   been confirmed in, for instance, Argentina (Ferreiro and Teborosky 1983), New Zealand (Clay 

  1979), England (Raban 1984) and in the USA (Mason 1980). 

  These studies confirm that children who arrive at school less developmentally advanced towards   literacy can soon begin to experie:nce failure as they encounter texts which are too difficult for   them to read for themselves. This results in their reading less l:han their peers. Lack of exposure to 

  04/08/ 1999 

  inaugural .doc 

  Page7of13 

  text and lack of practice will exacerbate children’s initial delay in achieving literacy. Results   obtained by Allington (1984), for example, in his sample of six-year olds, ranged from 16 words   read in one week’s school reading group by a poor reader, to- 1933 words read by the most skilled   reader. Because of this kind of discrepancy, Stanovich (1986) has identified a “Matthew effect”   whereby the rich get richer and the poor get poorer as educational and other supporting   experiences both subtly and increasingly discriminate between children, a phenomenon referred to   earlier by Peter Hill (op tit). 

  Role of parents in developing earIy literacy 

  During the pre-school years and after, of course, it is also important to acknowledge the fact that   parents influence children’s progress in significant ways. Morris (1966) showed how library   membership and book ownership, initiated by parents, was related to later progress in reading .   Clark (19’76), commenting on the 32 young fluent readers in her study, pointed out that their   parents were avid readers, belonged to public libraries, they were interested in their children’s   progress and they ensured that written and spoken language were shared within a friendly and 

  accepting social context. 

  My own longitudinal study (Raban 1984) illustrated the influence of parental provision for   literacy during the pre-school yeoars; buying books, comics, pIens, paper, crayons and the like,   along with visits to the library and hearing stories read aloud regularly. This provision was related   to later suiecessful reading development in school at ages 7 and 9 years whereas parental explicit   teaching elf reading was not related to later progress. 

  However, it is not just reading to children that makes a difference. It is enjoying the books with   them and reflecting on the book’s form and content; it is developing and supporting children’s   curiosity about texts and the mea.nings they convey; it is encouraging them to examine the print; it   is sometimes starting and always inviting discussion of the meanings of the words and the   relationships of the text’s ideas to the world beyond the book (Heath 1983). The major message   here is not to leave early experiences of literacy to chance, but to be drawing children’s attention   to literacy and to be incorporating literacy activities into appropriate contexts in the weave of   every day and this should be going on all the time during all the years of childhood. Careful   planning a.nd knowledge of developing and enhancing literacy will be critical and parents are seen   as an essential and natural component of this pre-school experience (Harmon 1995). 

  Involvingparents in thepre-school 

  However, pre-school teachers in Britain and in other countries like Australia (Fell in prep) have   been reluctant to teach literacy. There have been a number of reasons for this which include: 

  l Protecting children from too much adult pressure. 

  l A desire to respect children’s pre-school life as valuable in itself. 

  l Feeling that ways of teaching initial literacy are inappropriate for very young children. 

  l An jnadvertent misunderstianding of emergent literacy n terms of learning pre- reading   skills which looked like drills. 

  In a recent study (Harmon and Ja:mes 1990) pre-school teachers and parents of pre-school children   were interviewed in depth. The teachers were aware of parents’ interest in literacy but they were   worried about parents using inappropriate methods, parents putting too much pressure on the   children and they didn’t see literacy as a central concern of thie pre-school curriculum.   Consequently the serious involvement of parents in pre-school literacy development did not arise   for this group of teachers. 

  Nevertheless, studies of children who read from an early age have found that they have parents   who have :supported them in num.erous ways. From the interviews with parents in the study   referred to above, it emerged that virtually all parents were taking a very active role in their 

  http:ll~ww.edfac.unimelb.edu.au/lectures/’dean~lec/BRBl~text. html 04,/08/ 1999 

  in&gural .doc 

  Page8of13 

  children’s literacy experiences. These parents added spontaneously that they did not put their   children under too much pressure, indeed it appeared that most children needed no pressure at all   to engage in literacy activity but found it enjoyable in itself. rrhe activities they engaged in   together included: 

  l reading shop signs,   l writing and reading greetings cards,   l looking up TV programs,   l looking at papers , magazines and comics,   l book sharing,   l drawing and writing. 

  Parents saw themselves as having a positive role to play in developing their children’s literacy,   although there was widespread uncertainty that they were doing the right thing. 

  These parents wanted advice. However, they did not ask for this from their child’s pre-school   teacher because they didn’t see any connection with the pre-school program and literacy activities.   Those who did ask for advice were invited to read to their children. No more specific information   was made available to them. Clearly, intrinsic to all forms of parental involvement is home-school   communication . While telling parents on the one hand that they are their children’s most   important   children’s 1 earning. 

  In the UK, the Sheffield Early Literacy Development Project (Hannon et al 1991) set out to find   practical ways of working with parents to promote pre-school literacy development in the home.   The project developed methods of working with parents - focussed on the home but located in   both the home and the school - targeted primarily on children aged 2 and a half to 3 years of age.   The focus on reading emphasised children’s experiences of environmental print as much as books.   Three main methods of working with parents were devised (Weinberger et al 1990): 

  0 provision of literacy materials, 

  l home visiting, and   l meetings held at school. 

  The overall findings from this project indicated that the take-up and participation levels were   high, there were no drop outs, and the intervention was .welcomed by parents. 

  There is considerable potential for involving parents in the pre-school development of literacy. A   limiting factor is the reluctance of some pre-school teachers to accept literacy as a major concern   of pre-school education, but it is likely that increasing numbers of them will see that, from an   emergent literacy perspective, a concern with literacy means extending the tradition of child-   centred pralvision rather than compromising it (Fell op tit; Raban-Bisby 1995). 

  Role of teachers in the early development of literacy 

  Through the close observation of 5 year olds in a kindergarten classroom in New South Wales   with Peter Geekie (Geekie and Ra.ban 1993; 1994), we identified one teacher’s behaviour which   changed over time as the children”s literacy developed. This teacher structured her classroom   environment so that print was an integral part of the room. She used patterns of predictable   moments which allowed the children to follow her repeated models for incorporating print into   various classroom activities. Indeed, this teacher was seen to behave in ways which have been   identified bly Bruner (1986) in reporting his work with mother-child pairs. This teacher acted as   ‘consciousness for two’ firstly, by establishing joint attention and secondly, by creating what   Bruner refemrred to as ‘formats’. ShIe provided predictable but flexible interactional structures which   made it easier for these children to learn. 

  At the beginning of the school year, none of these children could read even the simplest of texts   or write a sentence. However, with the assistance of their teacher through these repeated episodes,   they were able to solve literacy problems which they could obviously not solve for themselves. 

  04/08/ 1999 

  I 

  inaugural. dot Page9of 13 

  By the end of the school year the patterns of exchange formally used by the teacher became the   property of the children. They were aware of what they needed to know and how to find out and   check, and they were no longer dependent on their teacher for guidance. These children had   gained control of the process for themselves. 

  During these observations we were reminded of David Wood’s work in which he monitored   tutoring sessions between mother-child pairs (Wood and Middleton 1975). He concluded that   successful instruction was dependent upon the ways in which the adult regulated their   instructional behaviour, that is demonstrations, discussions and evaluations, to the current   attention and ability of the child. The adult provided just enough support to help the child   overcome their current difficulties, and withdrew to a less direct level of intervention. when the   child showed they could manage a particular part of the task -for themselves. 

  Wood has described adult intervention, therefore, as contingent upon the child’s activity, and has   further cla:lmed that this contingency is based on the adult’s interpretation of, firstly, the child’s   successful progress and, secondly, what has happened as a result of earlier interventions. This was   exactly the, sequence of behaviours which Peter Geekie observed. The successful teacher in our   study progressively relaxed control over the planning and execution of problem solving as the   children showed that both the task and the strategies needed to complete it were understood. In   Bruner’s words this teacher allowed the children to ‘borrow’ her knowledge and consciousness in   order that they might eventually be able to solve independently the problems involved in the   activity. 

  Bronwyn Reynolds, one of my research students, is replicating this work in her own kindergarten   with 3 and 4 year old children. She is documenting her role in creating a literate environment and   further, her role in supporting these young children’s endeavours towards solving literacy   problems. What is significant, even at this early stage of her study is the amount of control and   appropriate direction which the children are able to take with the guided support of their teacher. 

  From the theoretical perspectives of Vygotsky and Bruner and the findings of a number and range   of differen: studies we are building a clearer view of the significant and central role of adults, both   parents and teachers, in early childhood development. This role is being further developed in   practice and all these understandings inform our preparation of early childhood professionals. 

  Summary and Recommendation 

  In conclusion, the issues raised here will be restated in turn: 

  l The :impact of quality early education influences the lives of all young children, but is   greatest for children from backgrounds of poverty and disadvantage, locally, nationally and   globally. 

  l Quality early education leads to lasting cognitive and social benefits, not only at the start of   schooling, but throughout adolescence and into early ad.ulthood. 

  l Investment in quality early education is cost effective and a number of studies are   indicating the degree to which this has been possible. 

  l The most important learning in the pre-school years concerns task persistence, social skills,   feelings of confidence and aspirations for the future. 

  l The necessity for supporting emergent literacy during the pre-school years as a way of   deve:!oping literate ways of thinking during the years of’schooling can no longer be ignored. 

  l The role of the adult during the early years of childhood is crucial and becomes more   powerful when professionals and parents work together. 

  What has been indicated throughout this review is the inextricable links between ‘care’ and   ‘education’ which need to be maintained, not inappropriately separated, and that adults, both 

  04/08/1999 

  inaugural.doc 

  Page 10 of 13 

  parents and teachers, have an active, participatory role in the development of young children,   especially in the development of literacy. There has been a danger? with non-interventionist   strategies, that child care could be interpreted as requiring liltle input from adults over and above   basic duties of health and safety. If this becomes the focus ic. the press forward towards integrated 

  services, then we will be facing the dilemma of institul:ionalising ignorance at the expense of   providing an appropriately educational context for the successful development and progress of our   youngest children. This is the problem facing us in the immediate future. We must make every   effort not ‘to squander the nation’s richest resource, the years of early childhood and the early years   of schooling. 

  Acknowledgments 

  We all work with a collective consciousness which is built u.p over years and derived from the   work and Insights of others. It is: therefore, important for my own part to acknowledge the debt I   owe in particular to Professor Kathy Sylva and Dr Iram Siraj-Blatchford (University of   London, Institute of Education) and Professor Tricia David (University of Canterbury) for their   generous s’haring of papers and ideas. Emeritus Professor Dame Marie Clay, Peter Geekie   (University of Wollongong) and Pat Smith (RMIT) have provided many hours of stimulating   opportuni&es for discussion and reflection on the links between literacy theory and practice.   Colleagues and students in my own Department of Early Childhood Studies here at the University   of Melbourne have helped me to develop a significant Australian context for my work, these   include Dr Christine Ure, Kathy Walker and Bronwyn Reynolds who have been especially   informative, Kevin Fell has added valuable insights and Dr Manjula Waniganyaka has offered   welcome critical support. 

  To all these people and many more, I owe a great debt of gratitude. However, none more than my   family in England and here in Australia, especially my husba.nd Eddy for his patience and   support. 

  REFERENCES 

  Allington, R.L. (1984) ‘Content coverage and contextual reading in reading groups’   JOURNAL of Reading.Behaviour 16 8 5 -96 __._ -- ~ ~~ _~ - ..--- 

  Andersson, B.E. (1992) ‘E&cts ofd a y care on cognitive and socio-emotional competence of   thirteen-year-o Id Swedish school children Qij~~Dey~:lopm!:nt 63 20-3 6 

  Anstie, R., Gregory, R.G., Dorwick, S. and Pincus, J. (1988) Government Spcndirzgqn work-   related child care: Some economic issues   &onomic Policy Research   Discussion paper 19 1, Canberra: ANU Centre for 

  Bamett, W.S. and Escobar, C.M. (1990) ‘Economic costs and beneJts of early intervention’ in   S.J. Meise:ls and J.P. Shonkoff (eds) Handbook of Early-Childhood Intervention Cambridge:   Cambridge University Press pp560-583 

  Berrueta-Clement, J.R., Schweirihart, L., Bamett, W., Epstein, A. and Weikart, D. (1984)   &z~ged Lives: The effcctz of Jtc Per-w-re-schoojprggcanz- en y&s through ege. I9   Ypsilanti, Michigan: The HigWSlcope Press 

  Bruner, J. (1986) Actu~~~~inds,~~‘~sSible- W+ds _ Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

  Clark, MM. (1976) Yquzg;‘lue@ Readers London: Heinemann 

  Clark, MM. (1988) ~C&l&~~ Under-&c: Educational research-and-evidence New York:   Gordon anld Breach Science 

  Clay, M.M . (1979) Reading: ~Thepattqningof~qmpl~x behavioztr (2nd. edition) London:   Heinemann 

  Comey, M. (1992) The Case for &vesting ic Basic Education New York: UNICEF 

  http://www.edfac.unimelb.edu.au/lectures/dean_lec!BRB_text.html 04,/08/ 1999 

  * 

  inaugural.doc Page 11 of 13 

  Dweck, C. (1986) ‘Motivational Processes affecting learning’ American Psychologist 4 1 1040-   1048 

  Dweck, C. and Leggett, E. (1988) ‘A social-cognitive approach to motivation andpersonali~~’   Psychological Review 95 2 256-273 

  Fell, K.(in prep) ‘Thepolitics ofearly childhood literacy’ 

  Ferreiro, E. and Teborosky, A. (:I 983) Literacy Before Schooling London: Heinemann 

  Field, T. (1991) ‘@al@ f t J in an a’a )-care and grade school behaviour and performance’ Child   Development 62 863-870 

  Geekie, P and Raban, B. (1993) Learning to Read and W’rite Through Classroom Talk Stoke-   on-Trent: Trentham Books 

  Geekie, P. and Raban, B. (1994) ‘Language learning at home and at school’ i n C Gallaway and   B. Richards (eds) Input and Interaction-in Language Acquisition Cambridge: University of   Cambridge Press pp 153- 180 

  Hannon, F’. (1995) Literacy, -Home and School: Research ~andpractice~teaching literacy ti:ith   parents London: The Falmer Press 

  Hannon, F’. and James, S. (1990) ‘Parents’ and teachers ‘perspectives on preschool literacy   development ’ British Educational Research Journal 16 3 259-272 

  Harmon, F’., Weinberger, J. and Nutbrown, C.. (1991) ‘,4 study of work with parents to promote   early literacy development’ Research Papers in Education 6 2 77-97 

  Heath, S.B. (1983) Ways With Words Cambridge: Carnbridge University Press 

  Hill, P. ( l!J95) ‘School effectiveness and Improvement’ Dearls Lecture S-e-ties Inaugural   Professorial Address, Faculty of Education, Melbourne: The University of Me1boum.e Press 

  Howes, C. (1988) ‘Relations between early child care and schooling’ Developmental   Psychology 24 53-57 

  Howes, C. (1990) ‘Can the age oJfentrv into child care and the quality of child care predict   adjustment in kindergarten ?’ Developmental Psychology 26 2 292-303 

  Jowett, S. and Sylva, K. (1986) ‘Does kind of kindergarten matter?’ Educational Research 28 1   21-31 

  Lazar. and Darlington, R. (1982) ‘Lasting effects of early education: A report from the consortium   of longitudinal studies’ Jouma!-(~~theSqciety~foyResearcbin~Chi!~qevelopment 47 (2-3) Serial   No. 195 

  Marcon, R.A. (1994) ‘Doing the right thingfor children: linking research andpolicy reform in   the District of Colombia public schools’ Young-Children (Nov) 8 - 20 

  Margetts, I  3 (February 16) 

  Mason, J.b/I. (I 980) ‘When do children begin to read: An e.xpioration offour year old children’s   letter and word reading competencies’ Reading Research Quarterly 15 2 203-227 

  Morris, J.M. (1966) Standards and Progress in Reading Slough: National Foundation for   Educational Research 

  Myers, R. (1992) Strengthening programs of early childhood development in the third world 

  http://www.~~dfac.unimelb.edu.au/llectures/dean_lec/BRB~text.l~tml 04:;08/ 1999 

  w 

  L 

  inaugural .doc Page 12 of 13 

  London and New York: Routledge in Co-operation with UNESCO for the Consultative Group on   Early Chihlhood Care and Development 

  Porter, R. I[ 1982) ‘The effect qfpre-school experience and far& environment on chiJdren’s   cognitive and social development’ Early Child Development and Care 9 155 - 175 

  Raban, B. (1984) Observing Children Lear-rung to Read and Write Unpublished PhD,   University of Reading 

  Raban, B. (199 1) ‘The role of schooling in initial literacy’ Educational and Child Psychology 8 3   41-59 

  Raban-Bisby, B. (1995) ‘When are you going to teach my chi”d to read?’ Clearing House Journal   of the Free Kindergarten Assoc. 7-8 

  Raban-Bisby, B. (in press) ‘Quality provision: how can this be quantiJied?’ Early Childhood 

  Rutter, M. (1985) ‘Family and social influences on cognitive development’ Journal of Child   Psychology 26 5 683-704 

  Schweinhart, L., Weikart, D. and Lamer, M. (1986) ‘Consequences of threepre-school   curriculum models through age 1.5’ Early EducationResearch Quarterly 1 15-45 

  Schweinhart, L. and Weikart, D. (1993) 4 Sum-mar-y ofSigntf;cant Benefits: The qigh   pre-school study through age 27 Ypsilanti, Michigan: High Scope UK. +A   Scope Perry 

  Seitz, V., Rosenbaum, L.K. and Apfel, N.H. (1985) ‘Effects offamily support intervention: a ten   year follow-up’ Child Development 56 376-391 

  Smith, G. and James, T. (1977) ‘The effect ofpre-school education’   and Environment London: Methuen   in A.H. Halsey (ed) Heredity 

  Smith, MS. and Bissel, J.S. (1970) ‘The impact of Head-Start: The Westinghouse-Ohio Head   Start evaluation ’ Harvard-Educational Review 40 4 1- 104 

  Sylva, K. (1992) ‘Conversations in the nursery: how they contribute to aspirations andplans’   Laxuage and-Education 6 2,3&4 14 1 - 148 

  Sylva, K. (1994a) ‘The impact of early learning on children’s later development’ in C. Ball (ed)   Start Right;he Importance-ofEarly Learning London: Royal Society of Arts, Manufacturing and!/   Commerce 1 - 18 

  A 

  Sylva, K. (1994b) ‘School influences on children’s development’ Journal of Child Psychology +   &d’ 

  and Psychiatry 35 1 135 - 170   Stanovich, K.E. (1986) ‘Matthew effects in reading: Some consequences of individual differences   in the acquisition of literacy’ Re;~dingResearchQuarte:r!y 2 1 4 360-406 

  UNDP ( 1993) Hummaan- Development Report New York: United Nations Development Program 

  UNICEF ( 1994) The State- of the World’s Children Oxford: Oxford University Press 

  Vygotsky, L. (1962) Thought and Language New York: MIT Press 

  Walker, K. (in prep) ‘The social competence ofyoung children in junior primary schools (P-2)’   Master of Education thesis, The IJniversity of Melbourne. 

  Weinberger, J., Hannon, P. and Nutbrown, C. (1990) ‘Ways ofworking with parents to promote   early literacy development’ USDE_Papers in Education, 14 Sheffield: University of Sheffield   Division of Education. 

  http://www.c:dfac.unimelb.edu.au/lectures/dean_lec/BRB--text.html 04/08/1999 

  * 

  c 

  ’ J . 

  . i 

  inaugural .doc Page 13 of 13 

  Weiss, R.S. (1980) ‘INREAL intervention for language handicapped and bilingual children’   &urn-al-f the .Qi~~~~~~~f Eq!y-Cljldh~qcj 4 40-5 1 

  Wilkinson, R.G. (1994) r/f- -212-P ._ n air I ares:- T/k~flects of yideningP@come d*ferences on the welfare __   of the young Ilford, Essex: Bamardo’s __._ ----   Wood, D., Bruner, J. and Ross, GL (1976) ‘The role oftutoring in problem-solving’ Journal-$   Child Psy>:ho&y and Psychiatry 17 2 89 - 100 

  Wood, D.J.. and Middleton, 

  D.J. (1975) ‘A study of assistedproblem-solving’ British Joumal of   Psychology 66 18 1 - 19 1 

  - ____ _.--- --. . -. 

  Last modified: July, 1996   Authorised by: IT Manager, Faculty of Education   Access: Unrestricted.   Copyright 01996, The University of Melbourne.   Maintained :by: Lana Parsons l.parsons@edfac.unimelb.edu.au 

  http:liwww.edfac.unimelb.edu.au/lectures/dean lec/BRB-text.‘html - 04/08/ 1999 

