---
title: "Speech ... [to the] UN International Meeting on Mine Clearance, Geneva, 6 July 1995"
date: "1995-07-06"
creators:
  - "Punch, Gary"
source: "MINISTER FOR DEFENCE SCIENCE AND PERSONNEL"
subjects:
  - "to the"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211189515
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VZB20%22
---

  ,... 

  EMBARGOED UNTIL 21.00 est (9pm) 6 JULY 1995 

  SPEECH BY THE HON GARY PUNCH MP 

  MINISTER FOR DEFENCE SCIENCE AND PERSONNEL  COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA 

  TO 

  UN INTERNATIONAL MEETING ON MINE CLEARANCE 

  GENEVA, 6 JULY 

  I would like to extend my appreciation, and that of the Australian  Government, to the Secretary General, Dr Boutros Boutros Ghali, for  the sense of urgency he has displayed in organising this Conference so  promptly. The terrible human costs brought about by the misuse of  landmines makes a concerted international de mining effort one of the  most pressing requirements of our time. 

  Anti-personnel mines result in horrendous physical injuries and  carnage, often long after conflict has ended. The term 'weapons of  mass destruction in slow motion' has unfortunately been well earned.  The need for the medical treatment and rehabilitation of victims  places great strain on countries with severely limited resources. 

  Mines have an effect beyond the visible, and often tragic, impact of  human suffering. 

  Mines also result in widespread disruption to social and economic  activity. Mines restrict the productive use of arable land in war " ravaged countries where the people rely heavily on agriculture for  their livelihood. In Cambodia, for example, fertile rice growing areas  remain unused, refugees are prevented from returning to their homes,  and the country's ability to move towards self-sufficiency in feeding  its own people has been sorely restricted. 

  The Australian Government has long recognised the importance of  this issue. We have a proud record of contributing to international  de mining activity: 

  2. 

  We were one of the first countries into Afghanistan in 1989 and  the last to leave in 1993. In that time we helped to train over  14,000 Afghans in mine clearance . 

  Australian defence personnel continue to serve in Mozambique  and Cambodia. We provide funding to UN agencies for work  in both countries and in Afghanistan. 

  Our contribution to the international de mining effort to date is  worth almost $15 million, with nearly $4million spent on  demining in Cambodia alone in 1994 /95. 

  The challenge we now face is to address these problems in a concrete  way, and with an increased sense of urgency. The removal of  landmines and the treatment and rehabilitation of victims must remain  a priority. But our efforts cannot be restricted to clearing up the 

  legacy of the past. It is also imperative that we develop an agreed and  workable set of controls to ensure that the terrible situation we are  witnessing today cannot be repeated in the future. 

  The Australian Government is committed to continuing its support for  international demining activities. 

   " Over the next year, Australia will again provide a package of  international assistance, worth over $5million, to meet the  development challenge. 

  In Cambodia, we will provide $2.5m to support the work  of the Cambodian Mine Action Centre. This will be in  addition to some $800,000 which will go to support the  efforts of the Australian Army in demining assistance in  Cambodia. We will also provide $150,000 to the  Australian Red Cross for the treatment and rehabilitation  of landmine victims. 

  3. 

  In Afghanistan, we will provide $400,000 to the UN  Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance  to Afghanistan. 

  In Mozambique, Australia will provide $250,000 for  mine awareness and clearance operations through the  UN. Again this will be supplemented by the activities of  the Australian Army in Mozambique, which will cost  some $300,000 this year. 

  And we will provide $300,000 for mine clearance and  awareness activities in Angola. 

   " To supplement this effort, the Australian Government has  decided to contribute $500,000 to the UN Voluntary Trust Fund. 

   " This Trust Fund will build on the extraordinary achievements  of those UN agencies and operations which have already  accomplished so much in the field. It will enable the effective  coordination of all our efforts in demining. To ensure that the  training we have provided is used to best effect, we would like to see  some of this money directed towards paying the salaries of mine " clearers. 

   " Within Australia, we have recently increased our spending on  research into new technologies for mine detection and clearance,  from about $200,000 to over $lm annually, with a strong focus on  the needs of humanitarian demining. In this regard, Australia is  already collaborating with a number of countries and non " governmental organisations involved in the demining effort and we  are looking to expand this effort. 

  While the humanitarian and development assistance work of the UN,  national Governments, and international organisations will remain  important, limiting our efforts to these programs cannot solve the  problems created by anti-personnel mines. It would be like a doctor  who treats a patient's symptoms, yet fails to cure the underlying  disease. As a result , the patient continues to suffer. 

  4. 

  The international community must establish clear and unambiguous  controls which ensure that the practices of the past are not repeated.  The laws governing war reflect international consensus that war,  abhorrent though it is, must comply with humanitarian constraints.  This consensus needs to be expanded. 

  In this endeavour, we attach considerable importance to this  September's Review Conference on the 1980 Convention on the Use  of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to be  Excessively Injurious -'the Inhumane Weapons Convention'. 

  At the root of the landmines problem is the fact that indiscriminate  injury and death to civilians continues well after conflict has ended.  The measures Australia is, and will continue to argue for, go to the  heart of that problem. The Australian Government is urging all  countries to support: 

  a ban on long lived anti-personnel mines, that is a ban on  landmines which do not have both self-destruction and  self-deactivation capability; and 

  a ban on non -detectable mines. 

  And to reinforce the effect of those measures, we are also urging: 

  a ban on trade in any mines which are not sanctioned by the  Convention; 

  a ban on the supply of mines to all countries not party to the  Convention and to all non-government entities ; and 

  the extension of the Convention to cover internal conflict. 

  We believe these proposals are realistic. And we are very sure that, if  implemented, they would greatly alleviate the problems posed by the  misuse of landmines. 

  5. 

  To demonstrate the strength of our commitment, Australia is now  preparing a plan to allow replacement of our own current mine stocks  to comply with the conditions we are proposing. While there could be  considerable costs involved in converting from long-lived to  self-destructing landmines, this financial cost is small when  compared to the humanitarian costs, in terms of the loss of life, the  rehabilitation of victims and the clearing of long lived landmines. 

  Australia is also seeking to enhance the authority of the 1980  Inhumane Weapons Convention, by encouraging a larger number of  countries, especially those in the Asia-Pacific, to become a party to it. 

  Australia believes we must make the Convention the undisputed  international standard on mine matters, so that its provisions have the  force of accepted international law. We should remember that, had  the provisions of even the present Convention been followed by  insurgent forces, the extent of the problems we face would have been  much less. Our proposed improvements would further reduce the  likelihood of problems of today's extent. These are especially  important points, which we must not overlook. 

  The international community has made significant progress in  demining. Continued assistance and support by governments and  non-government organisations to the international de mining effort is  imperative if we are to achieve further progress in solving today's  problem. More importantly, greater authority and stronger provisions  for the Inhumane Weapons Convention will prevent tomorrow's  problem. I am encouraged by the commitment the international  community is showing, as witnessed by our participation here.  Australia looks forward to working with you all to achieve a  successful outcome from this meeting and the September Review  Conference. 

  I thank you. 

