---
title: "Aid budget up"
date: "1995-05-09"
creators:
  - "Bilney, Gordon"
source: "MINISTER FOR DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AND PACIFIC ISLAND AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211188150
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DMP20%22
---

 Minister lor Development Cooperation · Minister tor Pacific Island Affairs  Gordon Bilney MP MDC42 » 9 May 1995

 AID BUDGET UP

 Australia's overseas aid budget will increase to $1,563.2 million in 1995-96, the Minister for  Development Cooperation, Gordon Bilney, announced today.

 This is an increase of more than $83 million over expenditure in 1994-95 or 1.8 per cent in  real terms. It represents an official development assistance (ODA) to gross national product  (GNP) ratio of 0.33 per cent.

 "Australians have a very real concern for the well being of people in developing countries,"  Mr Bilney said. "This is demonstrated by the generosity of Australians in times of crisis and  by the Government's commitment to overseas aid.

 "This Government is making every effort to return the Federal Budget to surplus as soon as  possible, but this does not mean that we will turn our backs on those in the developing world  who are worse off than ourselves.

 "At 0.33 per cent in 1995-96, our ODA/GNP ratio is well above the average for all donor  countries of 0.30 per cent. I am delighted that we have been able to provide a real increase in  funding despite budget restraints.

 "As part of this year's Budget, I am announcing a number of significant initiatives and a new  emphasis in assistance to the education sector.

 "Emergency and refugee assistance will be increased by $10.5 million to $84 million. This  includes an increase in core funding for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  (UNHCR), up by $5.5 million to $13.5 million. UNHCR is the lead international agency  dealing with complex refugee emergencies and protracted refugee situations. Funding for  non government and United Nations organisations working on specific emergency refugee  and relief operations will be increased by $5 million.

 "The importance of crisis prevention work is recognised, with $500,000 to be provided for  the International Crisis Group and the Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance.  These institutions will further Australia's objectives for peace building.

 â™¦

 2

 "Australia will provide an extra $2.5 million for assistance to Palestinians in 1995-96. This  is in addition to our pledge of $15 million over the three years to 1995-96, and in recognition  of the critical role of social and economic development of Palestinians to the peace process in  the Middle East.

 "In a major new four year initiative for India, we will provide additional assistance to * improve the efficiency of the coal sector through training, institutional strengthening and  technology transfer. An extra $7 million will be provided for this initiative in 1995-96, * increasing total programmed assistance to India by about 50 per cent. Australia's clean coal 

 technology will make India's coal sector more efficient and productive, reduce pollution and  greenhouse gas emissions and assist the poor, who are especially vulnerable to environmental  health risks.

 "Basic education, particularly for women and girls, helps developing countries to increase  productivity and economic growth, improve health standards and slow population growth.  While assistance at the tertiary level will continue to be a strong focus for Australia's  educational aid, major activities worth about $25 million in 1995-96 will begin across the  program in basic education and technical and vocational training.

 "Programs in Bangladesh, Mongolia, Gaza and the West Bank, the Philippines, South Pacific  countries, Papua New Guinea and South Africa are targeted. Support for Palestinians will be  aimed at young people whose education has been disrupted by conflict.

 "This change in emphasis in education complements and builds on the social sector initiatives  in health and population I announced in the last two Budgets.

 t "In recognition of the special role of women in the aid program I have earmarked $3 million

 in 1995-96 for non government organisations involved in activities designed to increase  participation by women.

 "Regional and international security is an underlying objective of the aid program. We are  providing $6.8 million in 1995-96 to the Korean Peninsula Energy Development  Organisation (KEDO). KEDO will assist the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to  replace its plutonium producing nuclear reactors and related facilities with alternative sources  of energy production, essential for long term sustainable development.

 t "An extra $1 million is provided to assist developing member countries to implement their APEC commitments. Developing APEC into a vigorous and outward looking economic  group in the Asia Pacific region is a key part of the Government's policy of regional  engagement and will greatly assist APEC's developing country members.

 "Funding for the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR) will  increase by $1.5 million in 1995-96. ACIAR's research program will be expanded in key  areas including aquaculture, sustainable land and water management and developing research  skills of agricultural scientists.

 3

 "The treaty guiding the development cooperation relationship between Australia and Papua  New Guinea will be reviewed in September this year. The phased transition from budget  support to programmed activities - the basis for our aid with all other countries - continues to  be one of the most substantial policy challenges for Australia's aid program.

 "Non government organisations have a unique ability to contribute to grass roots  development activities and to build personal contacts between Australians and people in the  developing world. This is recognised in 1995-96 with total funding worth more than $100  million, including an additional $1 million for the Overseas Service Bureau which manages  the largest program of Australian volunteers abroad.

 "These initiatives form only part of our comprehensive overseas aid program, a program  which continues to forge enduring links between Australia and the developing world," Mr  Bilney said.

 Media contact: Allen Mawer (Minister's Office) 06-277 7660 Cathy Walker (AusAID) 06-276 4960 015-488 954

