---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Commonwealth Parliamentary Offices, Adelaide: 10 October 1995: East Timor"
date: "1995-10-31"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "East Timor"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211195652
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2985536%22
---

  ' ' 

  ALEXAl\DER DOYVNER, I'v1.P.  SIIADOW rvfTNrSTER FOR FOREIGN AfFAIRS  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR MAYO 

  76 Mt Barker Rd. Stirling, S.A. 5152 Tel: 61(8)370 9288 Fax 61(8)370 8166 

  TRANSCRIPT 

  ALEXANDER DOWNER MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

  PRESSCONFERENCE-CWLTITPARLIAMENTOFFICESADELAIDE  TUESDAYlOOCTOBER-1515 

  TOPIC: EAST TIJ\llOR 

  E&OE 

  DOWNER: I want to say something about the statements by Senator Evans today  that the Government would oppose applications by some East Timorese for refugee  status on the basis that they are under the responsibility and protection of the 

  Portuguese Government. 

  This position of Senator Evans is hypocritical and unprecedented~ It is hypocritical  because only a few months ago the Australian Government was arguing before the  lnternational Court of Justice that East Timor no longer had anything to do with  Portugal. The Government has been arguing that it recognises Indonesian sovereignty  over East Timor. that Portugal no longer has any role to play. That Portugal has no  sovereignty. When it comes to an inconvenient refugee issue, the Government is  turning around and saying that it may very well be that Portugal has responsibility for  some of those who are applying for refugee status. The point here is whatever the  legal niceties may be, the Govenunent's position makes the Australian Government  look manifestly absurd. This is just going to embarrass Australia in the eyes of the  international community. The Government is just making us look foolish. 

  If the legal case that the Government now says it wants to put is such a strong legal  case, then why was it that the Government never raised this issue before when  previous applications were made by people from East Timor for refugee status. The  Government has never used this argument before. They now think that it is an  argument that might prove to be convenient. Well out of diplomatic convenience on  the one hand, they are creating a position of intellectual absurdity on the other.  Senator Evans is looking, as usual, pretty grubby over this whole affair. 

  JOURNALIST: Wouldn't you say that this a rather convenient cop-out for the  Guvermnent over ... (inaudible) .... East Timor~se issue? 

  DOWNER; Well the Government is, you sec, at a point "'here it ha.'S 

  CANBERRA Off!Cc: Parltament House. Canbem., A.CT 2600 Tel 61(6)277 4885 Fax: 61 (6) 277 2062 

  COMMONWEALTH  '1;:>&,'Q!_lA l\AE!'ITA RV lTBRA.RV 

  73 

  Government plunged the bilateral relationship into disarray through the Mantiri affair.  It's mishandled the issue ofthe flag burnings and so it's created a great deal of strain  in our bilateral relationship with Indonesia. Then along come the refugees - that's in  that contcJr..'t a particularly inconvenient event and so the Government has been playing  around with various legal schemes that it can concoct in order to get those who have  applied for refugee status off Australia's hands. And what docs the Government come  up with? It comes up with the idea that these people might go off to Portugal. To  Portugal? Well the Government was arguing in the International Court of Justice only  a few months ago that Portugal had nothing to do with East Tim.or any more and that  Australia recognises Indone$an sovereignty in East Timor. What a tangled web the  Government has woven for itself here. These are the sort of actions of a Government  that is tired in office. It is just exhausted from being in power for too long. 

  JOURNALIST: Is it a case of kow-towing to the Indonesians? 

  DOWNER! It's a case of the Government casting around now for arguments which  will help it to push aside any issues of inconvenience in the bilateral relationship with  Indonesia. Our relationship with Indonesia should have enough ballast to withstand  the odd wave like this. The Government shouldn't have to cast around for concocted  legal solutions to try and get it out of a diplomatic jam that it has got Australia into in  the first place. 

  JOURNALIST; Granting the bridging visas, is that the correct thing to do? 

  DOWNER: Well, the Government has done that and the Coalition hasn't opposed  that decision on the part of the Government. See what we've always said is that these  people have applied for refugee status and they should be considered in the normal  way just as anybody would be. That's not to pre-empt what the Tribunal may say.  That is, of course, entirely a matter for the Tribunal. What's extraordinary about the  Government though is that we've had the normal procedures in the past and suddenly  they want to change the procedures because this whole matter is inconvenient to them  and it is inconvenient to Senator Evans and Mr Keating because they damaged our  relationship with Indonesia so fundamentally. You see the point is if the Government  had, in the first place, not done so much damage to Australia's relationship with  Indonesia, then none of this sort of scheming which they are coming up with now  would be necessary and it is scheming that is embarrassing Australia. I mean I  suppose the Indonesians will be pleased but it is doing great damage to Australia's  standing internationally. 

  JOURNALIST: Is it all about giving credibility to these people who come into  Australia claiming that they have been ill-treated at the hands of the Indonesians? 

  DO"''NER: The Government is not the slightest interested in th~se people who haYe  come from East Timor. The Government is interested only in playing political games.  These people are just pawns in a greater political game. The Government has an  election on its hands. It's behind in the opinion polls. It's got to find a way of 

  building i~elf up. One of the ways it wants to do that is to claim that it's very good at  dealing with Asia Not so good of course because they have done so much damage to 

  2 

  our bilateral relationships with Asia and our bilateral relationship, in particular with  Indonesia, and so what the Government is trying to do is a bit of nip and tuck here to  try and make that relationship with Indonesia look better so that they can say to the  electorate we've fixed up that prohlem, aren't we clever? Only in the process of doing  that they're just undermining Australia's international credibility. They are just  turning Australia into a laughing stock behaving like this. 

  JOURNALIST: Okay Mr Downer. You're the Minister in waiting. What would  you do? 

  DOWNER: Well, as a Minister, I will always behave with the greatest of propriety.  As far as I am concerned if people apply for refugee status in Australia they should be  processed in the normal course through the Tribunal and according to Australian law.  I offer no more or no less than that and let's just see what the decision of the Tnbunal  is. I mean I wouldn't get into these sorts of games and one of the things that I will 

  never do as the Foreign Minister is embarrass Australia internationally by this sort of  hypocrisy. I mean this is just crass hypocrisy. On the one hand to be saying that  Portugal has no claims over East Timor and we don't want anything to do with  Portugal and East Timor, which is fair enough. But then on the other, when  something inconvenient crops up, reaching out and grasping for the Portuguese card  and playing that card - pretty absurd I would have thought. 

  JOURNALIST: And likewise for the Indonesians. If they claim the territory then  they have to claim the people" 

  DO"""'NE~ 1bafs right. Well of course. It's Indonesian territory. We recognise it 

  as Indonesian territory. Obviously, ipso facto, the Indonesians recognise it as  Indonesian territory. There is no question of their position. For that matter, there has  been no question of our position since 1979. 

  JOURNALIST: So Australia can't have two bob each way? 

  DOWNER: Well, I don't think hypocrisy in international relations ever does you  any good. I think Australia is just being embarrassed by the quite obvious hypocrisy  of Senator Evans' position. 

  JOURNALIST: And his position at this stage, has it got to the point where it's  untenable? 

  DOWNER: Well, Senator Evans is putting foru:ard some alternative options. I  would say to him stick with the alternatives. Don't go down this track. See Senator  Evans has made so many mistakes in the last nine months as Foreign Minister. Ibis is  just another mistake and he has just been there too long. They've all been there too 

  long. It doesn~t do a country any good to have one group of people in power too long  and they've been there too long and this is proof of it 

  3 

  JOURNALIST: You're saying it's time for a change. How would you do this job  any better than Senator Ev

  DOWNER: Well, I don't think that would be very difficult. For a start I'd place a  great deal of emphasis on good bilateral relations with Indonesia which would include  discussing with the Indonesians the appointment of a new Amba5sador. I thi.nk one of  the things that will happen with a change of government in Australia is that the  Indonesians will actually send an Ambassador to Canberra and we will welcome an  Indonesian Ambassador in Canberra. Ifs just about the only country which has an 

  Embassy in Canberra which doesn't have an Ambassador there and it's supposed to be  one of the most important countries to Australia. I would have thought th.at what we  need is Senator Evans out of the job and all his colleagues out of the job and a change  of government to give this country a fresh approach. That's what every country needs 

  from time to time. That's what Australia desperately needs now. 

  Ends. 

  4 

