---
title: "Boat people processing centre identified in WA"
date: "1995-01-25"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211186817
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Q8320%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

  Senator Nick Bolkus  Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860 

  B4/95 

  BOAT PEOPLE PROCESSING CENTRE IDENTIFIED IN WA 

  A new reception and processing centre for unauthorised boat arrivals has been identified  near Derby in Western Australia, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Senator  Nick Bolkus announced today. 

  Senator Bolkus said agreement had been reached with Defence to use the facilities at  RAAF Base Curtin when needed until the end of March 1996. 

  "The centre can accommodate 300 people and could be developed as part of the  Government's on-going response to the arrival of boat people in northern Australia,"  Senator Bolkus said. "The accommodation can be activated at short notice and requires  minimal work to bring it up to our requirements." 

  Senator Bolkus said a large number of factors had been considered in the selection  process, including the availability of suitable facilities, time to activate, cost " effectiveness and the reaction of the local community. 

  "In terms of a short-term response to the potential need for extra accommodation, no  other facility matched up," Senator Bolkus said. 

  Senator Bolkus said the Port Hedland Immigration Reception and Processing Centre is  at its effective capacity and there are no plans to house any new boat arrivals at that  Centre in the immediate future. 

  "A departmental taskforce has investigated a wide range of potential short-term and  long-term facilities for boat people," Senator Bolkus said. 

  "It is continuing to examine a number of possible sites for longer term accommodation  should we need it. 

  "In the meantime, the Government is continuing its efforts at national and international  levels to reduce the number of illegal boat arrivals." 

  CANBERRA 

  CONTACT: 

  25 January 1995 

  Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860  Steve Ingram (DIEA) (06) 264 3652 

