---
title: "Australia Remembers Pacific Tribute luncheon, Townsville, 14 August 1995: speech"
date: "1995-08-14"
creators:
  - "Keating, Paul"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211191515
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1SE20%22
---

  PRIME MINISTER 

  SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP  AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS PACIFIC TRIBUTE LUNCHEON - TOWNSVILLE  14AUGUST 1995 

  ·-cHECK AGAINST DELIVERr-

  Ambassador, distinguished guests. ladies and gentlemen. 

  It is a pleasure and a privilege to be in T ownsville to pay tribute to this brave city  on the Soth anniversary of the end of the war in the Pacific. 

  I have always had a feeling Townsville's story is probably not as well known as it  should be. 

  Not all Australians are aware that the city was bombed on four occasions in July  1942; and not everyone appreciates the stress and hardship it endured during the  War. 

  The Japanese airmen were not as accurate as they might have been with their  bombs, but the incidents do give us some idea of the pressure the people of  Townsville were under and the strategic importance of Townsville to the conduct  of the war. 

  In the darkest days when a Japanese invasion of the Australian mainland seemed  imminent, a report by Sir John Lavarak recommended that 10,000 civilians be  evacuated south. The evacuation never happened. but between 1939 and 1942  about twenty five percent of Townsville's population left 

  This place was an entry point for refugees from South -east Asia after the fall of  Singapore; and a refuge for soldiers, sailors and airmen returning from battle in  New Guinea and the Pacific. 

  Townsville was also, of course. a major embarkation point for troops and  supplies, and it was the most important Allied airbase in Australia 

  2 

  This was the home of the "Kennedy" Regiment, 31st Battalion which served in the  Middle East and at Kokoda, Buna and Gona: and, when linked with the 51st  Battalion. at Lae and Ramu Valley, and at Balikpapan in Borneo. 

  Then, as now. Townsville was recognised as a vital link in the chain of Australia's  northern defence. 

  As Allied forces led by the United States first resisted and then began to drive  back the Japanese, Townsville's role became pivotal. 

  It was the home to the 5th American Nr Force - and I believe it still is, in the  sense that they have Freedom of Entry to the city. 

  Its presence involved thousands of civilians and military men and women, both  American and Australian, in the service of the US Army Air Force. 

  During the War Townsville was host, all told, to 90,000 troops - the highest  soldier/civilian ratio of any Australian city. 

  There were two RAAF squadrons - No 7 Beaufort Bomber and No 80 Kittyhawk. 

  The No 1 Wireless Unit of the RMF was located here at a top secret Central  Bureau of Intelligence base intercepting and decoding Japanese signals. 

  Among those engaged in Intelligence were members of the Women's Auxiliary  Australian Airforce and the Australian Women's Army Service. 

  The RAN worked out of Towns ville of course, shipping Australian and American  troops to New Guinea and the Pacific Islands and providing escorts and patrols. 

  As the most important Allied Military and Air base in the north of Australia and the  Headquarters for Naval Intelligence, no city in Australia - no community in  Australia - made a greater contribution to victory in the Pacific. 

  You can't tum a civilian town into a military base without putting strain on the  community. But Townsville clearly withstood the strain. The civilian population  returned, the city grew and developed. 

  Today the city combines the twin strands of its history as a frontier town and a  garrison town. It has an important place in Australia's economic Mure and a  continuing strategic role in our defence. 

  Two thousand nine hundred soldiers of the AustraJian Army's Third Brigade are  here as part at the Ready Deployment Force. Among their many essential tasks  are conventional military operations protected evacuations of Australian nationals,  and the provision of personnel and equipment for UN or multinational operations. 

  3 

  The Brigade has recently distinguished itself in operations in Somalia. Cambodia  and Bougainville and provided support to Australia's medical contingent in  Rwanda which arrives back in Townsville in about ten days. 

  The RAAF took over Townsville Aerodrome in 1939 and it maintains a significant  presence, with 1.250 personnel providing support for air operations. 

  The Army's 5th Aviation Regiment, which is also based at RA.AF Townsville, was  deployed to Cambodia to support UN sponsored elections, and more recently to  Buka in Bougainville as part of Operation Lagoon. 

  So the T ownsville tradition continues. As I've said on other occasions, this is one  of the outstanding cities of Australia. 

  It has the strength which comes from its place on the northern frontier. It has  withstood the ups and downs of droughts and depressions which afflict rural life. 

  And carried more than its share of the weight of the war - and emerged stronger  than it began. 

  In 1995 there are signs in T ownsville to remind us of the past: in particular those  memorials to the great alliance with the United States - the Coral Sea Memorial  and the memorial to the 5th American Air Force. 

  With Ed Perkins here today I want to pay tribute to the American men and women  who fought and died so bravely in the war against Japan - they fought for our  freedom as well as America's, and you may be sure that this country will never  forget that. 

  But, above all, today I want to pay tribute on behalf of the nation to the people of  Townsville. for all they did for Australia during the war and all they continue to do. 

  I mentioned the visible signs ofTownsville's contribution to the war- but r think  the real indic.ation lies in all that has been done since, all that is being done now. 

  It lies in the spirit of the place and the people. I think that is what counted - and  today It has been my privilege to join you here in tribute. 

