---
title: "Bolkus wrong on Coalition response to Vietnamese refugees"
date: "1995-10-15"
creators:
  - "Short, Jim"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211194405
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2985551%22
---

  SEN JIM SHORT MELE. ID:034196350 15 OCT'95 14:00 No.003 P.01 

  Senator Jim Short  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs  &  Assisting the Leader on Multicultural Affairs 

  /\ . 路路'1 \fl V\1 -J.-路  ~.~ MEDIAX 

  '-:路 RELEAS;p.. 

  :---~~ 

  IMEA 66/95 

  Bolkus Wrong on Coalition Response to Vietnamese Refugees 

  The Coalition has, and will continue to be, a strong supporter of the Comprehensive  P1an Of Action (CPA) for the resettlement of Indochinese refugees. 

  The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Bolkus, in an inteiview  today a11egcd that the Coalition was seeking to undennine the CPA by promising the  Australian Vietnamese community that we would support the re-screening of the  rernain1ng 40,000 Vietnamese asylum seekers in t11e CPA camps throughout South  East Asia. This claim is incorrect. 

  The Coalition has, and wilt always be committed to listening to the concen1s of tl1c  various ethnic communities throughout Australia. In doing so we do not reject, or  commit to, these requests witl1ol1t give them the appropriate and necessary  consideration. 

  John Howard and J have both personally conducted regular consultations with the  Austra1ian Vietnamese community on th1s, and all other,issues of concen1 to them. The  plight of the remaining asylum seekers in the CPA camps is an issue of great concern  to the Coalition, and is one which we will continue to pursue. This is in direct contrast  to the response by KeaHng Govenuneut, which has arrogantly ignored these legitimate  concerns, and has placed this and many other issues of importance to the various 

  ethnic communities in the too hard basket. 

  The Coalition has always said that if any cases of manifest corruption in the CPA  screening procedures which have lead to the wrongful screening out of genuine  refugees are brought to our attention then we will vigorously pursue them with the  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). 

  During his interview today Senator Bolkus was also questioned over the advice which  his Department has provided the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT) regarding dual  nationality and the I 300 East Timorese asylum seekers. I again call on the Minister, in  the interest of maintaining the credibility and integrity of Austra1ia's refit gee  processing system, to release this advice. COMMONWEAim 

  Canberra ~ Sunday, 15 October 1995 

  t'ARL.IAMENTARY LIBRARY 

  For further infonnation contact Senator Short (06) 277 31 19 or Richard King 015 683 586 

