---
title: "Honour your commitment on Vietnamese refugees, Mr Howard"
date: "1995-10-17"
creators:
  - "Spindler, Sid"
source: "Office of SPINDLER, SEN SID"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211194441
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2908086%22
---

 Senator Sid Spindler Australian Democrats Spokesperson on Law and Justice and Ethnic Affairs

 17th October-1995 MEDIA RELEASE _ 951457

 Honour your commitment on Vietnamese refugees, Mr Howard

 The Democrats today called on the Australian Government to take action on the resolution passed by the Senate on the 25th of August, calling for the reinstatement of basic human rights in Vietnam.

 "The Government supported that resolution. It is now time it gave account of the action it has taken to get the Vietnamese government to implement that resolution.

 On the issue of Vietnamese refugees, Democrat Spokesperson said at the Press conference he hosted for Vietnamese community leaders that all asylum seekers have a right to be assessed under the Australian refugee process.

 "The Senate Legal and Constitutional Committee had ample evidence before it that assessments made by countries like Indonesia cannot be trusted and that we should not abdicate our responsibility to asylum seekers or to Vietnamese refugees who are still in refugee camps in the region.

 "Mr Howard has promised that the Coalition would support reassessment of asylum seekers and refugees by Australian authorities. This is curious. The Liberal Party voted with the Government when that legislation was before the Senate and the Democrats objected to the exclusion of the Australian assessment process when refugees had been refused that status by other countries.

 "However, if Mr Howard has really had a change of heart, he will have an opportunity to move appropriate amendments to implement his promise when Migration Bill (No 4) comes before the Senate later this session, Senator Spindler concluded.

 For further information, contact Sid Spindler on (06) 277 3643.

 .COMMONWEALTH eAR LIAIVIE.NTARY LIBRAR•

 Keeping the Senate Strong AUSTRALIAN

 r: I

