---
title: "Short wilfully irresponsible over boat people returns"
date: "1995-04-07"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187714
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LI720%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  Senator Nick Bolkus 

  B25/95 

  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

  Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860 

  SHORT \VILFULLY IRRESPONSIBLE OVER BOAT PEOPLE RETURNS 

  The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, confirmed from  China today that arrangements were proceeding smoothly for the return to China of about  700 boat people currently in detention in Australia. 

  Under a memorandum of understanding reached between the two countries in January this  year, the Chinese Government agreed to the repatriation of the Sino-Vietnamese boat people  once their identities had been officially confirmed. 

  Speaking in Shanghai, Senator Bolkus slammed suggestions yesterday by the Federal  Opposition Immigration Spokesman, Senator Jim Short, that the process had been frustrated. 

  "Senator Short's statement amounts to a wilful disregard of Australia's national interests,"  Senator BoUrns said. "It reflects a lack of understanding of his Shadow portfolio and a  general lack of understanding by the Federal Opposition of issues in our region. 

  "On what information has he made this assessment? 

  "The reality is that discussions with Chinese officials are moving both quickly and positively  - a fact widely reported in the Australian press throughout the week. 

  "The Australian Government has always been aware of the fact that the verification of  identification is a tortuous process which takes time. This will always be the case, no matter  where in the world it is taking place. 

  "I have made pubiie statements to the effect that we would not have expected returns before  March at the very earliest. This time frame has been on the record from the outset." 

  Senator Bolkus is attending a Migration Officers' conference and meeting with Australian  business representatives in Shanghai today before visiting the source of the boat departures,  the Southern Chinese port city of Beihei. Chinese authorities have confirmed that they have  prevented a number of boats from leaving Beihei in recent months, and taken action against  those organising the departures. The boat people currently in Australia had been successfully  resettled in Southern China after fleeing Vietnam in the 1970s. 

  "My visit to Beihei will be constructive in that it will bring together the relevant national and  local Chinese authorities, and reinforce the strong message that such people who attempt to  enter Australia illegally can expect to be returned to China," Senator Bolkus said. 

  "Senator Short's irresponsible and completely unfounded claims, on the other hand, serve  only to send them a green light." 

  SHANGHAI APRIL 7 1995 

