---
title: "International treaties: their impact on Australia: keynote address to the International Treaties Conference, Canberra, 4 September 1995"
date: "1995-09-04"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211192865
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/S4J20%22
---

  Department of the Parliamentary Library  Information Storage and Retrieval System Page 1 

  International treaties: their impact on Australia: keynote address to the  International Treaties Conference, Canberra, 4 September 1995. Sen Gareth  EVANS. Press release 

  The text of this press release has been scanned electronically from the original. Freedom from errors  or omissions cannot be guaranteed. 

  This conference on international treaties is certainly timely. Australia's involvement in  treaty making is currently being examined in a number of forums; there is now a Senate  Committee looking at the operation of the external affairs power in the Constitution;  and there is legislation currently before the Parliament dealing with the effect of  treaties on administrative decision making. I think there can be no doubt that treaties  do have an important and developing influence on many aspects of Australian society  and I want to examine their impact in a little detail. But first I think it would be useful  to spend a few moments in considering what treaties actually are, and perhaps more  importantly, what they are not. I feel constrained to do so because of the  misinformation, some of it quite deliberately spread, which has clouded the whole issue  of treaty-making over the last couple of years. 

  What treaties are not. Let me start by making clear what treaties are not. Despite  assertions from the radical right, a treaty is not an edict issuing forth from some  unelected and unrepresentative world body and imposed on unwilling nation states.  Nor is a treaty a secret agreement between Australia and the rest of the world designed  to undermine federalism and the Australian Constitution. And a treaty does not have  any legislative-type effects unless and until an Australian parliament incorporates it  into Australian law. 

  To tackle the global conspiracy theory first. Nation states, i.e. individual countries,  enter into treaties of their own free will and on the basis that the terms of those treaties  serve their national interest. This is certainly the basis on which Australia enters into  treaties. The United Nations has absolutely no power to impose treaty obligations on  nation states. Governments negotiate treaties among themselves and, once they have  agreed upon a text, each government decides whether or not it will become a party to the  treaty. Treaties thus represent an agreed position between nations. By becoming a  party, nations freely accept the obligations imposed by the terms of the treaty. It is  always open to them not to become a party, or to become a party with reservations  where this is not excluded. The process is entirely voluntary. Indeed, becoming party to  a treaty is an exercise and an affirmation of a country's sovereignty - a point that is lost  sight of in the often confused debate about the impact of treaties on sovereignty. 

  And what of the national conspiracy theory which has it that the Federal government is  secretly whittling away the power of the States and the foundations of the Constitution?  The fact is that it is the Constitution itself which grants power to the executive  government to enter into treaties and grants the legislative power to the Federal  government to implement them. It is important to keep in mind that treaty making is  not a process carried on in secret or behind closed doors. The Commonwealth  government recognises that treaties may, in some cases, impact on State and Territory  administration. The State and Territory governments are extensively consulted in all 

  Page 2 

  cases and at an early stage on all treaty negotiations in which Australia is considering  participation. It is not only essential but, perhaps more importantly, it is very sensible,  for the Commonwealth to seek the views of the States and Territories, particularly  where they will be involved in implementing treaty obligations. 

  Finally, international treaties do not somehow subvert the constitutional arrangements  in Australia. There can be no doubt that constitutional power to enter into treaties lies  with the executive government. The Australian Constitution distinguishes between the  treaty making power and the power to implement treaty obligations in Australian law.  The former is an executive power of the Commonwealth, and under section 61 of the 

  Constitution it is exercised by the Federal Executive Council. The latter -the external  affairs power - is a legislative power, and is exercised by the Parliament of the  Commonwealth. The rights and obligations contained in a treaty do not become binding  rights and obligations under Australian law unless and until specific legislation is  passed implementing its provisions. This basic position was reaffirmed in April this  year by the High Court in Teoh's case which I will return to in a moment. The position is  in sharp contrast to that in the United States, for example, where treaties - which  require the consent of two thirds of the members of the Senate before they are ratified " are then generally self-executing and directly enforceable by domestic courts. 

  What treaties are. So, what then are treaties? The Vienna Convention on the Law of  Treaties (itself of course a treaty) holds that a treaty is an international agreement  concluded between states in written form and governed by international law. It has also  been observed that '(t)reaties are landmarks which guide nations in their relations with  each other. They express intentions, promises and normally appear to contain  reciprocal advantages. Treaties represent attempts to reduce the measure of  uncertainty inherent in the conduct of international affairs'. 

  It is sometimes claimed that Australia is party to over 2,000 treaties. This claim is based  on a misreading of the Australian Treaty List. Simply counting the number of items in  the List does not provide an accurate indication of the number of treaties which are  currently in force in Australia. The List sets out separately all treaty actions which  Australia has undertaken, or which were undertaken on its behalf by the United  Kingdom: amendments to treaties are included as separate items in the List, which also  includes references to treaties which have been terminated, superseded or replaced, 

  and to treaties which have been signed but have not yet entered into force for Australia. 

  In fact, at the end of 1994, Australia was a party to approximately 920 treaties. The  majority, over 500, of these treaties are bilateral i.e. between Australia and just one  other country. Some growth has occurred in recent years in the number of bilateral  treaties, particularly in areas such as investment, extradition, mutual assistance in  criminal matters and taxation. However, our rate of participation in treaties is by no  means unusual: the United States, for example, is a party to more than 7,000 treaties.  Australia's adherence to multilateral treaties negotiated under the auspices of the  United Nations is about average for an OECD country. There is simply no basis for the  wild allegations that are sometimes made that the treaty regime is somehow out of  control or running amok with Australian constitutional arrangements. 

  Page 3 

  The growing level of international interaction is, I believe, a positive force in the world,  especially for a nation like Australia which reaps tremendous benefits from  international developments in trade, transport, and communications. As an increasing  number of activities are conducted on a transnational basis, national actions  increasingly have international ramifications. Treaties have always been a feature of  international relations but with the trend to globalisation they play an increasingly  important role: some help us to achieve common goals, for example, cooperation in 

  space, telecommunications and trade; some set reference points which guide  international behaviour in times of crisis such as war and in relation to issues such as  disarmament; some set common standards in relation to human rights and refugees, for  example; and some address issues which, it is increasingly recognised, can only be 

  addressed on a global scale such as damage to the environment, transboundary  movements of hazardous wastes and drug trafficking. 

  For small and medium sized powers like Australia, international law and international  treaties and institutions are particularly important. They provide a framework which  ensures that our voice is heard and that we can play a fair and reasonable role in global  deliberations. For a country of less than major power status, a world governed by  principles of justice, equality and the rule of law is much more attractive than a world 

  governed by status and power. 

  Let me not turn in a little more detail to the impact which treaties have and can be  expected to have on Australia and Australians, in particular on Australian law,  Australian policy making, Australian industry and business, and Australian society  more generally. 

  Impact of treaties on Australian law. The impact of treaties on Australian domestic  law has received a good deal of attention lately. The basic point to be noted here, again,  is that the terms of treaties do not create rights or obligations in Australian law in the  absence of legislation. Creating such rights and obligations is a role reserved for  Parliament under the Australian Constitution. 

  That is not to say that treaties to which Australia is a party do not affect Australian law  at all. The courts have traditionally used treaties to which Australia is a party in a  limited way -to resolve ambiguities in legislation, and as a guide in developing the  common law (i.e. judge-made law -where there is no legislation), particularly where a  treaty declares universal fundamental rights. In addition, treaty provisions could quite  properly be taken into account in the exercise of a discretion by an administrative 

  decision maker: decision makers did not have to take a possibly relevant treaty into  account, but if they did, they would not be taken to be in error. 

  In the Teoh case of April this year, however, the High Court went one step further. The  Court held that merely entering into a treaty could give rise to a "legitimate  expectation" that government decision makers would make decisions in accordance  with the treaty provisions, even if they had not been legislated into Australian law: in  this particular case, an immigration official deciding a deportation matter was held to  be in error for not taking the Convention on the Rights of the Child sufficiently into 

  account -even though there was no specific legislation implementing this particular 

  Page 4 

  Convention, and even though the Convention had not been referred to in argument. The  Court went on in its decision to state that such a "legitimate expectation" could be  displaced by statutory or executive indications to the contrary. 

  The Court's decision raised a fundamental question about our system of parliamentary  law making in Australia -should the Parliament be by-passed to allow treaties to have  a direct effect in Australian law? The Government is firmly of the view that this is not  an appropriate development and that the role of changing Australian law to conform  with treaty obligations should remain with the democratically elected parliaments of  this country. 

  The Joint Statement which the Attorney-General and I published on 10 May 1995 and  the Administrative Decisions (Effect of International Instruments) Bill 1995 were  designed to make that "contrary intention" clear, in the way that High Court itself  allowed for. Our concern in making the statement and in introducing the Bill was  simply to preserve the role of parliament in changing Australian law. 

  We still take our treaty obligations very seriously - and will continue to make every  effort to ensure that Australian law is in accordance with the treaties we decide to  adhere to. However, I firmly believe that it is appropriate to retain the long-standing,  widely accepted and well understood distinction between treaty action undertaken by  the Executive, which creates international rights and obligations, and the  implementation of treaty obligations in Australian law. The implementation of treaties  by legislation is the way that the rights, benefits and obligations set out in treaties to  which Australia is a party are conferred or imposed on individuals in Australian law. 

  Because we do take international obligations seriously, to ensure that there are no  obvious gaps between the terms of domestic law and the treaties we have committed  ourselves to -particularly in the human rights area, where this problem is more likely  to arise-the Attorney announced on 5 July that his department will be carrying out a  review of Commonwealth government decision-making in consultation with the  Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission and other Government  departments . If it emerges from the review that there are areas where those obligations  are not being adequately met, we will do something to remedy the situation. 

  Impact of treaties on Australian policy making. Australia and Australians can no  longer afford the inward-looking mentality of past decades. Nor can we any longer rely  on others to look after our interests in the wider world. Our future prosperity and  security rely, to a large extent, on our playing an active and positive role on the  international stage. Our contribution to international peace building and the  international rule of law, our activism in international forums, and our commitment to  establishing and maintaining global standards are what will keep us afloat in a sea of  changing power relationships. Policy makers cannot try to disregard international  developments such as these -rather they must try to influence those developments to  promote and protect national interests. 

  To be successful in our efforts, we must approach treaty making in a cooperative and  inventive way. We must seek outcomes which not only benefit Australia but which also 

  Page 5 

  benefit as many other parties as possible. As a middle power of some significance, we  are in a strong position to influence the outcomes of important international  deliberations. Our skill in coalition building, our flexibility in finding common ground,  our experience over forty years of international diplomacy, and our pivotal position  between Europe, America, and the Asia Pacific region give us added standing and  credibility in international treaty negotiations. 

  Nationally, we must ensure that we plug into relevant international developments and  make them our own. Let me take as an example the area of the environment. There is no  doubt that concerns about the environment have become a major issue in the last ten  years, both domestically and internationally, and they are likely to remain so for the  foreseeable future. The issue has been driven internationally by the increasing  recognition that many of the major threats to the world's environment extend beyond  national borders and require solutions to be worked out on a global scale if they are to be  effective. Issues such as global warming, depletion of the ozone layer, and threats to  biodiversity are problems for the global community, not simply for individual states.  For Australia the imperative to help resolve global and regional environmental  problems goes well beyond our own national environment. Environmental problems, if  unchecked, are likely to hamper our development, weaken our economic infrastructure 

  and trade prospects, and diminish the quality of our lives and those of future  generations. We therefore pursue solutions to such problems in negotiations for  international treaties. 

  We are able to bring to these negotiations a wealth of practical background knowledge.  In the case of climate change, for example, we have a strong record of technological  innovation which will assist international efforts to reduce the threat of global  warming. Australian researchers have developed a range of efficient and renewable  energy technologies, including advanced generating technologies using fossil fuels and  photovoltaics, and we have particular expertise in sustainably managing agricultural,  pastoral and forestry resources which could assist in reducing emissions of greenhouse 

  gases, enhancing sinks for greenhouse gases or in adapting to impacts of climate  change. 

  Impact of treaties on Australian industry and business. The Australian economy  is heavily dependent on international trade. As the rest of the world moves forward  setting up international trading arrangements we cannot expect to maintain our rate of  growth by acting alone. We must have an effective handle on developments in the  international system to enable Australian business and industry to participate fully in  the globalisation of the world economy. 

  The 1994 Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation, to which we are party,  is crucial in this respect. Major agreements negotiated under the World Trade  Organisation Agreement are the revised General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade; the  General Agreement on Trade in Services; and the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects  of Intellectual Property Rights. Together, these agreements will result in estimated  increases in Australian exports of $A5 billion and Australian GDP of $A4.4 billion by 

  the year 2002. 

  Page 6 

  These are major multilateral trade agreements but regional and bilateral trade  agreements also form part of our integrated approach to international trade. The South  Pacific Regional Trade and Economic Cooperation Agreement (SPARTECA) provides a  mutually beneficial framework for trade among South Pacific countries. It also  contributes to the prosperity and stability of the region. Our Closer Economic  Relationship (CER) arrangements with New Zealand, is a core element of our  relationship with a country which is one of our largest trading partners. The Nara  Agreement with Japan provides the cornerstone of our huge trading relationship there,  the destination for 25 per cent of all our exports. 

  Australia has concluded some thirty five double taxation agreements which increase  our international competitiveness by reducing to fair levels the tax burdens of  companies with international operations. These agreements also encourage  international investment in Australia. We also have bilateral Investment Protection  Agreements with ten countries which act as confidence building mechanisms for  investors, and protect the interests of Australian investors overseas. 

  Equitable access to the world's natural resources is more than ever governed by  international agreements. The United Nations Law of the Sea Convention, for example,  in the negotiation of which Australia played a critical role, establishes globally accepted  regimes for access to the resources of the sea and the seabed with 200 nautical mile  exclusive economic zones. 

  And the list goes on: civil aviation agreements, telecommunications agreements, postal  agreements, customs agreements and the like all operate to support and facilitate  international trade and commerce. The benefits are enormous, to Australia certainly,  but also to the region and to the world. 

  Impact of treaties on Australian Society. Just as the benefits of treaties for  business are often overlooked, this is also true of the benefits to individual Australians.  In many everyday activities - including international post, air travel and  communications-treaty arrangements are the silent partner. 

  This is particularly important and significant in a society as multicultural as our own.  As a nation we have a heightened awareness of and interest in the people of other  nations and this translates into a global outlook on issues like the environment and  human rights. The responses of Australians to the crisis in Rwanda and to the ongoing  conflict in the former Yugoslavia are indicative of the concern many Australians share  for problems which are geographically remote from us. 

  Major international human rights treaties include the International Covenant on Civil  and Political Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial  Discrimination and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination  Against Women. These treaties establish world wide standards and the international  machinery to monitor and help ensure that the rights are implemented. 

  Following Australia's ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and Political  Rights in 1981, the Government established the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity 

  Page 7 

  Commission here in Australia to increase the understanding, acceptance and  observance of human rights in Australia and promoting social justice and equal  opportunity. The Commission administers Australian legislation in the field of human  rights such as the Racial Discrimination Act 1975 and the Sex Discrimination Act 1984  which are squarely based on the relevant international treaties: the Australian  Government brings these internationally accepted standards into Australian law and  practice - by getting the Australian Parliament to enact appropriate Australian  legislation. 

  Another major area of international treaty law which has clear benefits for Australian  society generally is that of the International Labour Organisation Conventions, setting  internationally accepted minimum standards in areas such as forced labour,  discrimination in employment and workers with family responsibilities. 

  Treaties such as this allow us to examine ourselves against international standards and  see how we measure up. Another way we do this is through our adherence to The  Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. This  allows individual Australians to approach the United Nations Human Rights 

  Committee where they believe that their rights under the Covenant have been breached  and where they have exhausted all available domestic remedies. The Committee is not a  court and its decisions are not binding, but its views do provide valuable guidance on  implementing human rights standards at the national level. As you will recall, last year 

  the Committee provided its views to Australia in the Toonen case in relation to  Tasmanian laws which made sexual relations between consenting adult men in private  a criminal offence. The Committee expressed the view that criminal laws of this sort did  not meet the standards set out in the Covenant. The Australian Parliament agreed, and  the Human Rights (Sexual Conduct) Act was passed in 1994, effectively negating the  Tasmanian legislation. This is another example of our international obligations not  being self-enforcing, but being examined by Parliament and enacted into Australian  law. 

  The Toonen case is sometimes cited as an example of the Commonwealth Parliament  overreaching itself and legislating in an area traditionally thought to lie within State  responsibility. This ignores, however, the very extensive efforts the Commonwealth  made to persuade the State to act first and the reality that the Commonwealth only  acted as a last resort. 

  There are those who will go on expressing the view that by participating in the treaty  system we are somehow ceding national sovereignty to the international community.  But there is no frightening 'new world order' telling us what to do. We are an active and  successful player in the multilateral game and any concessions we make are met by  concessions from other parties for the common good. Each decision to become a party to  a treaty is taken after extensive consultation with States and Territories, with industry  groups and other non government organisations and with Australia's national interest  clearly in mind. We enter treaties freely as a sovereign nation state and with our eyes  wide open. 

  It should really be apparent that full and active participation in the international arena 

  . ' 

  Page 8 

  and the international treaty system is simply a requirement oflife in the modern world.  There is little point in ignoring such developments, and every point in working within  the system to promote and protect our national interests. The system has a very great  deal to offer a middle power like Australia: it empowers us by establishing rules and  systems which operate in a transparent and equitable way. 

  Overwhelmingly, Australia benefits from its involvement in the international  community of nations and the treaty system. We are empowered and enriched  politically, socially and economically. Treaties allow us to assist and to be assisted in an  ever increasing range of areas. They oil the wheels of international dealings and  provide guidance and rules for the conduct of international relations. Without them  Australia would be unworkably isolated and struggling to make its way. Treaties may 

  at times seem to be difficult and complex beasts, but they are well worth the time and  trouble to harness. 

  See R v Burgess; Ex parte Henry (1936) 55 CLR 608 at 644 (Latham J); Koowarta v  Bjelke-Petersen; State of Queensland v Commonwealth (1982) 153 CLR 168 at 211-213  (Stephen J). The treaty making power rests exclusively with the Commonwealth as the  national government responsible for the conduct of Australia's foreign relations 

  Constitution, Section 51 (xxix). Minister of State for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v  Teoh (1995) 128 ALR 353 The Major International Treaties Since 1945: a History and  Guide with texts, Grenville and Wasserstein (1987),6. United States Department of  State Treaties in Force: A List of Treaties and Other International Agreements of the  United States in Force on January 1, 1994. XXIX/95 

