---
title: "Working Nation: working for Sydney's Chinese and Vietnamese communities"
date: "1995-06-15"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION AND TRAINING"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211188730
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ORA20%22
---

  :-::::-.-_ ..... :_ .. -.. ∑∑ . . . 

  MEDIA RELEASE  Minister for Employment, Education and Training 

  Simon Crean, MP 

  C69/95 15June1995 

  WORKING NATION- WORKING FOR SYDNEY'S CHINESE AND VIETNAMESE  COMMUNITIES 

  The Minister for Employment, Education and Training, Simon Crean, today called on  Chinese and Vietnamese community and business leaders to work with the Federal  Government in addressing the employment and training needs of unemployed people in their  communities. 

  Mr Crean spoke to a breakfast gathering ofbusiness leaders from Sydney's Chinese and  Vietnamese communities about the Government's Workin~ Nation strategy which contains  specific measures to improve opportunities for migrants. 

  "Australia's economic development has only been possible through the contribution of ethnic  communities including the Vietnamese and Chinese communities. Migrants have brought  with them their skills, entrepreneurship, resourcefulness and energy," he said. 

  "As we reflect on where we as a nation have come from, it is with a sense of unity and  common purpose that we can say our immigration policy has become one of our greatest  assets. It has enriched our population and cultural base and added new dimensions not only to  who we are, but to how we see ourselves and the world around us." 

  Mr Crean said that while the unemployment rate for Non-English Speaking Background  (NESB) people was still unacceptably high, it has fallen in the last year from 14.9 per cent to  12 per cent. 

  Migrants from China experienced a decline in unemployment from 11.9 per cent to 10.5 per  cent, and Vietnamese migrants also experienced a decline in unemployment from 31 per cent  to 27.9 per cent. 

  "Working Nation is aimed at ensuring that migrants who face barriers in finding employment  can successfully compete for jobs. A major barrier to employment for many migrants is poor  English language skills. To address this in the recent Budget the Government boosted English  as a Second Language (ESL) funding to $130 million. This will give 32,000 people  immediate and essential assistance. 

  "This is in addition to the Migrant Service Improvement Strategy, a key plank of Working  Nation which established a network of 51 Migrant Liaison Officers (MLOs). 

  MLOs work to establish links between local migrant communities and employers to help  communities deal with special labour market needs and to provide information about  Working Nation initiatives and CES programs and services. 

  Parliament House , Canberra ACT . 2600 Telephone : (06) 277 7460 Facsimile: (06) 273 4117 

  "In Western Sydney there are two Vietnamese MLOs, Mai Luc and Di Hong Lam, who have  already organised information seminars for Chinese and Vietnamese clients and kept the  ethnic media informed of initiatives for employers." 

  Mr Crean announced that the Federal Government has agreed to provide $72,000 for an  Employment Liaison Officer with the Australian Chinese Community Association of New  South Wales. 

  "This will improve links between employers and job seekers in the Chinese community and  the Federal Government, through the CES, to help people into jobs," he said. 

  Migrant Advisory Committees have also been established to provide feedback and policy  advice on service delivery issues facing migrants and to provide information to ethnic  communities about CES programs and services. In NSW there is representation from the  Australian Chinese Community Association, the Indo China Refugee Association ofNSW,  the Vietnamese Australian Welfare Association and the Vietnamese Women's Association." 

  Mr Crean called on employers to take advantage of the range of initiatives available under  Working Nation including wage subsidies and more simplified training procedures. 

  Under the National Training Wage employers pay trainees around 80 per cent of key award  based rates where approved training is provided. Employees taken on under the training wage  are exempt from the minimum entitlement provisions of the Industrial Relations Act. 

  Working Nation also provides:   " enhanced training subsidies from $2000 to a maximum of $1 0,640;   " wage subsidies of up to $9470 with an extended probation period of four weeks;   " cutting the red tape involved in the training approval process; and   " greater flexibility in terms of offering more scope for employers to provide on-the-job 

  training. 

  Mr Crean said the recent Budget provided a substantial increase in expenditure on  labo+arket programs and training assistance under Working Nation, from $1.7 billion this  year to $2.2 billion in 1995-96 and to $2.3 billion in 1996-97. 

  "This is the highest level of commitment ever made by an Australian government to  assistance for the unemployed. 

  "I encourage everyone here today to find out about what's on offer and w ork with us to fmd  employment and training opportunities for unemployed A ustralians. " 

  For further information contact your local CES office or ring the Working Nation hotline on  131180. 

  Co ntact: Catherine Payne, Simon Crean's O ffice (06) 277 7460 or 018 174 875 . 

  . . .. -.... :::: ∑.∑ .∑ :-∑. 

  MEDIA RELEASE  Minister for Employment, Education and Training 

  Simon Crean, MP 

  C68/95 14 June 1995 

  WESTERN SYDNEY MEETS JOBS CHALLENGE -CREAN ISSUES ANOTHER 

  The Minister for Employment, Education and Training, Simon Crean, today congratulated  members of the Central Western and Outer Western Sydney Area Consultative Committees  (ACCs) and the CES on creating 19,000 job opportunities in the past six months. 

  The challenge was issued last November during the 'Kelty, Fox, Crean' regional job tour to  encourage employers to lodge vacancies with the CES and to take advantage of the generous  subsidies available under the Federal Government's employment and training strategy,  Working Nation. 

  Mr Crean said the 19,000 vacancies lodged with the CES is a marked increase over the same  period the year before when only 17,000 vacancies were lodged. 

  "The number of unemployed people in the Western Sydney region has fallen dramatically in  the last 12 months with the unemployment rate in Central Western Sydney dropping from  15.9 per cent to 1 0 per cent. The unemployment rate for Outer Western Sydney has fallen  from 10.4 per cent to 6.9 per cent with employment growing by a very impressive 17.2 per  cent," he said. 

  The Minister said it was important to maintain the momentum and he issued another  challenge to the ACCs and the CES to create 21,000 job opportunities in Western Sydney  over the next six months. 

  "The success ofthe first jobs drive is largely due to the partnership approach developed under  the Working Nation jobs teams or ACCs," he said. 

  "Western Sydney businesses and community groups have worked with the Federal  Government to identify their region's strengths and develop the right employment and  training programs to build a diverse regional skills base. 

  ∑'The 19,000 job opportunities were generated in industry sectors including manufacturing  (21 %), wholesale/retail (30%), recreation (12%), construction (8%), Community services  (7.5%), finance and property (7%) and other (14.5%). 

  ∑'The ACCs used their networks and industry contacts to make employers aware of the  benefits available when taking someone on under the Working Nation program. It is an  example of what can be achieved when industry , community and government bodies join  forces to combat unemployment."' 

  Mr Crean said the Federal Go vernment had committed $80 million to help beat  unemployment in the Outer and Central Western Sydney regions by providing quality work  and training opportunities for the long term unemployed. 

  Parliament Hou se, Ca nberra ACT 260 0 Telephone : (06) 277 7460 Facsim ile: (06) 273 4117 

  Member for Parramatta , Paul Elliott , said this is money well spent helping people develop the  skills needed to become productive members of the Australian workforce. 

  "For example, in Parramatta the Federal Government spent $3.2 million to provide training  for 450 people under the Land care and Environment Action Program (LEAP), more than $10  million to help 4,323 people with English language or literacy difficulties and a further $25.6  million to help more than 8,000 long term unemployed people into jobs through Jobskills, 

  Jobtrain and Jobstart ," he said. 

  The Minister and Mr Elliott paid tribute to the Outer Western Sydney ACC Chair, Jim  Bosnjak and Central Western ACC chair, Ross Jones, who played a key role in a number of  new initiatives, including the Parramatta River Foreshore re-development under the New  Work Opportunities (NWO) program with the Parramatta City Council. This alone will help 

  350 long term unemployed people. 

  Mr Crean said the recent Budget provided a substantial real increase in expenditure on labour  market programs and training assistance under Working Nation, from $1.7 billion this year to  $2.2 billion in 1995-96 and to $2.3 billion in 1996-97. 

  "This is the highest level of commitment ever made by an Australian Government to  assistance for the unemployed. 

  "Working Nation contributed savings to this year's Budget based on the forward estimates of  expenditure in last year's Budget. The savings reflect both the strong improvements in the  labour market over the past 12 months and the efficiencies achieved in the delivery of  Working Nation. 

  "No-one who was originall y eligible for employment and training assistance will be denied  access to that assistance by dint of the lastest Budget decisions , nor will there be any  reduction in the qualit y of service and level of help for unemployed people." 

  Contacts: Catherine Payne, Simon Crean's Office (06) 277 7460 or 018 174 875.  Ross Jones, Central We sten Sydney ACC Chair (02) 630 4988. 

