---
title: "Opposition paralysis undermines Australia's borders"
date: "1995-03-02"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187197
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/H4520%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  Sena  B13/95 

  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

  Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860 

  OPPOSITION PARALYSIS UNDERMINES AUSTRALIA'S BORDERS 

  The Opposition's latest backflip on refugee policy is further  evidence of its chronic policy paralysis, the Minister for  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, said today. 

  "On December 30 last year, Senator Short expressed his clear  support for measures to prevent the undermining of Australia's  refugee/humanitarian program and to protect our protect our  borders from illegal migration," Senator Bolkus said. 

  "His Coalition colleagues with their extreme and ill-informed  views have now hijacked the debate and opposed the Migration  Legislation Amendment Bill No 3 1995.  "Their actions not only highlight the deep divisions within the  Liberal party, but jeopardise the Government's efforts to protect  the integrity of our refugee determination processes. 

  "They have dealt another slap in the face to Senator Short and  another mixed message to those who seek to enter Australia  illegally."  Senator Bolkus said the Government remained fully committed to  the Bill, which would prevent repeat applications by people  already found not to be refugees, and provide a common sense  approach to the definition of 'particular social group' contained 

  in the united Nations Refugee Convention.  "Claims that the Bill would deny people in genuine fear of  persecution because of the particular application of China's  fertility control policies the opportunity to have their claims  assessed are simply wrong," he said. "The legislation simply  aims to correct a Federal Court interpretation of 'particular  social group' which would leave the Convention devoid of meaning. 

  "Nevertheless, I have already discussed with Senator Short  amendments which may clarify and give certainty to this aspect  of the legislation. 

  Senator Bolkus pointed out that Senator Short did not sign his  colleagues' dissenting report and has thus distanced himself from  their position.  "He must now fulfil his commitment to this legislation, or be  responsible for sending a green light to those who would abuse  the system." 

  CANBERRA MARCH 2 1995 

  Contact: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860 

