---
title: "Australia facing another potential influx of boat people"
date: "1995-05-01"
creators:
  - "Short, Jim"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211188015
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2985562%22
---

  ' j 

  Senator Jim Short  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs  &  Assisting the Leader on Multicultural Affairs 

  IMEA31/95 

  AUSTRALIA FACING ANOTHER POTENTIAL INFLUX OF BOATPEOPLE 

  Today's reports from China that Australia could be facing another wave of Sino Vietnamese  boatpeople from Southern China are not suprising in view of the failure to return any of the  existing boatpeople detained in Australia. 

  Department oflmmigration officials told me months ago that there could be a further 5,000  boatpeople come to Australia in the next few months if urgent steps were not taken to return  the 700 who arrived late last year. 

  Since then, not one of the 700 has been returned, despite the assurances to me by the Minister,  Senator Bolkus, in January that the first returns would occur in March. 

  We now learn from Senator Bolkus, who is currently visiting China, that no date has been set  for the return of any of these people. 

  No wonder many other Sino Vietnamese in Southern China are now talking about taking to  the boats unless the existing illegal boatpeople in Australia are returned to China. Failure to  return these people to China is being seen as a clear signal that Australia is not serious about  preventing more illegal immigrants from arriving by boat. 

  Quite clearly something has gone seriously wrong with the agreement-the Minister told us he  had reached with the PRC Government for their return. 

  If this problem is not fixed urgently, and the existing boatpeople not returned quickly, then we  could face a new and much larger unwelcome influx of boatpeople. 

  Senator Bolkus must tell the Australian people urgently what he is doing to fix this latest  apparent policy failure of his. The present situation is totally unacceptable and must not be  allowed to continue. 

  Melbourne  7 April 1995 

  For further information contact Senator Short or Richard King on (03) 417 1499. 

