---
title: "Coalition will support Migration Bill No. 4 but seek amendments"
date: "1995-03-07"
creators:
  - "Short, Jim"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187243
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2993060%22
---

  Senator Jim Short  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs  &  Assisting the Leader on Multicultural Affairs 

  IM:EA 17/95 

  COALITION WILL SUPPORT MIGRATION BILL NO.  4 

  BUT SEEK AMENDMENTS  , . ation Legislation 

  The Coalition strongly supports the principle underlying the Governments Migf . . lf b grounds  Amendment Bill (No. 4) 1995, namely that China's One Child Policy should not m itse e  for the grant of refugee status in Australia. 

  S legitimate concerns 

  The Coalition, however, has several concerns about the Bill as drafted. trong ill (N 3) 1995 by  were voiced by many witnesses at the recent inquiry into Migration Amendment B . o. esented a  the Senate Legal and Constitutional Committee. Coalition Senators on that Cornrmttee pr  dissenting report which shared many of the concerns expressed by witnesses. 

  The Government has attempted to meet some of these concerns in Migration Legislation  Amendment Bill (No. 4) 1995, which is to replace Bill No. 3. 

  will k to 

  The Coalition ~11 allow the Bill to proceed according to normal due proce~s, bat it arf s:ar the  negotiate amendments to address the legitimateconcerns that have been rais~~- ~:is .:ell f~unded  Government must ensure that persons whose fear of forced abortion or sterilisatJO ill . ot clear on  are not automatically precluded from making application for refugee status. The B is n  this point. 

  The Coalition is confident that the Government will share its view that basic hum~ ri~:n to her  considerations would not allow Australia for example to force a pregnant won:an to; therefore  country of origin if it were known that on return she would face a forced abort1orJ.· e  believe that it will be possible to negotiate acceptable amendments to the Bill. 

  On this basis the Coalition will support its passage through the Parliament. 

  . . . :i-oduce sound 

  The Government's handling of this matter has again demonstrated its inability t~ P 3 was debated  ~egislation which can stand up to the scrutiny of the Parliament. Even befo~e Bill ~~cted in Bill 

  m the Senate the Government saw the need to make major amendments to it, as re 

  COMMONWEALTH 

  No.4. Once again the Minister, Senator Bolkus, has shown a sloppy, incompetent approach to this  important portfolio. It is his ineptitude that has caused the concerns and confusion about Bill No. 3,  and which have not as yet been rectified satisfactorily in Bill No. 4. 

  It is high time that the Prime Minister replaced Senator Bolkus with someone capable of handling  immigration and ethnic affairs policy competently and professionally. 

  Canberra  7March 1995 

  For further information please contact Senator Short on (06) 277 3119 

