---
title: "Agreement between Israel and the PLO on the extension of autonomy in the West Bank"
date: "1995-09-29"
creators:
  - "Mcmullan, Bob"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211194067
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KLI20%22
---

  Media Release  Bob McMullan Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs 

  MT162 29 September 1995 

  AGREEMENT BETWEEN ISRAEL AND THE PLO ON THE 

  EXTENSION OF AUTONOMY IN THE WEST BANK 

  The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Bob McMullan, warmly welcomed  the signature in Washington today of the agreement between Israel and the PLO on  the extension of Palestinian autonomy in the West Bank. 

  "Tne agreement, though much delayed, demonstrates that the psychology of peace is  taking root," Senator McMullan said. 

  "For Israelis and Palestinians , the peace process now appears irreversible.  ", 

  "As well as transferring civilian powers to the Palestinian Authority, the agreement  provides for the phased redeployment of Israeli Defence Force units in the West Bank. 

  "This would pave the way for Palestinian elections and see most Palestinians free of  Israeli occupation by rnid-1997." 

  Senator McMullan said the agreement had been achieved after lengthy and difficult  negotiations. He praised Israeli and Palestinian leaders for the commitment they had  shown to the negotiation process, especially in the face of continued, and sometimes  bloody, opposition from extremists . 

  Senator McMullan called on all sides to support the agreement, saying that it should  not be undermined by those seeking to score political points at the expense of the  Israeli and PLO leaderships. 

  "The agreement is significant not solely because it represents an historic step in the  normalisation of relations between Israelis and Palestinians ," Senator McMullan said. 

  "M ore importantly , it consolidates the peace process and clears the way for the next  and most critical stage -the commencement of 'final status' talks. 

  "Those negotiations will include the questions of sovereignty , Jewish settlements,  refugees. and the future of Jerusalem." 

  Senator McMullan cautioned that these talks would be even more difficult than the  negotiations just ended . 

   " Parliament House, Canberra, ACT 2600. Tel: (06) 277 7420  " Fax: (06) 273 4128  " 

  "All parties will need to approach the negotiations constructively and with a  preparedness to be flexible," Senator McMullan said. 

  He reaffirmed Australia's commitment to Israel's security within internationally  recognised borders and the right of the Palestinians to self determination and  independence alongside a secure Israel. 

  Senator McMullan said the original Oslo Accords had been the catalyst for negotiations and,  subsequently , peace between Israel and Jordan. 

  "I hope this agreement will prove a similar stimulus to bilateral negotiations between Israel  and Syria, and between Israel and Lebanon." 

  Further information: John Flannery, (06) 277 7420 

