---
title: "Democrats move for war criminals to be tried in Australia"
date: "1995-11-14"
creators:
  - "Spindler, Sid"
source: "Office of SPINDLER, SEN SID"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211196051
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2908083%22
---

 Senator Sid Spindler Australian Democrats Spokesperson on Law and Justice

 Democrats move for War Criminals to be tried in Australia

 The Democrats today moved a motion in the Senate calling upon the Australian Government to establish a Special Investigations Unit to investigate and prosecute war criminals from the former Yugoslavia in Australian courts.

 "The Australian Government must act immediately to ensure that Australia does not become a haven for war criminals from the Balkans," said Democrat Law and Justice Spokesperson Senator Sid Spindler.

 "Our existing war crimes laws effectively only allow the extradition of people facing prosecution in the International War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague.

 Only 100 people are expected to be prosecuted under this process. The acting deputy prosecutor of the Tribunal, Mr Graham 13Iewett, has encouraged Australia to initiate its own investigations and prosecute war criminals who are found here.

 "It is appalling that people who carried out the slaughter of civilians and prisoners and participated in the rape of women and children are now walking around Australian streets with impunity.

 "We must make it clear that those who murder, rape and destroy cultural property will not be tolerated in this country.

 "We must also provide the greatest relief for those refugees that have decided to call Australia their new home," concluded Senator Spindler.

 The Government and Opposition parties will be asked to vote on Senator Spindler's motion in the Senate on the 15th of November, 1995.

 For further information, contact Sid Spindler on (06) 277 3643.

 Keeping the Senate Strong AUSTRALIAN

 aJARLDUENTIPAAY7G1 ;MY

