---
title: "Chief Justice gets it wrong"
date: "1995-07-19"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211190199
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XVC20%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  Senator Nick Bolkus 

  B56/95 

  let .:::TUL-'1 Iqq5 

  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MIN ISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

  Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860 

  CHIEF JUSTICE GETS IT WRONG 

  The Chief Justice of the Family Court has clearly not checked his facts before making  comments on children in detention the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator  Nick Bolkus said today. 

  "Ill-informed and factually inaccurate statements are damaging to the office of the Chief  Justice of the Family Court," Senator Bolkus said. 

  "To describe the Port Hedland centre as a 'virtual concentration camp' is nothing short of  emotional and sensationalist nonsense. The centre at Port Hedland is designed to keep family  units together with appropriate comfort and dignity while they remain in detention. In  particular, an extensive range of high level medical and educational services is provided,"  Senator Bolkus said. 

  "The centre at Port Hedland is regularly visited by Parliamentary delegations and non " government organisations such as the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees." 

  "His description of the northwest of Australia as 'wilderness and remote' typifies an all too  common view by people out of touch with mainstream Australia that anywhere outside  metropolitan Sydney or Melbourne is not civilised," Senator Bolkus said. 

  "The residents of Port Hedland would be appalled to hear their thriving community described  as wilderness." 

  The overwhelming majority of people at the Port Hedland centre are not eligible to claim  asylum and have arrived in Australia without authorisation. Australian law requires that they  be held in immigration detention until they are removed. 

  The Minister said the Chief Justice appears to be ignorant of existing law in relation to  children in detention. 

  "There are already provisions under the law to release minors from detention, where it is in  the best interests of the child and this has been done. There can be no excuse for such a  senior member of the judiciary to be ignorant of such a basic point." 

  Senator Bolkus said the Chief Justice had again got it wrong in stating that the refugee  determination process can take years . 

   "  " 

  "On average my Department takes five weeks to process the asylum claims of boat people.  They then have access to full merits review by the independent Refugee Review Tribunal,"  Senator Bolkus said. 

  "The real delay in the refugee determination process occurs when failed applicants decide to  pursue litigation. It is the litigation process before the courts that can take years, not the  merits determination process. " 

  "The comments are a setback to rational discussion of the issues." 

  CANBERRA 

  CONTACT: 

  19 JULY 1995 

  BRONWYN MCNAUGHTON  (06) 277 7860 

