---
title: "Has Bolkus gone bonkers"
date: "1995-03-02"
creators:
  - "Short, Jim"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187205
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2993061%22
---

  Senator Jim Short  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs  &  Assisting the Leader on Multicultural Affairs 

  Has Bolkus Gone Bonkers?  IMEA 16/95 

  Today's extraordinarily confused and inaccurate Press Statement on the Coalition's attitude  towards Migration Legislation Amendment Bill No. 3 1995 from the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs can only lead one to question whether Bolkus has gone bonkers! 

  The Minister's statement was prompted by the Dissenting Report from Coalition Senators  Ellison, O'Chee and Abetz in the Report by the Senate's Legal and Constitutional Committee  following its public hearings into the Bill. 

  The Minister says that the Coalition Senators have opposed the Bill. Wrong. What my  colleagues have said is that the Bill has several major deficiencies and its consideration by the  Parliament should be deferred until the Minister attempts to resolve those concerns. 

  The Minister says that I expressed my support on 3 0 December 1994 for measures to prevent  the undermining of Australia's refugee/humanitarian program and to protect our borders from  illegal migration. What I actually said was that whilst I welcomed the belated statement on  that day about these matters, the Coalition would "need to see the detail of the Government's  proposed new legislation before taking a final decision on it. However, the Coalition agrees  with the intent of the legislation and will take a sympathetic approach to it." That situation 

  remains the case. 

  In line with the spirit of my 30 December statement the Coalition supported the expeditious  passage of Migration Legislation Amendment Bill No. 2 1995, which provided for the return  to China of the several hundred Sino Vietnamese illegal boatpeople who arrived in Australia  from around mid-November 1994. 

  Migration Legislation Amendment Bill No. 3 1995 has many flaws, as my Coalition colleagues  on the Senate Committee have ably pointed out. They were not alone in this criticism. This  Bill has attracted criticism from the Law Council of Australia, the Australian Law Reform  Commission, the Catholic Bishops of Australia, the Bar Association of NSW, the Federation 

  of Ethnic Communities' Councils of Australia, Amnesty International, the Refugee Council of  Australia and many other organisations. 

  COMMONWEALTH  t"ARLIAMENTARY LIBRA.Ry 

  -2-

  The Minister says he has already discussed amendments with me "which may clarify and give  certainty" to the legislation. Wrong. The fact is that during the Senate Committee hearings  there was general agreement not only by non-Governmental witnesses but by the Minister's  own Department as well that amendments would be required. The Government has produced  no amendments. The Minister has had no discussion with me about amendments. The nearest  he has got to it was a brief discussion yesterday, at my initiative, between myself and one of  his advisors, at which I expressed concern and surprise that the Government had not yet  brought forward any amendments for our consideration.* 

  The Minister's statement also implies that the Coalition is opposed to that part of the Bill  dealing with repeat applications by people already found not to be refugees. Wrong. There is  no mention of this matter at all in the report by Coalition Senators. 

  The Minister accuses the Coalition of "chronic policy paralysis" in this area. Wrong. It is the  failure of this Minister to produce a consistent approach to his portfolio that is the problem.  So far as this Bill is concerned any paralysis there is lies in the Government's failure to produce  the amendments it knows to be necessary to address the very serious concerns expressed by a  wide range of highly respected organisations, and by Coalition Senators - and acknowledged  by the Minister's own Department. 

  As Professor Helen Hughes put it so eloquently last week, "Immigration policy has staggered  on like the proverbial Australian drunk going from pub to pub on a Saturday night." Nothing  better could describe Senator Bolkus' performance in the Immigration portfolio. The  incompetence in the drafting of this Bill is further clear evidence to this effect. 

  The Coalition will be considering its final position in respect to the Bill in the next few days,  taking into account the views expressed in the Senate Committee's Report on the Bill. 

  2 March 1995  Canberra 

  For further information contact Senator Short on (06) 277 3199 

  *ps After the above statement was drafted, and several hours after the Minister's Media  Release, his office has faxed me some suggested amendments. 

