---
title: "Halfway point passed in removals to China"
date: "1995-10-26"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211195266
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RCK20%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  Senator Nick Bolkus B107/95 

  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

  Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860 

  HALFWAY POINT PASSED IN REMOVALS TO CHINA 

  The halfway mark has been passed in the removal of boat people to China as part of the  agreement with the People's Republic of China (PRC), the Minister for Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, announced today. 

  "The milestone achieved today reflects the extremely high level of cooperation between  the Australian and PRC Governments to deal with the issue of Vietnamese refugees who  have been granted the protection of China," Senator Bolkus said. 

  "It reflects a fast and cost-efficient process which critics claimed was not possible, and  which is unprecedented in the region. It has taken other countries years to achieve  similar results." 

  In the largest flight so far, 96 Vietnamese refugees left Port Hedland in Western  Australia this morning, bound for Nanning in the PRC. 

  This seventh flight brings to 465 the number of people removed under the agreement.  The first group of 53 people returned to China on 9 May 1995. 

  The verification process continues for the remaining 370 boat people in Australia who  are affected by the Safe Third Country (STC) Legislation. 

  The legislation prevents people who have been given protection of a recognised safe  third country from also claiming asylum in Australia. 

  In January this year, Australia and the PRC signed a Memorandum of Understanding  (MOU) which is linked to the STC Legislation and allows for the return and continued  protection of the refugees and their families under agreed verification arrangements. 

  The people being returned to China today came to Australia between November last year  and March this year. They -arrived on six boats code-named the Brolga, Galah, Heron,  Jabiru, Kookaburra and Nightingale. 

  "The return of more than half the arrivals underlines the determination of the Australian  and PRC Governments to see the quick return of people covered by the MOU," Senator  Bolkus said. 

  "Those who have returned since the first flight have been monitored, and are reported  to be safe." 

  CANBERRA OCTOBER 26 1995 

  MEDIA CONTACT: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860 

