---
title: "Australia to assist repatriation of remaining Rohingya refugees from Bangladesh to Myanmar"
date: "1995-03-13"
creators:
  - "Bilney, Gordon"
source: "MINISTER FOR DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AND PACIFIC ISLAND AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187395
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ST520%22
---

 Minister lor Development Cooperation · Minister tor Pacific Island Affairs  Gordon Bilney MP MDC 23 13 March 1995

 AUSTRALIA TO ASSIST REPATRIATION OF REMAINING ROHINGYA REFUGEES FROM BANGLADESH TO MYANMAR

 The Australian Government will provide $1.5 million through the overseas aid program to assist the  repatriation and care o f remaining Rohingya refugees, the Minister for Development Cooperation,  Gordon Bilney, announced today.

 A grant o f $1.1 million will be provided to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to assist  the voluntary repatriation o f refugees from camps in Bangladesh to their home villages in western  Myanmar. A further $400 000 will be used by UNICEF Australia to conduct an emergency  immunisation program for returning refugee children.

 "Over 250 000 refugees have fled to Bangladesh since 1991, following the Myanmar Government's  persecution o f the Muslim Rohingya minority. This represents some of the most extensive human  dislocation to occur in the region in recent years. The refugee camps have also placed an enormous  strain on the resources o f Bangladesh, itself one o f Asia's poorest countries.

 "Australia welcomed an agreement between the Myanmar Government and UNHCR in 1993 which  opened the way for the safe repatriation o f refugees to their home villages in Myanmar, under the  supervision and care o f UNHCR.

 "This latest aid package will assist the return of the 120 000 refugees remaining in camps inside  Bangladesh. The funds will be used by UNHCR to establish a larger presence in western Myanmar,  encourage repatriation, upgrade facilities, coordinate the movement o f refugees, provide short term  relief assistance and assist with rehabilitation projects in home villages. Funding for UNICEF Australia's  immunisation program will help reduce the high incidence of preventable disease among refugee  children.

 "The Myanmar Government's cooperation with UNHCR in facilitating refugee repatriation is a positive  step. All indications are that the repatriation program, including food distribution and village  infrastructure improvements, is proceeding smoothly.

 "The Australian Government will continue to encourage a process of national reconciliation in Myanmar  but will not resume our suspended program of govemment-to-government development assistance until  the Myanmar regime demonstrates greater respect for fundamental human rights and progress towards a  more democratic system o f government," Mr Bilney said.

 For further information contact: Minister's Office: -Alien Mawer (06) 277 7660

 AIDAB: Robert McKinnon (06) 276 4966

