---
title: "Agency heads departure puts spotlight on Bolkus"
date: "1995-10-03"
creators:
  - "Short, Jim"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211194194
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2993049%22
---

  SEN JIM SHORT MELE. ID:034196350 03 OCT'95 14:55 No.006 P.01 32_ 

  ·Senator Jim Short  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs  &  Assisting the Leader on Multicultural Affairs 

  Agency Heads Departures Puts Spotlight on Bolkus 

  The departure late this week of Ms Pam O'Neil from the position of  Principle Member of the lmmigration Review Tribunal (IRT}, just six  weeks after the departure of Pl'of. Leroy Certoma from the position of  Principle Member of the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT), raises serious  questions about the administration of the Immigration and Ethnic Affairs  portfolio by the Minister, Senator Bolkus. 

  IMEA 65/95 

  Ms O'Neil has served only one year of her l 994 three year reappointment.  At that time the Minister failed to reappoint several highly regarded IRT  members, and instead made several controversial and blatant appointments  of political and/or personal friends, often against the advice of an advisory  panel headed by Ms O'Neil. 

  Prof. Ccrtoma has also left well before the expiry of his term of  appointment. 

  These two unexpected departures follow press reports foreshadowing the  departure as well of Dr John Nieuwenhuysen, the head of the other major  agency under Senator Bolkus' portfolio, the Bureau oflmmjgration,  Multicultural and Population Research (BIMPR). It was common  knowledge last year that the Minister was trying to remove Dr  Nieuwcnhuysen from his position. Their prickly relationship was 

  dramatically highlighted during Senate Estimates Committee hearings  examining the Minister's blatant political interference in the organisation  of the 1995 BIMPR National OutJook Conference. 

  Another person who was reported to have fallen foul of Senator Bolkus  was the head of the Office of Multicultural Affairs (OMA), Mr Max  Bourke. Mr Bourke has also left that position after a relatively short  tenure. 

  COMMONWEALTil  PARLIAMENTARY ., ... ,.,"'""' ""' 

  SEN JIM SHORT MELB. ID:034196350 03 OCT'95 14:55 No.006 P.02 

  (2) 

  Senator BoJkus' term as Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs has  also been marked by turmoil within the Department itself. Some senior  officers were removed from their positions with little or no explanation  given. The Federal Police were called in in unprecedented fashion by the 

  Secretary of the Department, Mr Conybeare, to investigate certain  allegations about two senior officers. The DIEA staff passed a motion of  no confidence in Mr Conybeare, who is still Secretary of the Department. 

  It is inevitable that these events raise serious questions going to the heart  of the Minister's administration of his portfolio. Many are questions the  Minister has continued to duck for a long time now. However, if public  confidence in the operation of the DIEA and its agencies is to be restored,  they are questions the Minister must address urgently and explain to the  electorate. 

  Melbourne  3 October 1995  For further information contact Senator Short (03) 417 1499 or Richard  King 015 68 3586 

