---
title: "Situation in Bosnia: statement"
date: "1995-07-24"
creators:
  - "Keating, Paul"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211190312
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D6D20%22
---

  70/95 

  PRIME MINISTER 

  STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEA TING MP 

  SITUATION IN BOSNIA 

  All Australians have been horrified by the bloodshed and human rights abuses in  Bosnia, and appalled by the misery that has been inflicted on the civilian population in  the former Yugoslavia. 

  In particular, we feel for those among us who have families and friends and ties with  communities caught up in the fighting. 

  The Bosnian Serb capture of Srebrenica and continuing Bosnian Serb attacks on other  UN 'safe areas' have provoked another exodus of families and a wave of suffering, with  horrific violations of human rights. 

  The latest acts of aggression by the Bosnian Serb forces are a moral affront to all of us.  They offend every international standard of decency. 

  The international community faces immensely difficult decisions about how to respond  to this critical situation. 

  Though often criticised, UNPROFOR's operations with the UN High Commissioner  for Refugees (UNHCR) in the former Yugoslavia have helped protect nearly three  million people affected by the conflict. Despite the extreme difficulties imposed on  UNPROFOR by confused mandates, it can continue to make an important contribution  to the humanitarian effort and in restraining conflict in the former Yugoslavia. 

  The Australian Government welcomes the agreement in London among the countries  most involved in peace efforts in the former Yugoslavia and the UN to ensure access  for supplies to the civilian population in Sarajevo and to meet further Bosnian Serb  offensives with a decisive and effective response. 

  In order to help relieve immediate suffering, the Government has decided to provide a  new $3 million aid package. 

  Australia will provide $1. 5 million to the UN lead agency in the former Yugoslavia, the  UNHCR, and $750,000 to the World Food Program. We will also provide $350,000  to kick-start a joint appeal announced today by UNHCR and Austcare for cash  contributions to make up family survival kits with food, blankets, clothing and other  essential items. 

  The Government will give World Vision Australia $350,000 for its program to provide  food and care to displaced people in and around Zenica. And we will provide $50,000  to Austcare to support local women's initiatives to help women who have been subject  to violence. 

  This package of assistance is additional to the almost $5 million the Government has  already provided to the victims of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, including a  contribution of $500,000 to help civilians displaced by the latest fighting announced by  the Acting Foreign Minister on 18 July. 

  Since the outbreak of the conflict in 1991 Australia has accepted for resettlement some  14,000 victims of the war. This financial year, provision has been made for an  additional 5,600 people under the Government's humanitarian program. 

  Sir Ninian Stephen and other expert Australian staff work with the International  Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. 

  It is in the interests of the entire international community that the crisis in Bosnia be  brought to an end and an enduring peace established in the Former Yugoslavia. That  means all participants must make a determined effort to negotiate a settlement. 

  CANBERRA  24 July 1995 

