---
title: "Address to the Victorian Chinese Community, King Bo Restaurnat, Melbourne,"
date: "1995-11-01"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211195716
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QRK20%22
---

 Address to the Victorian Chinese Community, King Bo Restaurnat, Melbourne, 1  November 1995 

 EMBARGO 8.00pm 

 EOE 

 Dr Saw, fellow members of your organising committee, advisers, Parliamentary colleagues,  members of the Chinese Community of Victoria - and I see several old friends amongst you - other  guests, ladies and gentlemen. 

 Thank you for your warm welcome. It is a great pleasure to have this opportunity to meet you  again, and speak to you about several matters which I know are important to you, and to the  future of Australia. 

 I well remember the last time I attended a similar function with many of you several years ago. I  enjoyed and valued that evening very much, and I know that I will again this evening. 

 Could I first of all congratulate you, and thank you, for the way your community has worked  together for this dinner. I understand it has involved a high degree of cooperation between many  individuals, and between many different community organisations, and that members of well over  30 of those organisations are here tonight. It is, therefore, in many ways a unique event. I am  very grateful to all concerned, and in particular to Dr Saw and his steering committee. 

 The Liberal Party that I have the honour to lead is committed to a vision of Australia where each  and every person has the right to participate fully in our society and to maximise his or her  potential. We are proud of our country's diverse cultural heritage. It has helped to develop our  unique Australian identity. We value highly the contributions of Australians, of all backgrounds, to  our national development. 

 A Coalition Government will draw strength from that diversity to build a more secure future for  every Australian. We will meet the considerable challenges which exist to introduce policies which  will make Australia more competitive and more economically secure. We are committed to  providing a future of hope for our children. We have the will and we have the right policies. 

 We will need the assistance of every Australian to achieve that vision. 

 The Chinese community has been intimately involved in this process of nation-building from  Australia's very earliest days. We welcome this and welcome the lessons to be had in your  community's example of industriousness and commitment to the development of our country. 

 If I can reflect on history for a moment it will illustrate just how important Australia's Chinese  community has been to our nation's development. From the 1820s and 1830s two-way trade with  China was already brisk. Chinese sailors and others who had passage on these early trading ships  started settling in Australia around this time - amongst our first Chinese immigrants. From the  1850s many more Chinese came to Australia including those who participated in the gold-rush,  particularly in Victoria. 

 Since that time, the Chinese community has continued to play a valued role in building Australia's  national life. The contribution your community has made to the development of Australia has  enriched us all, both economically and culturally. 

 We are particularly lucky that Australia's Chinese community is itself diverse. This community has  been drawn not just from China, but from Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia,  Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos as well as many other countries throughout the region. 

 Many of you are second, third and fourth generation Australians. Many are recent settlers - some  of the fastest growing groups of Australian immigrants are also Chinese, especially from Hong  Kong, China, Taiwan and Malaysia. 

 The Coalition recognises and values the important role migrants play, and will continue to play, in  our society. Many are highly educated, highly skilled professionals who have arrived under the  various provisions of our migration program. They are making an increasing contribution to the  economic development of our country and often set an example to the rest of us of what can be 

 achieved through dedication, entrepreneurship and hard work. Ethnic Chinese migrants have been  in the forefront in these regards. 

 The Coalition's recognition of Asia's importance to our future 

 Australia should be drawing more on the Chinese and other ethnic communities to further our  aspirations in Asia. We are very fortunate to be living on the edge of the world's fastest growing  and most dynamic economic region but we should be better capitalising on the opportunities which  exist than the Labor Government has done. 

 The Coalition places the highest foreign policy priority on enhancing Australia's relations with Asia.  Realising the full potential of our interaction with the Asia-Pacific region provides Australia with an  historic challenge. A Coalition Government will be totally committed to providing the policy  framework in which we can meet that goal. 

 The Liberal Party has a long and proud history of interaction with Asia. A Coalition Government will  continue that role by implementing policies which will strengthen and deepen Australia's  relationship with its Asian neighbours. 

 We welcome our growing interaction with the peoples of our region. Both Australia and Asia can  learn much from each other. 

 The Coalition is committed to developing links and exchanges with our neighbours in the areas of  education, sport, cultural activities, the arts and tourism. We believe that through the expanding  number and range of activities Australia will become even more integrated with the region than it  already is today. 

 Asia offers Australian businesses enormous opportunities in terms of two-way trade and  investment. Six of our top ten trading partners are in Asia. Around sixty percent of Australia's  exports are destined for Asian markets. 

 Yet the Labor Government has not implemented adequate measures to strengthen Australia's  trade performance in the region. We are not doing as well in the region as Labor says we are. 

 Australia's share of East Asian imports has dropped twenty percent in the ten years since 1983 at  a time when regional economies are growing strongly. In those ten years we have lost market  share in China, Hong Kong, Japan, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan and Brunei. 

 Much of the problem is Labor's lack of attention to domestic economic reform. 

 A Coalition Government will implement policies to significantly improve Australia's domestic  competitiveness. We will focus on a comprehensive program of domestic micro-economic reform,  higher and better quality investment and innovation. 

 The Coalition will also place priority on actively expanding existing regional markets and  developing new ones. 

 I believe Australia should be calling more on the skills and networks of our ethnic communities to  improve our links with the region, particularly our business links. We need to recognise the  importance of community ties in Australia which link us to countries in the region. Together we  need to better exploit the considerable opportunities which exist in the Asia-Pacific. 

 In particular, the Coalition recognises the important role that overseas Chinese business networks  play in regional commerce and how the Australian Chinese business community can assist in  developing new opportunities for Australia. These networks extend right through the Asian region  and are a key part of Asian business. Many of you here tonight will already be capitalising on these  ties. 

 However, Australian business more generally needs to better recognise the value of first-hand  knowledge of business practices and cultural factors in developing trading relationships. The  importance of familial and friendship ties in doing business in Asia is also not as widely appreciated  as it should be. It is vital then that the Australian private sector better utilises the value of these  links in doing business with the region. 

 Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 Australia is a nation built on a diverse range of cultures, all of which contribute to the development  of a distinctively Australian way of life. We can draw on a heritage that very few other nations  have the privilege of doing, a heritage from which we can gain strength to meet the challenges of  the future. 

 The Coalition in government has a proud history in the field of immigration and ethnic affairs. We  have overseen the arrival of immigrants from continental Europe, the Mediterranean, Eastern  Europe, the Middle East and more recently Asia and the Pacific, all of whom have contributed to  the rich diversity of cultural life in our nation. Australians have benefited from these contributions  and we will continue to benefit. 

 It was a Liberal Government that effectively abolished the White Australia policy, in 1967. 

 In government we have played a humanitarian role of which every Australian should be proud. It  was a Coalition Government which lead Australia to one of the most compassionate responses in  the world to the Indo-China refugee crisis in the 1970s. 

 In the international community Coalition governments have more than honoured their obligations,  resettling many people as they fled from their homes to become refugees. After such traumatic  and distressing experiences Australians can be proud that in our country they can at last be free  and at peace. 

 Coalition governments were responsible for setting up the first settlement services for migrants -  including English language classes, the Special Broadcasting Service (SBS) and Migrant Resource  Centres. The Coalition set up the Institute of Multicultural Affairs - the first government agency to  represent multicultural interests. 

 A Coalition Government will continue this proud role. 

 The Coalition will maintain its commitment to an ongoing positive immigration program that has  broad community support and that takes full account of Australia's national interests as well as our  international responsibilities. 

 Humanitarian immigration, family reunion and refugee provisions will remain key components of  our program, as will business migration. Our longstanding commitment to non- - discrimination on  the basis of race, ethnicity, nationality, gender or religion will, of course, continue. 

 All Australians, irrespective of background, have the right to participate fully in our community.  The Liberal Party sees the diversity in our society as a great strength on which we can call to build  a more secure future for our country. 

 A Coalition Government will be committed to continuing our successful policies for the provision of  settlement services. 

 We believe that high priority needs to be given to improved English language programs so that  everyone can participate fully in the life of the nation. The link between English language and  employment has been clearly illustrated and we remain concerned by the high unemployment  levels in some of our immigrant communities, particularly amongst young people. 

 A Coalition Government will also focus on the special needs of ethnic aged persons and women, as  well as the special needs of refugees. 

 We believe that the Labor Government has not listened closely enough to the community, as well  as to relevant agencies and organisations, on these issues. In Government, the Coalition will  improve the opportunities for community consultation and input to our policy making process. We  value the views of the many individuals and organisations dedicated to assisting in these areas. 

 Small Business 

 One of the factors which underpin these regional business networks is the focus and involvement  of the Chinese community in small business. What is important about this for not just regional  trade, but for Australia, is the significant growth in small business generally as a contributor to  Australia's (and the region's) economy. 

 Small business is also, importantly, characterised by its sheer diversity with enterprises stretching  across every sector of Australia's and the region's economy. 

 The Liberal Party recognises the vital role small business play i in our local communities and our  national economy Small business is the driving force of employment and growth in our economy.  Yet the current Government unfairly penalises small businesses. A change of government will  make conditions dramatically better for small business. 

 Every policy the Liberal Party releases between now and the election will be informed by our  special concern for the needs and difficulties of small business. We believe that every decision  Government takes should be tested for its impact on small business. So much about what the  Liberal Party believes in and stands for is consonant with the needs and aspirations of small  business. 

 Only a Coalition Government can reduce the burden of excessive regulation and costs on small  business. 

 We will reduce the complexity of the fringe benefits tax, reduce the burden of capital gains tax for  genuine investors and those saving for their retirement, replace Labor's unfair dismissal provisions  with balanced laws and reduce the other costs of doing business in Australia. We will attack  excessive costs in Australia's transport infrastructure, in particular the ports and shipping. 

 A Coalition Government will create an environment which rewards enterprise and initiative. 

 The Family 

 Around eighty percent of small businesses in Australia are gamily businesses. The Liberal Party  places the highest value on the family as we recognise that families are the very bedrock on which  our society and our economy are built. 

 The quality of life for individual Australians is often crucially dependent on their relationship with  their immediate and extended families. 

 Families provide vital encouragement and a sense of security to their members. They also provide  support in times of trouble - in times of ill-health, unemployment and a whole range of other  difficulties that may happen to all of us throughout our lives. Families provide support as we grow  older and for many are a source of financial and emotional support in retirement. 

 The opportunities available to Australia's families will determine the future of our country. 

 The Liberal Party believes that governments need to recognise and respond to the changes which  have occurred in attitudes and family life with changes in society. Governments need to recognise  that every area of national policy-making can impact on the security of Australian families. 

 The Labor Government has not recognised the vital role of the family in today's society. Labor has  failed to implement measures which will address the impact on families of continuing high  unemployment levels and a heavy tax burden. This produces not just economic hardship, but  social and emotional stresses as well. 

 We are particularly concerned about the rate of family breakdown which causes pain and distress  to over 40,000 couples every year and over 45,000 children. 

 The Liberal Party will make restoring the security of families once again a national priority. Parents  must be able to offer their children and grandchildren a better and more secure future than was  available to them. This is what progress is all about. 

 Conclusion 

 Tonight I have touched on four areas that will receive priority from a Coalition Government. 

 The Coalition will continue to place the highest foreign policy priority on enhancing Australia's  relations with Asia. We will develop greater economic, cultural and educational links with our  neighbours and we will further encourage the utilisation of existing community networks to  develop business opportunities. 

 The conditions for small business will be dramatically improved by a Coalition Government. We are  committed to reducing the burden of excessive regulation and costs on small business. We  recognise the vital role small business plays in the development of Australia's economy. 

 A Coalition Government will restore the security of Australian families. We will implement policies  that will address the impact on families of economic and social change. We recognise that it is the  opportunities which are available to Australian families which will determine the future of our  country. 

 We are proud that Coalition governments have played a prominent role in establishing a society in  Australia where contributions from a diverse range of cultures, including in particular Chinese  culture, are recognised and encouraged. We will maintain our commitment to a positive  immigration program and the sensitive provision of settlement services. 

 The Liberal Party's vision is of an Australia where every individual has the opportunity to fulfil his  or her hopes and dreams. We have the policies and we have the commitment to build a more  secure future for all. 

 Thank you again for arranging this wonderful opportunity to be with you tonight. I look forward to  the next Coalition Government working with your community to build a better Australia for us all,  and for our children and future generations. 

 

 

