---
title: "Coalition policy: migrants "will have to wait from 6 months - 2 years before being eligible for social security benefits""
date: "1996-04-01"
creators:
  - "Kerr, Duncan"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214170127
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02011636%22
---

 M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 1.4.1996

 The Hon. Duncan Kerr MP Shadow Minister for Immigration  Assistant to the Leader o f the Opposition on  Multicultural Affairs

 The Minister for immigration, Mr Ruddock, must immediately clear up a number o f  unanswered questions surrounding Coalition policy which will extend the period that  migrants will have to wait from six months to two years before being eligible for  Social Security benefits. This will apply to all except refugees or humanitarian  migrants.

 The Opposition accepts that the Government has a mandate to toughen up the system  but Mr Ruddock has created a mass o f confusion which needs to be sorted out.

 The public material available is scant, vague and ambiguous, and appears to show  little regard for those already in the process o f migrating, their sponsors, and their  families.

 Neither the Immigration nor Social Security Departments presently are able to supply  any information to clarify the impact o f the changes, the policy is still being written  after it is supposed to take effect, and thousands o f new arrivals with current visas and  their Australian sponsors still have no idea of whether the rules are meant to apply to  them.

 At the very least, Mr Ruddock must explain:

 THE contradiction between the government’s claim that the policy will apply  to all people arriving in Australia from today, and his comments today (Canberra  Times newspaper, Page 2) where he said that the policy would apply only to migrants  “visaed” after today (i.e. not to immigrants already granted entry visas who have yet  to arrive);

 110W the Government will stand by its promise not to apply the measure  retrospectively - he claims the new rules come into force today, but changes to the  Act cannot be made until bills pass through Parliament; ,../2

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 - 2-

 WHAT the Government actually means when it says it will apply a “safety net  in the form of a special allowance for those migrants whose circumstances change  significantly after arrival in Australia for reasons beyond their personal control.” ;

 HOW many migrants will be affected by the new rules, and how the  Government has calculated its projected savings figure o f $616 million over three  years; and

 WTTRTTIRR there are any plans to deny new migrants access to education  entitlements.

 This policy has been implemented with undue haste, and without the Opposition being  given any details of legislation. The Government has been contemptuous of  parliamentary scrutiny.

 It has given no regard to the views of the ethnic communities, and risks creating an  underclass who suffer the misfortune o f not being able to find employment or who  lose their jobs, become pregnant o f suffer physical handicap.

 Duncan K err Is available for interview a t his H obart office on (002) 345 255, o r  on 0418 125 161.

