---
title: "Funding to help young homeless in Adelaide"
date: "1996-11-14"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION, TRAINING AND YOUTH AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211452842
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SP630%22
---

  Vanstone media release template http:/ /www .deet.gov.auiminwn/vanstone /v1571411.htm 

  lJcaf2 

  FUNDING TO HELP YOUNG HOMELESS IN ADELAIDE 

  V157/96 14 November 1996 

  Senator Amanda Vanstone, Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs today  announced $71,500 to Mission SA for Job Placement, Employment and Training -JPET - a  programme for young people who are homeless or at risk of homelessness. 

  The funding is part of $22 million to be provided nationally over the next two years. 

  "Mission SA is one of eight services funded as the first step in the nation-wide re-establishment of  JPET," Senator Vanstone said. "The Federal Government has placed a high priority on youth issues,  and we are committed to providing assistance to young people who face barriers so they can achieve  their full potential. 

  "In the lead up to the election the Coalition promised to re-establish the successful JPET programme  and provide $11 million a year in funding for the next two years. We are delivering on this promise  today. 

  "JPET will provide an individually targeted and flexible approach to assisting homeless young people.  Services are designed to help young people who are homeless or at risk of becoming homeless, with  priority being given to those aged 15-19. 

  "Other at risk groups, such as refugees, ex offenders, wards of the State or those exiting wardship  may also get help from JPET. They do not need to be homeless." 

  "A wide range of advice, support and referral services is offered to jobseekers to assist with  accommodation, finances, staying at school, training and employment, self esteem, family mediation,  drug and alcohol rehabilitation and other issues affecting young people. 

  Mission SA will run JPET services from three locations in metropolitan Adelaide; five days per week  in an employment training centre in Smithfield, three days per week at a youth sobering unit in  Hindmarsh and five days per week from a youth and community centre in Noarlunga. 

  Each centre will aim to provide meaningful assistance for clients and give access to opportunities  currently out of reach. JPET staff will provide mentoring to clients to help them find stable  accommodation, improve living skills, remove employment, education and training barriers and  increase their quality of life. 

  "I am pleased disadvantaged young people from Adelaide will be provided with a flexible,  individualised service to help them get back on track," Senator Vanstone said. 

  Further information: Christian Kerr, Minister's Office, 08 8237 7946 

  Virginia Wallace, Minister's Office, 0419 217 918 

  11125/9609:32:37 

