---
title: "Inaugural Yitzhak Rabin Memorial Oration 37th Biennial Conference of the Zionist Federation of Australia, 1 June 1996: speech"
date: "1996-06-01"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211450346
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/A3X20%22
---

  PRIME MINISTER 

  UNDER EMBARGO UNTIL 9.45PJ\1 

  SATURDAY 1 JUNE 1996 

  INAUGURAL YITZHAK RABIN MEMORIAL ORATION 

  37TH BIENNIAL CONFERENCE OF THE ZIONIST FEDERATION OF 

  AUSTRALIA, 1 JUNE 1996 

  Mrs Ann Zablud, President of the Zionist Federation of Australia 

  Mark Liebler, President of the United Israel Appeal Refugee Relief Fund 

  His Excellency Mr Shmuel Moyal, Ambassador of Israel 

  Government colleagues and members of the Opposition 

  Rabonim 

  Distinguished guests 

  Mr Malcolm Cohen (Master of Ceremonies) 

  It's a great pleasure to be here with you this evening, to enjoy your company 

  and warm hospitality at this 37th Biennial Conference of the Zionist Federation 

  of Australia. 

  I feel especially honoured to be asked to deliver the inaugural Yitzhak Rabin 

  Memorial Oration for the United Israel Appeal Refugee Relief Fund. 

  l\ily last address to your Conference was eight years ago, on that occasion as 

  Leader of the Opposition. 

  It's been a big eight years for both of us. 

  I'm very pleased to be here tonight, both as prime minister and as a 

  longstanding friend of Israel. 

  I'm pleased to have again the opp011unity to say how much I value the role and 

  friendship of Australia's Jewish community and the strong links between 

  Australia and Israel. 

  I count as one of the valued things of my life a deep affection and respect for 

  the Jewish people stretching back long before my enhy into public life. Can I 

  say, not to coin a phrase, that I feel relaxed and comfortable among you. 

  The world has changed enormously in those eight years, including in the 

  Middle East. Eight years ago we might all have dreamed of an end to the long 

  and bitter conflict, of finding peace for Israel and its neighbours in the region. 

  But there was little reason then to foresee the progress which has since been 

  made. 

  That dream is now within reach, although its final shape is yet to be resolved. 

  None of us underestimates the difficult challenges that lie ahead still. 

  Many forces were at work in driving the peace process: the end of the 

  Cold War and demise of the Soviet Union, the Gulf War and, not least, the 

  sustained commitment and vigorous role of the United States in the Middle 

  East. 

  2 

  But there is no doubt that a decisive force in turning the region from fear and 

  despair, in bringing hope for peace, was the leader we honour tonight 

  Yitzhak Rabin. 

  Yitzhak Rabin 

  On the night of his death, speaking at the peace rally in Tel Aviv, 

  Yitzhak Rabin told the crowd of more than one hundred thousand people that 

  he had always believed that the majority of the people wanted peace, and that 

  they were ready to take risks for peace. 

  As the Zionist Federation's report says of him, Rabin was a selfless and heroic 

  leader who was himself prepared to take great risks for peace. 

  He was not prepared, of course, to take risks which would jeopardise the 

  security of Israel. 

  Rabin's support for the peace process was hard-headed and hard-nosed. He 

  made the strategic judgment that only a negotiated peace would secure Israel's 

  future. As the well-known Israeli author and commentator, Amos Oz, said 

  after the assassination, Rabin was an unsentimental dove. 

  Rabin understood the uncertainties, fears and hopes of many Israelis in 

  embarking on the path of making peace with their erstwhile enemies - those 

  same who had threatened Israel's survival from the moment of its birth in 1948. 

  His commitment to Israel's survival as a nation, as a safe haven and refuge for 

  the Jewish people, was the cornerstone of his life. 

  But he also realised the opportunity presented by the end of the Cold War. 

  3 

  He appreciated the significance of the changes taking place in Israel - in 

  particular as a consequence of immigration and the growth in the Arab 

  population - and in neighbouring Arab societies. 

  Like Israel's founding father, David Ben-Gurion, Rabin recognised the need for 

  Israelis and Arabs to build mutual respect, as the necessary foundation for 

  living side by side with each other as neighbours. As he said, speaking to 

  Palestinians, in his inaugural speech to the Knesset in July 1992 "we have been 

  fated to live together on the same patch of land ... We lead our lives with you 

  " 

  Rabin's commitment to a negotiated settlement was bolstered by his 

  convictions about the nature of the Israeli state and society. 

  Like Ben-Gurion, Rabin believed in the essential Jewishness of Israel and in 

  the importance of its democracy. For Rabin, ruling by force over the 

  Palestinians was fundamentally incompatible with the democratic character of 

  Israel - it would, he said, cause many of Israel's friends to view Israel as no 

  different from its enemies. 

  Rabin and Progress Towards Peace 

  Yitzhak Rabin became prime minister in 1992. 

  As prime minister, he brought to the pursuit of peace as a politician the same 

  personal courage and strategic vision he had shown as a soldier - during Israel's 

  war of independence and as the commander of Israel's forces during the 1967 

  war. 

  4 

  He was at the hea11 of Israel's drive to ensure Israel's future security through 

  peace, just as he had been at the critical moments in def ending Israel's security 

  militarily. 

  On becoming prime minister, he picked up and pushed ahead the peace process 

  which began with the 1991 Madrid Conference 

  Under his leadership, Israel negotiated with the Palestinians the Oslo 

  Declaration of Principles which was signed on 13 September 1993. We all 

  remember that slight hesitation as he shook hands with Y asser Arafat - no 

  doubt a small visible sign of the competing emotions tugging within his heart 

  and the competing judgments tugging within his mind. 

  He signed with King Hussein the peace treaty with Jordan in October 1994. 

  Then, just over a month before his death, there was the signature on 

  28 September 1995 of the Interim Agreement governing the transitional period 

  of Israeli/Palestinian relations and setting the framework for the permanent 

  status negotiations. 

  The tremendous progress which has been achieved was not due to Rabin alone. 

  He had partners for peace, in King Hussein and Y assar Arafat. The 

  constructive and creative support of the United States was also necessa1y. 

  But it was Rabin's vision, courage and - above all - the trust the Israeli people 

  had in him that kept the process moving. 

  5 

  Australia and the l\:liddle East peace process 

  The Government hopes - I hope - that this momentum will not be lost. 

  Newly elected prime minister, Mr Benjamin Netanyahu inherits a valuable 

  legacy towards a comprehensive settlement. He also inherits a heavy 

  responsibility to see that legacy fulfilled and help create a future in which all 

  peoples of the Middle East can live in peace with security. 

  He brings a new era to the Israeli prime ministership. He is the first prime 

  minister of Israel to have had no personal involvement in the tumultuous events 

  surrounding the foundation of the Jewish state. 

  Alexander Downer will talk to you more tomorrow about the Government's 

  policies on the Middle East. Tonight I want just to mention the basic principles 

  which underpin those policies. 

  Eight years ago I promised you that a government led by me would be a true 

  and understanding friend of Israel. My commitment to that promise has never 

  wavered and I am pleased to repeat it tonight. 

  The security of Israel within recognised and respected borders is at the core of 

  our policy. 

  Australia and Israel will, of course, sometimes have differences, but they will 

  be resolved in the context of Australia's staunch support and friendship for 

  Israel and the Israeli people. 

  6 

  A just outcome for the Palestinian people. in which their legitimate and 

  political rights are respected, is clearly also necessary for the achievement of an 

  enduring peace. 

  As Rabin said not long before his death, the nature and final shape of the 

  Palestinian entity will be defined in the pe1manent status negotiations. The 

  settlement is for the Israelis and Palestinians to decide. It's encouraging that 

  the first round of those negotiations was held on schedule in Egypt last month. 

  The PLO's recent decision to remove from its Charier the offensive provisions 

  rejecting Israel's right to exist was also a most welcome step. 

  I would like to see a sovereign Lebanon, free of all foreign forces, with the 

  Lebanese people being able to live in peace and continue to rebuild their 

  country after the long years of civil war and strife. 

  A comprehensive settlement will require Syria to join in further negotiations 

  with Israel. 

  The Government condemns the terrorism that seeks to wreck the peace process: 

  the attacks on Israeli citizens by the Hamas suicide bombers and by Hezbollah. 

  There can be no compromise with teITorists, in the Middle East or elsewhere. 

  Much of the teITorism that plagues the world has its roots, and its sponsors, in 

  the Middle East. Iran's supp011 for teITorism is unacceptable. 

  In the end, only the achievement of a comprehensive settlement will ensure the 

  defeat of teITorism in the Middle East. It will also help defeat the activities of 

  teITorists throughout the world. 

  7 

  Australia· s support for the peace process is backed by practical contributions of 

  resources and expertise. \Ve have made longstanding conunitments of 

  Australian defence persmmel to United Nations peacekeeping forces and the 

  Multinational Force and Observers group in the Sinai. 

  Australia is active in the working groups on aims control and regional security 

  and on water resources. Australian expertise and technology can be useful in 

  helping manage the scarce water resources of Israel, Jordan and the 

  Palestinians. 

  We have contributed since 1993 to rehabilitation and development projects for 

  Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank 

  The impact of Rabin's assassination 

  Having spoken about Yitzhak Rabin's role and his legacy for the peace process, 

  I would like to reflect for a moment on the impact of his assassination. 

  In his final speech, Rabin told the crowds: "Violence erodes the basis of Israeli 

  democracy. It must be condemned and isolated ... In a democracy, there can be 

  differences but the final decision will be taken in democratic elections." 

  That Rabin was killed by a Jew was a transfiguring event for Israel. It 

  prompted much questioning and discussion about the nature of Jewish society 

  and, more widely, about the conduct of political debate and the role of free 

  speech in a democracy. 

  In a similar way, the massacre at Port Arthur six weeks ago invited Australians 

  to take a close look at our values and to reflect on the sort of society we want to 

  live in. 

  8 

  In the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin, we saw the consequences of the hate­

  filled language of fanaticism, language which creates a climate of violence and 

  intolerance and hopelessness. 

  Australians, like Israelis, are not backward in expressing opinions about any 

  subject, often in pithy and colomful language. The idea of plain speaking and 

  give and take is an accepted pati of political debate. 

  But politicians have a responsibility to protect standards and institutions. In 

  recent years, I have emphasised the importance of restoring respect for 

  Parliament and its procedures. 

  During the election campaign and since, I have emphasised the importance of 

  restoring the faith of the electorate in their political representatives. In my own 

  case, I regard it as a matter of personal honour my commitment to deliver on 

  promises made during the campaign. 

  For democracy to work it is vital that there be mutual trust between government 

  and people. 

  Following the tragedy at Po1i Arthur, the clear national will was that the 

  Government act to control guns more tightly. Responding to that demand has 

  been an important acquittal of political responsibility. 

  The tragedy also raised questions about the influence of violence in films and 

  other media on how we think and act - and especially on the attitudes of our 

  children. The role of gove1runent in responding to such community concerns 

  requires careful consideration. 

  9 

  As you would all know, I am against the unnecessary intrusion of government 

  into people's lives, especially where such intrusion impinges on people's 

  personal freedoms and choices. 

  It is a matter for fine judgment and honest debate as to where the line should be 

  drawn between rights and controls. We have seen that words and images have 

  awful and sometimes unintended consequences. On the other hand, for 

  democracies like Israel and Australia, the protection of free speech is of 

  fundamental importance. 

  I know that this community has a particular interest in these issues, and that the 

  Coalition's position on the Racial Hatred Act was a matter of concern to the 

  Federation. 

  You should be in no doubt about our abhorrence and rejection of all fo1ms of 

  racism. The Federation is aware of my supp01i for the Australian Parliament's 

  unanimous rejection in 1986 of the UN resolution which equated Zionism with 

  racism. We shared your pleasure when that resolution, with Australia's 

  support, was overturned in the United Nations in 1991. 

  But tolerance of the views of others, at least their right to express them, is 

  essential if our society is to retain its democratic foundations. As I have said 

  before, drawing on Voltaire, I may not agree with what another person says but 

  I defend his right to say it. 

  For the Coalition parties including criminal sanctions in the Racial Hatred Act 

  would have been to go past where we judged the line should be. The Act has 

  only recently come into force. The Government will retain it and monitor its 

  operations. We shall be happy to maintain a dialogue with the Federation and 

  with other interested community organisations in that process. 

  10 

  Racism will be eliminated only \Vhen the ignorance and lack of understanding 

  which are its breeding grounds are overcome. The Government's $10 million 

  two-year education and infonnation programme will, I hope, help reduce racist 

  attitudes in the community and foster tolerance and fairness. 

  Australia and Israel 

  My first letter to a foreign leader after I was sworn in as prime minister was to 

  Mr Peres expressing my concern about the Hamas bombings. I have today sent 

  a message to Mr Netanyahu congratulating him and reaffoming Australia's 

  commitment to the relationship with Israel. 

  Those links between our countries and our peoples go back a long way, to the 

  participation of Australian soldiers in the liberation of Jerusalem in the First 

  World War, and Australia's early recognition of the new state of Israel in 1948. 

  More can be done, however, to deepen the links, especially in the commercial 

  field. Trade between Australia and Israel has been growing, but has not yet 

  reached its full potential. 

  I know that many of the guests here tonight are actively pursuing the 

  opportunities presented by Israel as an export market. There is scope for more 

  joint ventures, especially in areas such as information technology, 

  telecommunications and agriculture, where Australian and Israeli companies 

  have much to offer each other in research and technology capabilities. 

  I was pleased to hear of the successful pa1iicipation last month by a large 

  Australian delegation in Agritech '96, Israel's international agricultural 

  11 

  exhibition. I heard that delegation found good prospects for cooperation in 

  agricultural technology. 

  The private sector is obviously best placed to identify and pursue the 

  oppo1tunities. My govenunent will do what it can to assist the competitiveness 

  of Australian exp01iers by reforms in the labour market, telecommunications, 

  energy and the waterfront. 

  Immigration and the United Israel Appeal Refugee Relief Fund 

  Australia and Israel share the challenges and opportunities of welcoming 

  migrants to our shores. 

  When I last spoke to you, Soviet controls on emigration still prevented many 

  from exercising their right to leave. Since then nearly 700,000 Jews from the 

  former Soviet Union have rebuilt their lives in Israel. 

  As Rabin said in his Rosh Hashana message last year, this is a matter for pride 

  but also no easy undertaking. 

  In this context, I would like to pay tribute to the United Israel Appeal Refugee 

  Relief Fund for its work in helping young refugees from Ethiopia, the former 

  Soviet Union, and former Yugoslavia settle in Israel. 

  We admire the Fund's creativity and the success of its well-designed projects -in particular, its work with Ethiopian. student refugees, many of whom are 

  orphans and come from ve1y deprived conditions. These students have begun 

  new lives through the training and other supp01t given them at special boarding 

  schools. 

  12 

  I would like to compliment .l\1ark Liebler for the energy and commitment he 

  has shown as president of the Fund. No-one who is aware of his ten years as 

  former president of the Zionist Federation would be surprised by his 

  achievements at the Fund. 

  Jewish community and Zionist Federation of Australia 

  The Jewish community in Australia is the most imp01tant link we have with 

  Israel. 

  The Jewish community has made an outstanding contribution to Australia's 

  national, cultural, business and intellectual life. 

  The Zionist Federation of Australia has a respected role in communicating to 

  the government and the wider Australian public the Jewish community's views 

  on Israel and the Middle East, and on social and other issues in Australia. It 

  does great work, as your report shows, in fostering the Jewish religion and 

  culture, and in supporting the Jewish community, including through its 

  education and youth programmes. 

  I would like to thank the outgoing President of the Federation, 

  Mrs Ann Zablud, for her invitation this evening. She has made a distinguished 

  contribution to the Jewish community. I offer my best wishes to her successor, 

  Dr Ron Weiser. 

  Conclusion 

  I think it's appropriate for me to conclude by returning to what must be the 

  principal theme of this evening in honour of Yitzhak Rabin - peace in the 

  Middle East. 

  13 

  The violence of his death adds poignancy to his comments on signing the peace 

  accord on 13 September 1993: ''We should not let the land flowing with milk 

  and honey become a land flowing with blood and tears". 

  It is, as Rabin said, "impossible to erase 100 years of hostility and bloodshed 

  with the stroke of a pen and single handshake. It is an ongoing and often 

  painful process." 

  How painful Israelis and Palestinians in the Middle East know better than we 

  here tonight. 

  But we can dedicate ourselves to supp01iing those who continue Rabin's search 

  for a comprehensive settlement. 

  I assure you my government will be a constant friend to Israel as it continues 

  that search. 

  14 

