---
title: "Senate Committee minority report slams migrants' two year waiting period legislation"
date: "1996-09-11"
creators:
  - "Kerr, Duncan"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214170919
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02011616%22
---

 Duncan Kerr m h r Federal Member for Denison

 Shadow Minister for Immigration

 and Assistant to the Leader of the Opposition

 on M ulticultural Affairs

 188 Collins St, Hobart 7000

 Ph (002) 345 255 Fax (002) 238 560

 GPO Box 32A Hobart Tas. 7001

 Media Release 11 September 1996

 Senate Committee Minority Report Slams Migrants* Two Year Waiting

 The Minority Report of the Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee (attached) says  the Howard Government "has undertaken a sustained attack on migrants to Australia and  their families. These attacks make a lie of the Coalition's commitment to govern 'For All Of

 The Report denies claims that the legislation has the support of the Australian community and  the broader ethnic community.

 It highlights the inequity and the discriminatory effects this Bill would have on new arrivals.

 The Report cites many submissions made to the Committee which support the view that the  provisions in the Bill would create incalculable suffering and hardship to thousands of  families and their children.

 The key recommendations in the Report include that the Bill be amended:

 . not to over-ride the Racial Discrimination Act . to ensure new migrants have the same eligibility to Special Benefit as other members  of the community . to prevent the application the waiting period to labour market programs . to ensure that Australian citizens and their families are not denied access to any

 benefits

 . to not extend waiting to benefits such as Carer pension, disability allowance, double  orphan's pension and access to Heath Care Cards

 Period Legislation

 Us'."

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  

 Telephone (06)277 2178

 -2-

 . to implement only the Government's pre-election commitment (ie restrict the extended two year waiting period to unemployment benefits for those in skill-based  visa categories).

 The Committee also recommends that the Migration Act not be amended and that it retain the  provision which enables permanent residents to sponsor their spouses or fiances.

 I hope that the Democrat, Greens and independent senators will support the recommendations  of the Minority Report.

 For Further Contact: Duncan Kerr 0418 125 1261

 SENATE LEGAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL  LEGISLATION COMMITTEE

 SOCIAL SECURITY LEGISLATION (NEWLY ARRIVED RESIDENTS WAITING  PERIODS AND OTHER MEASURES) BULL 1996

 MINORITY REPORT

 Senator the Hon. Nick Bolkus (ALP)  Senator Jim McKiernan (ALP)

 A. INTRODUCTION - THE CONTEXT

 Contrary to its election commitments, the Coalition has undertaken a sustained attack on  migrants to Australia and their families. These attacks make a lie of the Coalition's  commitment to govern 'For All Of Us'.

 In the area of research and policy advice, the Office of Multicultural Affairs, formerly part of  the Department of Prime Minister & Cabinet, has effectively been abolished. The Bureau of  Immigration and Population Research has also been abolished. These bodies have been  invaluable in providing Government and the community with high quality research and  policy advice on areas affecting new migrants.

 Services too have been cut. Resources under the SIP for English language program have  been halved for 1996/97 and abolished the following year. Cutbacks in Labour Market  Programmes have occurred and charges for the Adult Migrant English Programmes are  proposed to increase by over 200 percent.

 The number of migrants in various categories have been cut and fees have been increased. For example, the preferential family category has been capped and fees increased. Sponsorship arrangements have also been tightened such that now only an Australian citizen 

 can sponsor a relative.

 All of these decision adversely affect the ability of new migrants to successfully integrate into  Australian society.

 These cuts disregard not only the immediate needs of new migrants, they also ignore the fact  that migrants contribute to our society in a myriad of ways including through the payment of  direct and indirect taxes.

 The fact that the Government has indicated that, if this legislation is passed, an additional $20  million will be provided to allow community groups to provide expanded services, is nothing  more than a cheap bribe. The paltry stun constituting this conditional promise will in no way  be adequate to provide new migrants with the services they need.

 Page 1

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 The claim in the majority report that this Bill is supported by the Australian community, and  in particular 'the broader ethnic community', has not been substantiated and is vigorously  denied by the minority. The submissions to the Committee amply demonstrate this  conclusion. None of the submissions supported the policy underlying the Bill.

 Racial Discrimination

 We reject the contention that the Bill does not discriminate on the grounds of race or  contravene Australia's international obligations under the Convention on the Elimination o f  A ll Forms o f Racial Discrimination.

 We are deeply concerned about the discriminatory impact this legislation will have on  potential migrants and their spouses of non-English speaking backgrounds. This will  manifest itself in a number of ways. In particular, through a reduced capacity for people from 

 a non-English speaking background to afford to migrate as opposed to those from English  speaking backgrounds. This will result because of both the increased fees to be charged by  this Government and also through the loss of those settlement and support services new  migrants so desperately need.

 Failure to Understand the Plight of Migrants

 These measures ignore the practical constraints faced by many migrants. For example, by  assuming that new migrants have ready access to reasonable sums of money, it ignores the  fact that many new migrants, from countries such as Croatia, the Federal Republic of  Yugoslavia, Vietnam, Philippines, India, the People's Republic of China, South Africa and  Iraq face real difficulty in bringing currency with them (See Attachment A).

 The reforms also impose excessive burdens on the families of those fortunate to migrate to  this country under the humanitarian programs.

 As a result, families will be kept apart because of the lack of resources that will result from  this Bill. This will lead to the defacto implementation of the migration program suggested by  Dr Robert Birrell, Director of the Centre for Population and Urban Research at Monash 

 University, in evidence before the Committee, namely that sponsorship should be based on  the application of strict income and assets tests.

 "That is right. I am saying that the ideal situation is for us to bring here only migrants  who, we believe, will be in good hands within the families that bring them here. If we  do reduce the flows then we will not have the same financial necessity to introduce  these quite harsh rules in the first two years of their presence here."1

 As Dr Birrell admitted, this legislation will have a significantly detrimental impact on the  success of our migration program and Australian society.

 "Firstly, on the issue of the scale of recently arrived migrants' dependence on various  welfare benefits, the work that I conducted at my centre and that which has been

 Evidence, Dr Robert James Birrell, p. 113.

 Page 2

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 provisions in respect of employment, injury, occupational diseases, maternity, sickness,  disability, old age, death, unemployment, family responsibilities and any other  contingency which, according to national laws or regulations, is covered by a social  security scheme), subject to" certain limitations.

 Article 3 of the Convention on the Rights o f the Child states that:

 "In all actions concerning children, whether by public or private social welfare  institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best  interests of the child shall be a primary consideration."

 The non-compliance with article 22 of the International Bill o f Human Rights, article 9 of the  Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and article 24 of the Convention Relating  to the Status o f Refugees are evident on the face of those provisions.

 The position is less apparent in the case of the Convention on the Rights o f the Child.  However, in evidence Mr Stephen Langman, a solicitor with the National Welfare Rights  Network, explained that:

 "In our view, these provisions are certainly going to create suffering among children. If  a family has nothing to live on but the basic rate of family payment, which we think is  going to happen, there is no doubt that children will suffer as a result. Even if the  family is given the special benefit, the new provisions do not apply the same test for  giving additional family payments to those families. So those families will be living on  the special benefit, which is limited under the Act to the amount of the Jobsearch  Allowance and $22.70 per child, by itself."3

 Accordingly, we accept that the application of the proposed legislation, will not operate in the  *best interests of the child' and therefore is contrary to Australia's obligations as a signatory to  the Convention on the Rights o f the Child.

 B. THE LEGISLATION

 We believe that the operation of the proposed legislation is objectionable on a number of  grounds.

 RECOMMENDATION 1:

 The Bill should be amended so as to restrict the Bill to the implementation of the  Government's election commitment, to the extent that is possible.

 Retrospectivity

 First, the legislation has retrospective effect applying, as it does, to all new migrants who had  obtained approval prior to 1 April 1996 and who did enter Australia prior to that date.

 Evidence, Mr Stephen Mark Langman, p. 36.

 Page 4

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 prepared by the Bureau of Immigration, Multicultural and Population Research  indicates that about one-third of adults entering Australia in their first year are  dependent on some form of social security benefit - whether it be a labour market 

 payment or a pension of some sort - and at least 25 per cent in the second year they are  here. We have explored in more detail rates of dependence on the part of persons  entering the labour market in Australia and found a similar pattern. Overall about one-  third of those who indicate when they enter Australia that they are going to join the 

 labour market in their first or second year in Australia are receiving labour market  payments - mainly unemployment benefits - and in the second year about 50 percent.

 The research also shows that there are very great differences between country of origin  groups. The general pattern is that for non-English speaking background migrants, in  the first and second year the rate of dependence is of the order of 50 percent but it is  very much lower for persons coming from English speaking background countries and  from one or two Asian countries, including Hong Kong."

 "As far as the number of migrants likely to be affected by the new proposals for the  two-year waiting period goes, my estimates are that it would be around 8,000 to 10,000.  This takes account of the various exemptions to the rules, and the most important 

 exemptions, of course, are the humanitarian category and New Zealanders. Taking that  into account, we are looking at 8,000 to 10,000 people who will be affected by the  legislation, if passed."2

 Australia's International Obligations

 Finally, it is noted that the Bill fails to implement our international obligations. In particular,  it fails to have regard to the obligations we accepted in adopting the principles contained in  the International Bill o f Human Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and  Cultural Rights, the Convention Relating to the Status o f Refugees and the Covenant on the  Rights o f the Child.

 Article 22 of the International Bill o f Human Rights states that:

 "Everyone as a member of society has the right to social security."

 Article 9 of the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights states:

 "The states and parties to the present covenant recognise the right of everyone to social  security.”

 Article 24 of the Convention Relating to the Status o f Refugees, in part, states:

 "The Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in their territory the  same treatment as is accorded to nationals in respect o f . .. social security (legal

 Evidence, Dr Robert James Birrell, p. 108.

 Page 3

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 Refusal o f Benefits in Anticipation of the Legislation

 Secondly, despite the fact that the Bill is yet to be passed, the Department of Social Security,  acting on the instruction of the Minister, has already refused benefits to refugees. As was  stated in the letter dated 17 June 1996 from the Brisbane Migrant Resources Centre:

 "We have had some recent cases of refugees sponsoring spouses who have not been  eligible for income support upon arrival."

 Discriminatory Effect

 Thirdly, the legislation is clearly discriminatory in its effect. As the Race Discrimination  Commissioner, Ms Zita Antonios, stated in evidence before the Committee:

 "...as the Race Discrimination Commissioner I say that the perception could easily be  that the proposed bill is inconsistent with the standards and the spirit that is embodied  in the Racial Discrimination Act. I do not say it is intentional; I think it is an  unintentional consequence of Australia's agreements with countries like New Zealand  and, in a limited circumstance, the United Kingdom. That is the key point I wish to  stress today with all the earlier qualifications I made."4

 Whilst we note that the Attorney-General's Department disagrees with this view, we also note  the Department's acceptance that this conclusion is not free from doubt.

 "We take the view that you have to interpret the Racial Discrimination Act in light of  the provisions set down in the Racial Discrimination Convention. We are not of the  view that there are any provisions of that convention that are not complied with. The  conventions, I might add, allow for more favourable treatment but I think what I was  talking about was a minimal treatment to give legality to a particular provision."

 "If the effect of the legislation were to differentiate or discriminate between different  groups of people coming from the same country, I think you would have an argument  that it was discrimination but I do not think that that was the intention of the 

 legislation."5

 Later, the Department's representative also stated:

 "I suppose it is a question of how one looks at anti-discrimination law. If you examine a  lot of the conventions, really they do not protect everybody from the effects of  discrimination. In other words, discrimination of certain types, I suppose, is acceptable.  It is only those types of discrimination that are specifically mentioned in each of the  conventions and those groups or the grounds upon which you cannot discriminate, such

 Evidence, Ms Zita Antonios, p.105. 5 Evidence, Dr Rosalie Balkin, Acting Senior Government Counsel, Office of International Law,  Attorney-General's Department, p. 118. Page 6

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 as race, sex, et cetera, that are prohibited, which would open up the argument that it is  perfectly valid in legal terms to discriminate on other grounds. You need not. If you  want to be more generous there is nothing preventing the legislation of a country being  more generous and applying its laws in that way, but it is a question of bottom line  legality."6

 It is common ground between all members of the Committee that there is no intention for the  legislation to breach the principles underlying the Racial Discrimination Act 1975.  Amendment of the Bill will ensure that this agreed view finds expression in the legislation's  final form.

 RECOMMENDATION 2:

 The Bill should be amended so that it does not over-ride the Racial Discrimination Act. This  will ensure that the legislation does not have a racially discriminatory effect.

 Access to the "Special Benefit"

 The Bill also has the effect of making it harder for new migrants to obtain the "special  benefit".

 We believe that there is no reason why new migrants should be discriminated against in this  regard and the same test should apply to new migrants as applies to the rest of the  community. In this regard the Social Security Act 1947 must be amended to reflect the  principles adopted by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and the Federal Court of Australia 

 in determining eligibility for "special benefit".

 RECOMMENDATION 3:

 The Bill should be amended to ensure that new migrants are subject to the same test for  eligibility for the "special benefit" as other members of the community.

 RECOMMENDATION 4:

 The Bill should be amended to reflect the principles adopted by the Administrative Appeals  Tribunal and the Federal Court of Australia in determining eligibility for the "special benefit".

 Going Beyond the Election Commitment

 We are also deeply concerned that the Bill goes further than the Government's election  commitment by impose the extended waiting period to almost all types of benefits. As a  result the minority believe the Bill will cause considerable hardship to new migrants. The  Government cannot claim that it has any mandate to legislate in this manner.

 Evidence, Dr Rosalie Balkin, p. 120.

 Page 7

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 In its original claim during the election campaign, the Coalition announced in the document  Meeting our Commitments that it would save $616 million as a consequence of extending the  existing six month waiting period to two years.

 This was challenged by Labor, as it did not compute given the Government was saving only  $30 million per year from the application of the six month waiting period at that time.

 The Hon. Kim Beazley MP, then Deputy Prime Minister, said in a media release that Access  Economics' costing of the migrant waiting period confirmed suspicions that the Coalition's  election promise was based on the Finance Department's previous costing of Fightback. A   quick appraisal of the measures now proposed by the Government against a review of the 

 1993 position confirms this.

 The Explanatory Memorandum accompanying the Bill indicates that the financial impact in  Social Security as:

 1995-96 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99

 $0.0m -$31.4 -$143.5 -$ 185.6m

 The Budget Statement shows the savings in Social Security as:

 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-00

 -$28.0m -$ 139.6m -$ 187.4m -$193.2m

 The Budget Statement also claims savings in other portfolios over four years that were not  announced prior to the election:

 Health -$45.7m

 Education -$43.9m

 Labour & Employment -$1.9m

 RECOMMENDATION 5:

 Consistent with our position on the Bill, we oppose all the additional cuts proposed in the  Budget.

 Labour Market Programs

 First, the Bill extends the application of the waiting period to labour market programs. As a  result some new migrants may have to wait two to three years to access these important  programs. This will deny new migrants the ability to upgrade their skills to meet the needs of  the Australian market and deprive Australian businesses of otherwise useful employees.

 Indeed, the Table at Attachment B shows that the primary savings proposed by the Bill occur  as a result of the application of the waiting period to the Jobstart, Newstart and Mature Age  Allowances.

 Page 8

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 RECOMMENDATION 6:

 The Bill should be amended to prevent the application of the waiting period to labour market  programs.

 Indirect Application to the Humanitarian and Refugee Programs

 We believe that the families of all humanitarian entrants, whether onshore and offshore,  should be exempt regardless of the date of their arrival.

 In doing so, we accept the concerns raised by the Fairfield Migrant Interagency et al. that the  Bill may affect people in refugee-like situations will be subject to the waiting period. In their  submission, the Fairfield Migrant Interagency et al. stated that:

 "Refugees and Humanitarian Entrant quotas are filled and waiting lists at the Belgrade  Post now number into the tens of thousands. Staff in the Australian Embassy in  Belgrade are advising that applicants for refugees status also apply for migration to  Australia under other programs such as Family Migration. This evidence is supported  by a number of community organisations who were present at meetings with a staff  member from the Embassy in February this year including Bosnian Welfare  Association, Macedonian Welfare Association, Serbian Welfare Association.

 Similarly at the Ankara Post, the SHP allocation is also filled and workers from the  Kurdish community are being advised by the overseas post that applicants may be  eligible for Family Migration programs and that this is an option available to them.

 It is unclear as to whether all parties understand the immense differences in financial  burden incurred by a family member arriving under the Family Mediation program  compared to the Humanitarian Entrant program.

 Although the proposal purports to exclude refugees and their spouses and dependent  child it is unclear as to whether the spouse and/or child has to wait (in some cases  years) in order to access the Humanitarian program. Long waiting periods and  unavailability of places is what prompts migrants and refugees in Australia to try  alternative migration options such as the Family Migration Program. In doing so they  will be subject to financial burden which as refugees will be difficult to bear."

 Similar examples were also provided by the Brisbane Migrant Resources Centre in its  submission:7

 "An Iraqi male who had previously arrived in Australia on a refugee visa himself,  sponsored his wife who arrived in Australia after 1/04/96. When the wife applied for  Jobsearch Allowance she was told that she was not eligible as she had entered Australia 

 after the 1st of April."

 Submission No. 15, Brisbane Migrant Resources Centre.

 Page 9

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 "A recent case revealed a woman who had arrived in Australia as a refugee herself who  had sponsored a spouse under the prospective spouse visa and he arrived after 1/04/96.  He is not eligible for DSS assistance and this is causing enormous strain, financially,  economically and emotionally on this family. We are particularly highlighting this case  as we have many women from the Horn of Africa in similar positions who are  sponsoring spouses who are not exempt under the new legislation as they are not able to  prove their relationship existed at the time these women entered Australia."

 We note the view of the majority welcoming the provisions of the Bill that confer a discretion  on the Secretary of the Department of Social Security to treat "another person as a family  member" for the purpose of the refugee and humanitarian and migration program. However,  rather than leaving this matter to loose guidelines, the minority believes that there should be 

 some legislative direction to the Secretary.

 RECOMMENDATION 7:

 The Bill should be amended to provide legislative direction to the Secretary of the  Department of Social Security to guide her or his exercise of the discretion to treat "another  person as a family member" for the purpose of the refugee and humanitarian and migration  program. This direction should not limit the general discretion vested in the Secretary.

 In addition, we believe that the waiting period should not apply to persons who arrive in  Australia under the refugee and humanitarian programs, persons who are family members of  a refugee or humanitarian migrant, or a former refugee or humanitarian migrant, at the time  the refugee or humanitarian migrant arrived in Australia.

 However, to ensure that this matter is free from doubt, we believe that a specific provision  should be included in the Bill protecting those persons.

 RECOMMENDATION 8:

 The Bill should be amended to ensure that the waiting period will not apply to persons who  arrive in Australia under the refugee and humanitarian programs, persons who are family  members of a refugee or humanitarian migrant, or a former refugee or humanitarian migrant,  at the time the refugee or humanitarian migrant arrived in Australia.

 We note that the majority recommended that a review be considered as to whether a  humanitarian family reunion category should be introduced. The minority note that Senator  the Hon. Nick Bolkus, the former Minister for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs, previously  announced the formation of such a review.

 Innocent Illegals

 We believe that people who illegally enter Australia but who do so innocently should not be  subject to the legislation. The problems faced by such persons was raised in evidence by Ms

 Page 10

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 Anne Hampshire, the Director of Policy for the Federation of Ethnic Communities' Councils.  She stated:

 "The other issue that we would flag is the category of innocent illegals. There is a visa  category which is available to young adults who have spent half of their formative years  in Australia and who are no longer living with the family with whom they arrived. The  purpose of this visa is to regularise the status of a small group who became illegal  through no fault of their own. The imposition of awaiting period is particularly  untenable for this group."8

 Supplementary evidence provided by the Department of Immigration and Multicultural  Affairs stated that, since the introduction of the relevant visa subclass (833) in September  1994, 6 out of 27 permanent visa application were granted in 1994/5, with the number rising  to 30 out of 80 applications in 1995/96.

 RECOMMENDATION 9:

 The Bill should be amended to exclude innocent illegals from the operation of the extended  waiting period.

 Australian Citizens Resided Elsewhere

 In its current form the Bill denies full payment of the family allowance to Australian citizens  and their families who return to Australia after having permanently resided elsewhere.

 RECOMMENDATION 10:

 The Bill should be amended to clearly state that persons who are Australian Citizens and their  families should not be denied access to any benefits.

 The rights of permanent residents who have resided in Australia for two years and who  sponsor their spouse will be indirectly affected by the fact their spouse will now only be  entitled to a two year temporary visa. The rights of those who have resided in Australia for 

 two years and their families should be excluded from the operation of the legislation.

 Carer's Pension

 We believe that the carer's pension should be excluded from the operation of the waiting  period.

 In doing so, we accept the evidence of Ms Jane Goddard, Principal Solicitor, Immigration  Advice and Rights, where she stated:

 "The imposition of a 104 week waiting period for people granted permanent residence  on the basis of being a special need relative is clearly unjust as it penalises the

 Evidence, Ms Anne Hampshire, p. 8.

 Page 11

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 Australian citizen who is in need of care. Unless the overseas relative has independent  means, it will preclude poor people in need of care, sponsoring their relatives as they  will be unable to support them for the 104 weeks. This will in turn force them into  inappropriate institutionalised care."9

 Clearly such an impact cannot be tolerated nor could it have been the intent of the  implementation of the Government's policy.

 Further, we note that such cases are not isolated. Supplementary evidence provided by the  Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (see Table 1.1) shows the number of  people receiving permanent residence, either off-shore or on-shore in the period 1 July 1993 

 to 30 June 1996 under this "special needs" category.

 Year Off-shore On-shore Total

 1993/94 108 158 266

 1994/95 112 307 419

 1995/96 240 517 757

 TOTAL 460 982 1442

 RECOMMENDATION 11:

 The Bill should be amended to exempt the carer's pension form the application of the  extended waiting period.

 Double Orphans Pension

 We believe that the double orphans pension should be excluded from the operation of the  waiting period.

 The application of the extended period to the double orphans pension would impose severe  hardship on a child or young persons who requires the assistance of a relative to look after her  or him because either both of her or his parents are dead or they are unable to care for the  child or young person for a variety of reasons, including being a long term prisoner or a  psychiatric patient. The relatives of such a child or young person would find it very difficult 

 to migrate under these circumstances. As a result, the child or young person may be subject  to the clearly less preferable option of being looked after by the state.

 In doing so, we accept the evidence of Ms Merle Mitchell of the Australian Council of Social  Services10 and of the Immigration Advice and Rights Centre which supports this view.11

 RECOMMENDATION 12:

 Submission No. 8, Immigration Advice and Rights Centre, p. 5. Evidence, Australian Council of Social Service, p. 18. Submission No. 8, Immigration Advice and Rights Centre, p. 9.

 Page 12

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 The Bill should be amended to exempt the double orphan's pension form the application of  the extended waiting period.

 Health Care Cards

 We believe that access to Health Care Cards should be excluded from the operation of the  waiting period as non-exclusion would cause hardship.

 RECOMMENDATION 13:

 Access to Health Care Cards should be excluded from the operation of the waiting period.

 Disability Allowance for Children

 The disability allowance for children assists the carers of disabled children.

 We note that the Bill applies the extended waiting period only to those cases where the child's  disability is manifest prior to the child's arrival in Australia.

 In our view, the National Welfare Rights Network rightly stated that:

 "If Australian immigration policy allows a child with a disability to enter Australia as a  permanent resident, on whatever ground, Australia has an obligation to provide the  same support to that child as that provided to any other child."12

 RECOMMENDATION 14:

 The disability allowance for children should be excluded from the operation of the extended  waiting period.

 Delay in Recognising Overseas Skills

 We believe that eligibility for the "special benefit" should be extended to those cases where  the process of recognition of skills obtained overseas takes an extended period of time.

 Supplementary evidence provided by the Department of Immigration and Multicultural  Affairs stated that:

 "The time taken for the recognition of qualifications varies depending on the occupation  involved. Preliminary data from the Longitudinal Survey of Immigrants to Australia of  the Bureau of Immigration, Multicultural and Population Research (covering migrants  arriving in 1993/94) indicates that the mean number of weeks taken for qualification 

 assessment in the case of arrivals under the Preferential Family category (ie whose  qualifications are not required to be assessed for migration purposes and therefore  would seek an assessment on arrival) is 6.8 weeks.

 Submission No. 3A, National Welfare Rights Network, p. 13.

 Page 13

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 The Department of Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs has advised  that in regulated professions (such as health, architecture, law) recognition can take  from less then six months to well over a year. Recognition in these professions is not  assured.

 In self-regulating professions (such as engineering, accountancy) migrants can look for  work in their field immediately on arrival. If they wish to gain membership of a  professional body their qualifications can be assessed by the relevant body. This can 

 take as little as a few weeks.

 Professional occupations which are not regulated do not need to have their  qualifications assessed.

 Those trades or technical occupations which are licensed (such as electrical trades,  plumbing) require assessment. As a guide, the assessment of overseas trained electrical  tradesmen by Trades Recognition Australia usually takes less than 90 days."

 Accordingly, we believe that the "special benefit" should be extended to protect workers who  do not have their overseas obtained skills recognised.

 RECOMMENDATION 15:

 The guidelines should be amended to extend the application of the "special benefit" to those  new migrants who have not had their overseas obtained skills recognised within a reasonable  time.

 Interdependent Relationships

 Visa class 820 are granted to non citizens who are in heterosexual relationships with an  Australian citizen (ie. fiances and spouses). Visa class 826 is similar in nature and is  commonly used by person in a gay or lesbian relationship with an Australian citizen,  permanent resident or eligible New Zealand citizen. A person granted a temporary class 826  visa remains on that visa for a two year period at which time a permanent visa is granted.

 The Legal Aid Commission of New South Wales13 and Mr David Moss, Co-Convenor, Gay  and Lesbian Immigration Taskforce14 correctly pointed out that under the Bill, persons  holding a class 826 visa would be subject to effectively a four year waiting period before they  are able to receive social security benefits.

 This provision discriminates against persons on the basis of their sexuality. The minority  believes that same sex couples should not be discriminated against and should be subject to  the same eligibility criteria as other sex couples.

 RECOMMENDATION 16:

 Submission No. 5, Legal Aid Commission of New South Wales, p.20. Submission No. 14, Gay and Lesbian Taskforce, p.l. Page 14 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment

 (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 The Bill should be amended so that the waiting period applies in the same way to persons  who are the holders of class 826 visas as it applies to the holders of class 820 visas.

 Other Amendments

 We also believe that other amendments are necessary to the legislation.

 Permanent Visa Appeals

 We believe that an applicant's exercise of their right to appeal a wrongful decision should not  extend the commencement of the waiting period.

 RECOMMENDATION 17:

 The Bill should be amended so that the exercise of an applicant's right to appeal does not  extend or delay the application of the waiting period.

 C. RELATED MATTERS

 Non-Bona Fide Claims For Migration on Marriage Grounds

 We note that the oft cited claim that programs for migration on the ground of marriage  (spousal and fiancee) are rorted by applicants. Whilst we accept that some people do seek to  gain entry to Australia by misrepresenting their intent, we note that evidence provided to the  Committee confirms that the level of this abuse is very low.

 In this regard, we note that in 1995-96, the total number of persons granted either spousal or  fiancee visas was 20,791. However, its is noted that in the last two financial years only 108  briefs of evidence have been sent to the DPP involving contrived marriages and that since  September 1994, only 218 visas in the spouse visa sub-class have been cancelled. It is also  noted that some of these cases involved both prosecution and cancellation.

 Accordingly, we conclude that there is no evidence to support allegations that spousal and  fiancee visas are subject to widespread abuse.

 Sponsorship o f Spouses

 We note that an inconsistency will exist as a result of the Government's proposals relating to  the sponsorship of family members. Under visa class 820 a person will need to be an  Australian citizen to sponsor their spouse or fiancee to enter Australia. However, if a person  wishes to sponsor another family member under the preferential family category, it will be  possible for a person to sponsor such a relative even if they are a permanent resident.

 This distinction is unnecessary and demonstrates the fundamental flaw in the Government's  approach to this legislation.

 Page 15

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 RECOMMENDATION 18:

 The Migration Act 1958 should not be amended so as to retain the provision which enables  permanent residents to sponsor their spouses or fiances under visa class 820.

 Page 16

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident’s Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 Domestic Violence Provision

 Currently, the Department of Social Security's Domestic Violence Provision is the same as  that provided by the Department of Immigration & Multicultural Affairs. This situation must  be maintained in order to provide new migrants with adequate support in cases of domestic  violence.

 Sponsorship and Assurances o f Support

 We note the evidence referred to in the majority's report which support the withdrawal of  assurances of support in those cases where the application of the two year waiting period  would make the application of those assurances ineffective.

 Whilst we welcome the Government's review of the application of assurances of support in  those circumstances, we are deeply concerned that the Government is also considering the  "wider application of the existing assurances of support measures."15 We are also concerned  that the Government is reviewing sponsorship arrangements with a view to making sponsors  legally liable to provide financial support.16

 Misrepresentations by the Department

 Finally, we are concerned by evidence that the Department is, in some cases, misrepresenting  the operation of the Bill. In particular, we note the concerns expressed by the Brisbane  Migrant Resources Centre that:

 " . . . the 2 year waiting period is being presented as merely an extension of the current  26 week waiting period. This is a misrepresentation as previously every permanent  resident of Australia could be assured that they would qualify for income support from  DSS if genuinely without means of support through the special benefit."17

 Other examples of this campaign of misrepresentation were noted by the Fairfield Migrant  Interagency et al. They stated that:

 "We have evidence that many people who have reached interview stage of the process  at overseas posts such as Belgrade (and thereby are immediately likely to be granted  humanitarian entrant/refugee status) are being simplistically advised that they cannot  bring any relatives out to Australia before the two years has passed. They are not being  informed that:

 a. relatives can be nominated under the SHP; and/or

 b. there is considerable difficulty in being reunited with relatives in Australia under  non-humanitarian migration programs both in relation to meeting the initial

 Majority Report, para.5.88. Majority Report, para.5.89 Submission 15, Brisbane Migrant Resource Centre, p.183.

 Page 17

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 criteria (eg. points test) as well as having to support them once they are here (eg.  assurances of support, 2 year waiting period)."

 We call upon the Minister to take all reasonable steps to stop misrepresentations being spread  by his Department concerning the operation of the Bill.

 Submission 7, Fairfield Migrant Interagency et al., pp.l 14 & 115.

 Page 18

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

 ATTACHMENT B

 Two Year Waiting Period Savings Estimates, Social Security Portfolio

 Program 1996/97 1997/98 1998/99 1999/00 Total

 Jobsearch/Newstart/Mature Age -18.8 -85.9 - 111.0 - 111.0 -316.7

 Sickness Allowance -0.4 -1.6 -2.1 -2.1 -6.2

 Special Benefit 0.2 0.8 1.1 1.1 3.2

 Youth Training Allowance -0.1 -0.4 -0.6 -0.6 -1.7

 Widow Allowance -0.2 -0.8 -1.1 -1.1 -3.2

 Partner Allowance -0.6 -2.6 -3.4 -3.4 -10.0

 Parenting Allowance -5.2 -23.9 -30.8 -30.8 -90.7

 Rent Assistance for Families -1.0 -4.7 -6.1 -6.1 -17.9

 Guardian Allowance -0.3 -1.4 -1.8 -1.8 -5.3

 Health Care Card -2.3 -10.7 -13.9 -13.9 -40.8

 Seniors Health Care Card neg. -0.1 -0.2 -0.2 -0.5

 Disability Wage Supplement neg. neg. neg. neg. neg.

 Carers Pension -0.1 -0.3 -0.4 -0.4 -1.2

 Mobility Allowance neg. neg. neg. neg. neg.

 Child Disability Allowance neg. -0.1 -0.1 -0.1 -0.3

 Double Orphan Pension neg. neg. neg. neg. neg.

 Family Payment -2.4 -11.0 -14.2 -14.2 -41.8

 Maternity Allowance -0.2 -0.8 -0.1 -0.1 -1.2

 Total -31.4 -143.5 -185.6 -185.6 -546.1

 Page 19

 Minority Report - Social Security Legislation Amendment (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996

