---
title: "Major relief package for Ethiopia"
date: "1996-06-03"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211450374
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/P4X20%22
---



I am delighted to announce that AusAID, the Australian Government's aid
agency, will provide a massive package of relief to Ethiopia, including 7800
tonnes of wheat, 2000 oxen and $1.3 million for the UNHCR's repatriation
program for Ethiopian refugees.

 Ethiopia is the world's second
poorest country after Mozambique. Years of civil war have destroyed its
agricultural base and led to chronic food shortages. If the cycle of famine
is to be beaten, Ethiopia needs to rebuild its agricultural base,
environment, water supplies, health systems and infrastructure.

This Government is committed to putting the alleviation of poverty on top of
the agenda for the aid program and particularly committed to alleviating
hardship in Africa.

 The overall package amounts to $9 million.
It comes from recommendations made by an AusAID programming mission which
visited Ethiopia in late 1995. It is made up of:

 .
7800
tonnes of Australian wheat, worth $3.83 million, which will go to the
Emergency Food Security Reserve. The EFSR maintains food stores in five
locations around Ethiopia and is considered to be an outstanding success. It
functions as a food bank to be dipped into during food emergencies and lends
food for use in food-for-work schemes.

 .
$2.5 million cash
grant to Community Aid Abroad. This will be used to buy 2000 oxen and over
4700 tonnes of food within Ethiopia. The food will be used as payment for
workers on water and soil conservation projects, with the ultimate intention
of replacing the need for emergency food distribution.

 .
$1.3
million to UNHCR for its program to repatriate Ethiopian refugees from
Sudan.

 .
$550 000 to UNICEF for 42 Australian-made
solar-powered refrigerators to protect and transport medical supplies
including vaccines in three regions of the country.

 .
A cash
grant of $550 000 to an ongoing Community Aid Abroad water project. This
will be used to build 100 new hand dug wells and reconstruct ten existing
ones.

 .
$300 000 for training Ethiopian Government officials
in disaster preparedness and prevention.


Media Contact:

 Peter Collins, Minister's office, 06 277 7500; 0411 414 695

 Andrea McLaughlin, AusAID, 06 276 4966

