---
title: "Savings denied by Senate"
date: "1996-12-02"
creators:
  - "Newman, Jocelyn"
source: "MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211453184
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/S2730%22
---

  NEWS RELEASE 

  MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY 

  SENATOR JOCELYN NEWMAN 

  Savings denied by Senate.  December 2, 1996 

  The Coalition Government promised during the election to extend the waiting  period for social security benefits for migrants from six months to two years for  all welfare benefits with the exception of medicare payments, minimum rate  family payments and special benefits for those migrants whose circumstances 

  change significantly after arrival. 

  The Minister for Social Security, Jocelyn Newman today provided DSS figures  to the Australian Democrats outlining estimated savings from the Social Security  (Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Periods and Other Measures) Bill 1996. 

  Estimated savings were $546.lm over the four years 1996-97 and 1999-2000. 

  Following the amendments to the Bill in the Senate on 26 November 1996, the  lost savings over the four years amount to $404.7 (see attached tables) 

  Lost savings from the exemption of spouses and the change in start date for  newstart allowance, sickness allowance and youth training allowance total  $124.9m (over the four years). 

  By not applying a 2yr wait to special benefit it is estimated that 300/0 of those  who are covered by the waiting period for newstart allowance, sickness  allowance and youth training allowance will have much easier access to special  benefit during their waiting period, at an additional cost of $65 .3m over four  years. 

  Loss of savings by not extending the waiting time for parenting allowance  will be $90.7m over four years. 

  Loss of savings from not applying the two year wait to the proposed other  payments and entitlements total $123. 7m over four years. 

  "The Government gave a clear commitment to the electorate. There is  overwhelming support for this measure in the community and the Senate should  pass this Bill which is fair, responsible and maintains a safety net for migrants  who need it," Senator Newman said. 

  TABLE 1 

  Saving:w Lost from Senate Amendments.  1996-97 donars -not out-turned 

  96/97 97/98 

  Special Benefit 0.2 -9.6 

  Date of Assent Start  NSA, SA&YTA ~19.3 -55.9 

  & spouse exempt.. 

  Parenting  Allowance -5.2 -23.9 

  Widow Allowance -0.2 -0.8 

  Partner Allowance -0.6 -2.6 

  Famjly Payments -3.7 -17.1 

  Health Care Cards -2.3 -10.7 

  Seniors Health Cards neg -0.1 

  Disability Wage Sup. neg neg 

  Carers Pension ..{l.t -0.3 

  Mobility Allowance neg neg 

  Maternity Allowance ..{l .2 -0.8 

  TOTAL -31.4 -121.8 

  98/99 99/2000 

  -26.8 -29.1 

  -28.5 -21.2 

  -30.8 -30.8 

  -1.1 -1.1 

  -3.4 . -3.4 

  -22.1 -22.1 

  -13.9 -13.9 . 

  -02- -02 

  neg neg 

  ..{l.4 ..{l.4 

  neg neg 

  -1.0 -1.0 

  -128.2 -123.2 

  TOTAL FOR " YEARS $404.6m (the So. 1m difference with the figure on page one is  due to rounding). 

  . --_ .. --- . . .  " " . ' ~ .. . p . : . ',:. : ~ " :  " 

  . "' ....... 

  :  ". ~ ; . l 

  ... 

  . . 

  . " .. 

  TABLEl 

  Estimated Program Com from Bill as Amended. -(Not yet agreed with DoF)  (Implementation date 1/01197 -30% leakage to SpB  Spouse of Long Term Resident Exempt)  1996-97 dollars -not out-turned, 

  96/97 97/98 98199 9912000 

  $m Sm Sm Sm 

  JSAlNSA Nil -31.271 -83.391 . :"90.340 

  SA Nll -0.589 -1.570 -1.701 

  YTA Nil -0.157 -0.419 -0.454 

  SpB Ntl 10.433 27.847 30.168 

  TOTAL Nil -21.574 -57.533 -62.327 

  TOTAL FOR 4 YEARS 5141.434 

  . -. 

  , \ 

  39 

  Social Security -Require Migrants to wait two years for benefits 

  Description of Measure 

  Achieve savings by requiring new arrivals in Australia to wait two years before they are able to  receive benefits. 

  Financial Implications 

  Explanation 

  1996-97  Sm  84 

  1997-98  Sm  252 

  1998-99  Sm  280 

  Total  Sm  616 

  In January 1993, the Labor Government introduced a six month wait after arrival in Australia  for migrants, other than refugee and humanitarian migrants, before they became eligible to  receive most welfare benefits. 

  A Coalition Government will continue to grant all refugee and humanitarian migrants eligibility  to access welfare benefits immediately upon their arrival in Australia. 

  Access to welfare benefits for migrants other than refugee and humanitarian migrants will be  available after two years under a Coalition Government. This extension will have little direct_.  impact on those migrants, particularly those in the Preferential Family Reunion category, who  are accepted for entry into Australia on the basis of formal assurances of support. 

  Full access to Family Allowance and Medicare will be maintained for all migrants immediately  upon arrival . 

  As well, the Coalition will provide a II safety net" in the form of a special allowance for those  migrants whose circumstances change significantly after arrival in Australia for reasons beyond  their personal control. 

  The Coalition projects that this will achieve savings of $602 million over three years. 

  However, this policy will apply to prospective migrants only. It will not be applied  retrospectively or to migrants who arrive in Australia before 1 April 1996. 

