---
title: "Rural poverty alleviation and sustainable development in Asia and the Pacific"
date: "1996-04-22"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211449973
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FKU20%22
---

  EMBARGO -3pm, 22 April '96 

  RURAL POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND SUSTAINABLE  DEVELOPMENT IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC 

  Address by Mr Alexander Downer, MP, Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Ministerial  Segment of the 52nd Session of ESCAP, Bangkok, 22 April 1996 

  Introduction 

  I am very pleased to have this opportunity to address the Ministerial Segment of this ESCAP 

  session and believe that it is entirely appropriate in this, the International Year for the 

  Eradication of Poverty, that ESCAP has chosen rural poverty alleviation and sustainable 

  development as its central theme. 

  With this theme in mind, I would like to underline some key points to keep in mind in the 

  process of devising strategies for rural poverty alleviation. But, before moving onto that, I 

  would also like to say a few things about the process of reforming ESCAP which I know is 

  also occupying the minds of many of you here today. 

  ESCAP Reform 

  ESCAP's mandate is to contribute to the economic and technological development of the Asia 

  Pacific region, by way of specialised studies, statistical work and other advisory services. 

  ESCAP is also tasked with the social aspects of economic development. Such a broad 

  m andate inevitably leads to a duplication of the charters of other United Nations' bodies (such 

  as UNCTAD, UNICEF and UNDP) as we ll as the operations of other regional organisations , 

  including APEC and the South Pacific Forum. 

  The Australian Government was aware of these problems when ESCAP (or ECAFE as it was 

  then known) was founded. From its inception , the Australian Government has argued that the 

  body should limit its functions to those it could perform with real effectiveness and that it 

  should avoid overlap with the functions of other agencies. 

  2 

  This is in line with the new Government's declared approach to UN Reform of working to 

  overcome duplication within the different arms of the UN. 

  I note with pleasure that the ESCAP Secretariat is tackling some key issues concerning its 

  mandate. The Australian Government believes that all member countries should encourage 

  the Secretariat's efforts in this direction and work to ensure that ESCAP's mandate becomes 

  more narrowly defined. Beyond these issues, we must also ensure that ESCAP's 

  administrative management conforms to UN-wide best practices. I would like to take this 

  opportunity, therefore,to encourage the ESCAP Secretariat to focus on results and to promote 

  an environment in which the best budgetary and management practices are inculcated through 

  vigorous accounting and internal review procedures. 

  In terms of the Secretariat's restructuring, the Australian Government supports the direction in 

  which ESCAP is moving. Restructuring the Secretariat on thematic lines to exploit more 

  effectively its potential to undertake multi-disciplinary tasks, restructuring the annual 

  commission session to encourage more effective policy dialogue and strengthening the role of 

  the Advisory Committee of Permanent Representatives (ACPR) are all worthy initiatives that 

  we in Australia support. 

  To lessen the likelihood of overlap, Australia will continue to push for more genuine 

  consultation between the ESCAP Secretariat and other UN agencies. We must continue to 

  encourage the Secretariat to use the current financial restraints felt by the United Nations to 

  better set priorities. 

  The next year in particular will provide additional opportunities to reform ESCAP. Next 

  year's annual session will review ESCAP's current conference structure. I note, Mr 

  Chairman, that the Secretariat has commenced internal work on this and I want to indicate 

  formally Australia's interest in being involved as much as possible in any deliberations on 

  ESCAP's structure. 

  ESCAP stands poised to tackle the challenges of the new era. The discussion today on rural 

  poverty alleviation in Asia and the Pacific is evidence of ESCAP' s desire to concentrate on 

  those issues for which it has a geographic advantage. I am confident that the Australian 

  3 

  Government will continue to support ESCAP as a significant player helping to develop 

  economic and social prosperity in the region. 

  The Complex Nature of Rural Poverty 

  Having made these points, let me say, in connection with this Session's theme of rural poverty 

  alleviation, that we must keep at the forefront of our minds the reality that rural poverty is as 

  much the result of social, political and economic factors as it is the result of inadequate food 

  production and a lack of agricultural technology. 

  Despite all the technological advances that are changing our lives daily, when it comes down 

  to basic needs in rural areas, we still have a long way to go. Food security is still not assured 

  for large segments of the world's population and, at conferences such as this, we still ponder 

  the old question of whether an expanding world population will continue to be able to feed 

  itself. 

  In the past couple of decades the answer to this question was affirmative. The 'Green 

  Revolution' was, in many respects, spectacularly successful in meeting the food needs of the 

  world's growing population. While the world's population increased from 3.7 billion in 1970 

  to 5.8 billion in 1995, the number of people in the world whose food supply is insecure 

  decreased from around 950 million (or 26% of the world's population) to 800 million (or 14% 

  of the world's population) over the same period. 

  These are, without doubt, impressive gains. Unfortunately, though, the fact remains that the 

  majority of the world's poor live in rural areas, in other words, at the source of our food 

  supply. 

  In making this point, I am not saying that we should be complacent about agricultural 

  research. Some evidence is now suggesting that the great strides made in agricultural 

  productivity over the past decades are petering out and that new solutions need to be explored. 

  That is' why the Australian Government maintains substantial support for the Australian 

  Centre for International Agricultural Research which is continuing a proud Australian 

  tradition in the development of innovative techniques for improving food production while 

  preserving natural resources . 

  i i ' 

  4 

  If appropriate innovative technology is not enough to reduce the incidence of rural poverty in 

  developing countries, two other factors are central to adequately addressing the problem: 

  improving equity of access to basic social and economic infrastructures and ensuring 

  environmental sustainability as an integral part of alleviating rural poverty. 

  Equity of Access 

  As countries develop, there is a tendency for the focus of activities to be on cities and on new 

  industry . In this process, rural populations are easily disenfranchised from tIie benefits of 

  economic growth. Their need for access to health care, education and other fundamental 

  social services is often overlooked in trying to address the demands of growing urban 

  populations. It is a classic 'Catch 22' situation, because it is the very lack of equity of access 

  that fuels urban migrations and the associated social and environmental problems of 

  uncontrolled urbanisation. 

  The consequences of rural poverty go further still. The trend towards industrialisation and its 

  demand for land, water and power often conflict with the needs of traditional land users. 

  Conflicts stemming from disputes over resources, such as the right of access to water for 

  irrigation versus the need to generate power for industry are becoming increasingly common. 

  Like ripples in a pond, they can have a profound negative impact on a country's well being, 

  creating social disharmony and political instability, and depressing economic growth. 

  If conflict arising from social change, political instability or economic mismanagement is not 

  resolved peacefully, the consequences for rural communities can be devastating. One needs 

  no more graphic illustration of this than the picture of fertile land in Cambodia made 

  unproductive as a consequence of the millions of land mines still plaguing that country. 

  Improved agricultural technology is not providing solutions for Cambodia. De-mining is a 

  solution. 

  That i s why Australia is part of an international mine clearing effort in Cambodia whose 

  objective is to allow the return of refugees to their land. By the end of February this year 

  nineteen and a half square kilometres of land had been cleared, which of course is only a tiny 

  proportion of the 2,700 square kilometres suspected of being mined in Cambodia. But that is 

  5 

  already enough to allow the resettlement of about 16,000 families or the equivalent 

  agricultural land for the production of 2,000 tonnes of rice annUally. 

  It is also why the new Government has recently announced its support for a total ban on the 

  production , sale and transfer of landmines. And it is also why we announced in our Foreign 

  Affairs Policy a "Free Indochina of Landrnines" Program - a project about which we will say 

  more in the near future, and a development of which I am personally proud. 

  In developing effective strategies we must also have an appreciation of who the principal 

  victims of rural poverty are. Studies are repeatedly showing that it is women who are most 

  affected by rural poverty. Women are the mainstay of rural economies. They are the food 

  producers, the child rearers, the money managers. They are the thread of the rural social 

  fabric. So, we must continue with an emphasis on helping rural women to improve their own 

  standards of living through, for example, access to basic health and education, literacy 

  programs and micro credit schemes. These are all areas in which the Australian aid program 

  is involved. 

  Environmental Sustainability 

  As a relatively small donor, Australia needs to target its efforts in poverty alleviation 

  carefully. Part of that targeting process involves an examination of what Au stralia has to 

  offer to the region. One of the mo st effective means by which we can make the most of 

  Australian aid funds is by helping regional countries to develop in a way that is 

  environmentally sustainable 

  For all but the last 50 years of the 40,000 years or so of human habitation in Australia, we 

  have seen the land as the sole means of supporting our population . For much of the last 200 

  years that reliance has resulted in serious dam age to our environment. We have learnt and are 

  still learning how to use our precious natural resources in a sustainable way. We have had to 

  develop innovative solutions to the environmental problems caused by deforestation and 

  drought. In doing so, we have developed internationally recognised expertise in areas such as 

  dry climate farming and water catchment management. Of course, these are all areas of major 

  significance for efforts to redress the problem of rural poverty. We hope to pass on this 

  experti se through development cooperation so that others may benefit from our experiences 

  6 

  and perhaps even avoid some of our mistakes. It is one of the areas where Australian aid can 

  have its biggest impact. 

  Conclusion 

  The planting of a healthy seed is just one of a number of critical elements that contributes 

  ultimately to a successful harvest. The harvest is the culmination of many inputs (fertile soil, 

  water, sunlight , warmth etc) which combine to create an environment conducive to vigorous 

  growth. 

  Just as the right conditions must prevail for plant growth so too must they be in place for 

  successful development initiatives . Knowledge of sustainable rice cultivation or the 

  husbandry of pigs might be essential to a particular community, but without adequate health 

  and education services, secure tenure of land, effective access to markets and the ability to 

  resolve peacefully the competing demands for finite natural resources, efforts to alleviate rural 

  poverty will fail. I do hope, therefore, that ESCAP' s current exploration of this issue will 

  result in some concrete pointers to us all about how best we can work together to achieve 

  equitable and sustainable development in our region. 

