---
title: "Royal Australian Air Force's 75th Anniversary Dinner, Canberra, Tuesday 11 June 1996: address."
date: "1996-06-11"
creators:
  - "Deane, William"
source: "GOVERNOR-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211450441
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/71A30%22
---

  07/08 '96 12:07 1r06 2813197 GOVERNMENT HOUSE 

  . , 

  ADDRESS BY SIR WILLIAM DEANE 

  GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA 

  ON THE OCCASION OF THE ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE'S 

  75TH ANNIVERSARY DINNER 

  CANBERRA 

  TUESDAY 11 JUNE 1996 

  MR PRIME MINIST.ER, MR SPEAKER, CHIEF JUSTICE OF 

  AUSTRALIA, MINISTERS OF THE CROWN, CHIEF OF THE DEFENCE 

  FORCE AND CHIEFS OF STAFF, DISTINGUISHED VISITORS FROM 

  OVERSEAS, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, AND MEMBERS AND FORMER 

  MEMBERS OF THE ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE 

  ON THE FIRST DAY OF FEBRUARY 1943, THE BODY OF 

  FLIGHT SERGEANT RAWDON MIDDLETON WAS WASHED ASHORE 

  ON SHAKESPEARE BEACH .IN DOVER. THE LOSS OF THIS YOUNG 

  AUSTRALIAN'S LIFE WAS, IN ITSELF, A TRAGEDY. BUT MORE 

  THAN MERE TRAGEDY WAS INVOLVED. THE LAST FEW HOURS 

  OF RAWDON MIDDLETON'S LIFE HAD BEEN AN EPIC OF HUMAN 

  COURAGE WHICH HAS BECOME PART OF OUR HERITAGE. 

  A MEMBER OF THE ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE, 

  MIDDLETON HAD BEEN ATTACHED TO NO. 149 SQUADRON OF THE 

  ~ 002/015 

  07/08 '96 12:08 fr06 2813197 GOVERNMENT HO USE 

  2 

  ROYAL AIR FORCE, PILOTING STERLING BOMBERS. HE WAS ON 

  HIS lWENTY-NINTH SORTIE ON A BOMBING RAID OVER ITALY, 

  WHEN A SHELL BURST IN THE COCKPIT AND HE SUSTAINED 

  TERRIBLE WOUNDS, INCLUDING THE DESTRUCTION OF HIS 

  RIGHT EYE . 

  DESPITE HIS OWN DREADFUL INJURIES, MIDDLETON 

  ORDERED THE WOUNDED SECOND PILOT BACK FOR FIRST AID 

  AND TURNED THE AIRCRAFT TOWARDS ENGLAND. WEAKENED 

  BY LOSS OF BLOOD, HE WAS IN TOO M .UCH PAIN TO TALK DURING 

  THE TRIP. ICY-COLD AIR BLASTED HIM THROUGH A SMASHED 

  WINDSCREEN. FOR OVER FOUR HOURS HE STRUGGLED ON, EVEN 

  MANAGING TO TAKE EVASIVE ACTION WHEN ENGAGED BY 

  HOSTILE ANTI-AIRCRAFT DEFENCES OVER DIEPPE. 

  ON REACHJNG THE COAST OF ENGLAND, THE AIRCRAFT 

  HAD ONLY SUFFICIENT FUEL FOR A FEW MINUTES' FLYING. IT 

  WAS CLEARLY IMPOSSIBLE TO LAND SAFELY. ON MIDDLETON'S 

  ORDERS, FIVE OF HIS CREW BAILED OUT SAFELY. SERGEANT 

  JOHN MACKIE, THE FRONT GUNNER, AND SERGEANT JAMES 

  JEFFREY, IDE FLIGHT ENGINEER, BOTH MEMBERS OF THE RAF, 

  STAYED BEIDND TO HELP THEIR WOUNDED CAPTAIN. 

  MIDDLETON THEN TURNED THE AIRCRAFT BACK OVER THE 

  ENGLISH CHANNEL AND ATTEMPTED TO DITCH. THE AIRCRAFT 

  CRASHED INTO THE WATER. ALL THREE MEN WERE KILLED. 

  RAWDON MIDDLETON WAS AWARDED A POSTHUMOUS 

  ViCTORIA CROSS. TI-IE LAST SENTENCE OF THE CITA TION 

  ~ 003/015 

  07/08 '96 12:08 fr06 2813197 GOVERNMENT HOUSE 

  3 

  READS: "HIS DEVOTION TO DUTY IN THE FACE OF OVERWHELMING 

  ODDS IS UNSURPASSED IN THE ANNALS OF THE ROYAL AIR FORCE." 

  HE WAS FLYING A UNITED KINGDOM PLANE WITH UNITED 

  KINGDOM COMPANIONS SO HIS DEATH IS RIGHTLY WRIT LARGE 

  IN THE ANNALS OF THE RAF. BUT HIS INCREDmLE SKILL, 

  DEDICATION AND BRAVERY WERE IN THE SERVICE OF OUR AIR 

  FORCE. UNDER THE EMPIRE TRAINING SCHEME, AUSTRALIANS 

  WHO, LIKE MIDDLETON, WERE ATTACHED TO BOMBER 

  COMMAND, RETAINED THEIR DISTINCT IDENTITY AND STATUS AS 

  MEMBERS OF THE RAAF. IT WAS FOR THIS COUNTRY, IN TIDS 

  COUNTRY'S AIR FORCE AND IN THIS COUNTRY'S CAUSE THAT, 

  UEROICALLY AND FAR FROM HOME, RAWDON MIDDLETON GAVE 

  HIS LIFE. HE WAS, AND WILL ALWAYS BE, PART 0." THE RAAF 

  AND OF THE RAAF'S TRADITION OF REACHING FOR THE STARS 

  THROUGH SKILL, COURAGE AND SERVICE. 

  TRADITIONS ARE MADE BY PEOPLE AND SHARED BY 

  PEOPLE, GIVING A SENS .E OF PURPOSE AND COHESION TO WHAT 

  THEY DO. TRADITIONS ENSRRINE WHAT IS CONSIDERED 

  VALUABLE AND WORTHY OF PRESERVATION. THE RAAF'S 

  PROUD TRADITION OF SKILL, COURAGE AND SERVICE HAS BEEN 

  DEVELOPED IN WAR AND IN PEACE THROUGH TH.E SACRIFICE 

  AND EFFORTS OF THE MEN AND THE WOMEN WHO IIA VE BEEN 

  ITS MEMBERS. IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT WE SHOULD TAKE TIME 

  TONIGHT TO REFLECT ON THE HISTORY AND PAST 

  ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE RAAF AND ITS MEMBERS AS WE 

  CELEBRATE ITS 75TH ANNIVERSARY. 

  ~ 004/01~ ". __ ._ 

  07/08 '96 12:09 1r06 2813197 GOVERNMENT HOUSE 

  4 

  FOR THE BEGINNINGS OF THAT TRADITION ONE MUST GO 

  BACK TO THE FOUR AUSTRALIAN FLYING CORPS SQUADRONS OF 

  WORLD WAR I. WAR IN THE AIR WAS A NEW TYPE OF WARFARE 

  AT WIDCll THE YOUNG AUSTRALIAN PILOTS EXCELLED. THEY 

  DESTROYED NO LESS THAN FIVE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN 

  ENEMY AIRCRAFT. TH .E HUMAN COST WAS GREAT. SEVENTY "

  EIGHT MEMBERS OF THE FLYING CORPS LOST THEIR LIVES IN 

  BATTLE. SIXTY-EIGHT WERE WOUNDED. SUCH WERE THE RISKS 

  ASSOCIATED WITH FLYING IN THOSE EARLY YEARS THAT A 

  FURTHER TWENTY-FIVE MEN - A NUMBER EQUIVALENT TO ONE "

  THIRD OF COMBAT DEATHS - WERE KILLED IN TRAINING 

  ACCIDENTS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. 

  WHEN TUE RAAF WAS ESTABLISHED AS A DISTINCT 

  SERVICE ON 31 MARC1I1921, ITS MEMBERS CAME LARGELY FROM 

  FORM .ER FLYING CORPS MEN. THEY BROUGHT WITH THEM IN 

  PEACE- TIME TO TUE NEW RAAF THE ESTABLISHED TRADITIONS 

  AND THE RARE SPIRIT OF THE WARTIME CORPS. AMONG THEIR 

  NUMBER WAS FLIGHT LIEUTENANT FRANK McNAMARA. HE HAD 

  WON THE VICTORIA CROSS - THE FIRST OF FOUR TO BE 

  AWARDED TO AUSTRALIAN AIRMEN - FOR EXTRAORDINARY 

  VALOUR IN 1917 WHEN, WHILE HIMSELF BADLY WOUNDED, HE 

  LANDED BEHIND ENEl\1Y LINES TO RESCUE ANOTHER 

  AUSTRALIAN PILOT WHOSE PLANE HAD BEEN SHOT DOWN BY 

  ENEMY FIRE. 

  THE INTER-WAR PERIOD WAS A LEAN ONE FOR OUR AIR 

  FORCE. INDEED, AT TIlE OUTBREAK OF WORLD WAR II, THE 

  ~005/015 

  07/08 '96 12:09 fr06 2813197 GOVERNMENT HOUSE , 

  5 

  RAAF HAD ONLY THREE THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED MEMBERS. 

  ITS ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY FOUR OPERATIONAL AIRCRAFT 

  WERE ALL OBSOLESCENT. 

  ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT OF THE AUSTRALIAN 

  GOVERNMENT'S EARLY WARTIME DECISIONS WAS THAT IT 

  WOULD PARTICIPATE IN THE EMPIRE AIR TRAINING SCHEME TO 

  WHICH I HAVE ALREADY REFERRED. THAT SCHEME PROVED 

  VITAL TO THE STRUGGLE FOR SURVIVAL OF THE FREE WORLD. 

  WITHOUT IT THE MOST HAZARDOUS AND DEMANDING AREA OF 

  OPERATIONS - BOMBER COMMAND'S STRATEGIC AIR WAR 

  AGAINST GERMANY - WOULD NOT HAVE BE.EN POSSmLE. JUST 

  HOW HAZARDOUS THOSE OPERATIONS WERE IS STARKLY 

  ILLUSTRATED BY SOME STATISTICS. 

  IN T.HE FIRST THREE MONTHS OF 1944, BOMBER COMMAND 

  LOST EIGHTY PER CENT OF TIlE AIRCRAFT AND CREWS WHICH 

  HAD BEEN ON ACTIVE SQUADRONS AT THE END OF 1943. 

  APPROXIMATELY NINE THOUSAND MEMBERS OF THE RAAF 

  SERVED IN BOMBER COMMAND. THEY WERE ABOUT ONE PER 

  CENT OF ALL AUSTRALIAN ENLISTMENTS FOR ALL SERVICES. 

  YET THEY ACCOUNTED .FOR lWENTY-ONE PER CENT OF ALL 

  AUSTRALIAN COMBAT DEATHS DURING THE WAR. IN ADDITION, 

  THERE WERE THE WOUNDED WHO SURVIVED. AMONG THEM 

  WAS WING COMMANDER HUGHIE EDWARDS V.C. WHO LED NO. 

  105 SQUADRON'S BLENHEtM BOMBERS ON SOM .E OF THE 

  EUROP .EAN WAR'S MOST DARING RAIDS. AUSTRALIANS ALSO 

  PARTICIPATED IN THE OTHER GREAT OPERATIONAL COMMANDS 

  ~ 006/015 

  07/08 '96 12:10 fr06 2813197 GOVERNMENT HO USE 

  " ' 

  6 

  OF THE ROYAL AIRFORCE: FIGHTER COMMAND AND COASTAL 

  COMMAND. THERE TOO THE CASUALTIES SUSTAINED WERE 

  EXTREMELY liGH. 

  SERVICE IN THE FACE OF SUCH CASUALTIES DEMANDED 

  COURAGE, DEDICATION, SOUND LEADERSHIP, COMRADESIDP, A 

  HIGH STANDARD OF TRAINING AND, LET IT BE SAID, GREAT 

  PATRIOTISM. IT WAS IN T.HE FACE OF SUCH CASUALTIES THAT 

  THE RAAF CAME OF AGE AND THAT THE TRADITIONS WHICH IT 

  HAD INHERITED FROM THE AIR CORP WERE TESTED IN THE FIRE 

  OF BATTLE AND THE SACRIFICE OF DEATH AND TRIUMPHANTLY 

  CONFIRMED. 

  ONE YEAR AFTER MEMBERS OF THE RAAF BEGAN FLYING 

  IN THE AIR WAR IN EUROPE, JAPAN COMMENCED HOSTILITIES IN 

  THE SOUTHWEST PACIFIC. THE ALARMING SPEED OF JAPAN'S 

  MlLITARY CONQU.ESTS LEFT AUSTRALIA PERILOUSLY EXPOSED. 

  OUR OWN OP .ERATIONAL AIR ASSETS HAD REMAINED 

  EFFECTIVELY NON-EXISTENT. 

  AFTER ACQUIRING SOME KITTYHAWK FIGHTERS FROM 

  AMERICA, NO. 75 SQUADRON WAS FORMED HASTILY IN 

  TOWNSVILLE IN MARCH 1942. WITHIN A FEW SHORT WEEKS, THE 

  SQUADRON WAS DEPLOYED TO .PORT MORESBY WHERE, JUST 

  lWO HOURS AFTER THE ARRIVAL O}" TUE FIRST FOUR F.lGHTERS,  TWO OF THEM WERE SCRAMBLED TO M .. EET A JAPANESE 

  RECONNAISSANCE AIRCRAFT. AS ADDITIONAL PLANES BECAME 

  AVAILABLE THE SQUADRON'S YOUNG AND INEXPERIENCED 

  I4J 007/015 

  07/08 '96 12:10 fr06 2813197 GOVERNMENT HO USE 

  , 

  7 

  PILOTS WERE ENGAGED IN THE DESPERATE AND UNYIELDING 

  DEFENCE OF PORT MORESBY AGAINST MUCH STRONGER 

  JAPANESE FORCES. WHEN, AFTER FORTY-FOUR CRUCIAL DAYS, 

  THE BATTLE WAS OVER, THE SQUADRON WAS REDUCED TO BUT 

  THREE SERVI .CEABLE AIRCRAFT AND ITS LEGENDRY LEADER, 

  JOHN JACKSON, WAS DEAD. 

  THE COURAGE AND DETERMINATION SHOWN AT PORT 

  MORESBY STOOD AS AN EXAM .PLE TO THE RAAF WHEN A RE "

  VITALISED NO. 75 SQUADRON AND NO. 76 SQUADRON, OPERATING 

  IN CLOSE COOPERATION WITH THE ARMY, HELPED REPEL A 

  JAPANESE INVADING FORCE AT MILNE BAY IN AUGUST AND 

  SEPTEMBER 1942. THIS WAS A SIGNIFICANT VICTORY, THE FIRST 

  OVER THE JAPANESE ON LAND IN THE PACIFIC WAR. IN THE 

  WORDS OF FIELD MARSHAL SLIM, IT BROKE 'THE SPELL OF 

  INVINCIB1LITY' WHICH HAD, UP TILL THEN, SURROUNDED THE 

  JAPANESE. 

  THE RECAPTURE OF KOKODA IN NOVEMBER 1942 

  SIGNALLED AN ALL-OUT DRIVE TO EJECT THE INVADERS FROM 

  PAPUA. WITH THE ALLIES NOW POSING A DIRECT THREAT TO 

  LAE AND SALAMAUA, TilE JAPANESE DECIDED TO RUSH 

  REINFORCEME.NTS BY SEA .FROM RABAUL. ALLlED AIR FORCES, 

  INCLUDING RAAF BEAU}I'IGHTERS AND BOSTONS, INTERCEPTED 

  THE JAPANESE CONVOY, INFLICTING GRIEVOUS LOSSES ON THE 

  ENEMY. THAT WAS, OF COURSE, THE BATTLE OF THE BISMARCK 

  SEA. DOUGLAS MACARTHUR DESCRIBED IT AS 'THE DECISIVE 

  !dJ 008/015 

  07/08 '96 12:11 fr06 2813197 GOVERNMENT HOUSE 

  '. ' 

  8 

  AERIAL ENGAGEMENT OF TIlE WAR IN THE SOUTH-WEST 

  PACIFIC'. 

  MEASURED BY ANY STANDARDS, THE RAAF'S WAR EFFORT 

  IN THE SOUTHWEST PACIFIC WAS REMARKABLE. IN THE SPACE 

  OF A FEW YEARS, iT ORGANISED AND TRAINED A COMPETENT 

  AIR FORCE - THE FOURTH LARGEST IN THE WORLD AFTER THE 

  DISARMAMENT OF GERMANY AND JAPAN - AND ACQUITTED 

  ITSELF WITH DISTINCTION IN A MOST DIFFICUL T AND 

  DEMANDING THEATRE O:F WAR. IN THE SAME PERIOD, IT HAD 

  ESTABLISHED THE WOMEN'S AUXILIARY AUSTRALIAN AIR 

  FORCE WHICH GREW TO A STRENGTH OF 1WENTY-EIGHT 

  THOUSAND WOMEN WHO SERVED WITH DISTINCTION IN FORTY "

  lWO MUSTERINGS. 

  AS WAS THE CASE IN EUROPE, THE RAAF'S WAR IN THE 

  SOUTH PACIFIC CANNOT BE SEEN MERELY IN TERMS OF 

  STATISTICS OR OF BATTLES LOST OR WON. THE RAAF WAS AND 

  IS THE MEN AND WOMEN WHO CONSTITUTEO AND CONSTITUTE 

  IT AND WHO LIVED AND LIVE ITS TRADITIONS. EACH STATISTIC 

  OF DEATH WAS THE END OF A LIFE, ORDINARILY A YOUNG LIFE. 

  EACH DE.ED OF COURAGE WAS A HUMAN DEED. EACH 

  ACIDEVEMENTWAS A HUMAN ACHIEVEMENT. TIME PRECLUDES 

  ANY DETAILED ACCOUNTING OF INDI.YIDUAL ACHIEVEMENTS, 

  INDIVIDUAL ACTS OF HEROISM AND INDIVIUUAL LIVES LOST. 

  THE MOST THA T ONE CAN DO IS TO RECALL ANOTHER 

  INDIVIDUAL NAME WHILE ALWAYS REMEMBERING THAT FOR 

  ~ 009/015 

  07/08 '96 12:11 ~06 2813197 GOVERNMENT HO USE 

  I ' 

  9 

  EACH RECORD :ED ACT OF DEVOTION OR COURAGE, THERE WERE 

  THOUSANDS WHICH WENT UNNOTICED OR UNRECORDED. 

  WILLIAM ELLIS NEWTON JOINED THE RAA.F IN EARLY 1940. 

  HE DID A.DV ANCED TRAINlNG AS A PILOT AND SERVED AS AN 

  INSTRUCTOR FROM 1940 UNTIL MAY 1942 WHEN HE SUCCEEDED 

  IN BEING POSTED TO ACTIVE SERVICE AS A PILOT WIm NO. 22 

  ATTACK SQUADRON. DURING THE NEXT TEN MONTHS, HE FLEW 

  NO LESS THAN FIFTY-TWO SORTIES WITH THE SQUADRON'S 

  BOSTON BOMBERS. HIS LAST FLIGHT WAS ON 18 MARCH 1943 

  WHEN IDS AIRCRAFT Sl1FFERED A DIRECT HIT AND BURST INTO 

  FLAMES. NONETHELESS, NEWTON DITCH.ED AT SEA AND 

  MANAGED TO REACH TIlE SHORE WHERE HE WAS CAPTURED BY 

  THE JAPANES .E. FOR HIS GREAT COURAGE OVER TEN MONTHS 

  OF OPERATIONAL FLYING IN CONOITIONS OF INTENSE DANGER, 

  HE WAS SUBSEQUENTLY TO BE AWARDED THE VICTORIA CROSS, 

  THE FOURTH OF THE FOUR AWARDED TO AUSTRALIAN AIRMEN. 

  THE AWARD WAS, HOWEVER, POSTHUMOUS. ON 29 MARCH 1943, 

  ON THE ORDERS OF REAR ADMIRAL FUJITA, HE WAS EXECUTED. 

  A JAPANESE WITNESS OF HIS DEATH HAS WRITTEN THAT HE 

  "REMAINED UNSHAKEN TO THE LAST". HE WAS lWENTY-THREE 

  YEARS OLD. 

  ON 25 JUNE 1950, NORTH KOREA INVADED THE REPUBLIC OF 

  KOREA WITHOUT WARNING. AT THE TIME, NO. 77 SQUADRON 

  WAS ON THE POINT OF RETURNING TO AUSTRALIA AFTER 

  OPERATIONS WITH THE BRITISH COM .MONWEALTH OCCUPATION 

  }~ORCE IN JAPAN. ITS PILOTS HAD FLOWN THEIR LAST 

  ~ 010/015 

  07/08 '96 12:12 fr06 2813197 GOVERNME ~~ HO USE 

  10 

  OCCUPATION TASKS ON 23 JUNE. ON 2 JULY THEY FLEW THEIR 

  FIRST OPERATIONS .IN THE KOREAN WAR. .rUST FOUR DAYS 

  AFTER AUSTRALIA ENTERED THE WAR, SQUADRON LEADER 

  GRAHAM STROUT'S MUSTANG FA.ILED TO PULL OUT OF A DIVE "

  BOMBING ATTACK AT SAMCHOK. HE WAS THE FIRST 

  AUSTRALIAN TO DIE IN THE MILITARY SERVICE OF HIS COUNTRY 

  IN THE KOREAN WAR. 

  LIKE THE FIRST AND SECOND WORLD WARS, THE KOREAN 

  WAR TOOK A TERRIBLE TOLL OF THE LIVES OF OUR 

  AUSTRALIAN AIR CREW. THUS, IN THE FIRST 18 MONTHS OF 

  COMBAT, 25 PER CENT OF NO. 77 SQUADRON'S PILOTS WERE 

  .KILLED OR CAPTURED. ALSO LIKE THOSE EARLIER WARS, THE 

  MEMBERS OF THE AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE SERVED, AND MANY 

  SUFFERED AND DIED FOR, THEIR COUNTRY WITH COURAGE AND 

  DEVOTION. WHILE TIlE WAR WAS STILL BEING FOUGHT IN 

  KOREA, A PROTRACTED INSURRECTION BY COMMUNIST 

  TERRORISTS OCCURRED IN MALA VA. THE RAAF, THROUGH NO.1 

  AND NO. 38 SQUADRONS, WAS CALLED TO FIGHT UPON ANOTHER 

  FRONT. AGAIN, THEY SERVED BRAVELY AND WITH DISTINCTION. 

  AUSTRALIA'S PARTICIPATION IN THE WAR IN V1ETNAM HAS 

  BEEN THE SUBJECT OF CONTROVERSY. ONE THING IS, 

  HO\VEVER, CLEAR. THAT IS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN 

  SERVICEMEN AND WOMEN WHO PARTICIPATED IN IT IN THEIR 

  COUNTRY'S FORCES WERE ACTING AT TH.E BEHEST OF, AND IN 

  THE SERVICE OF, AUSTRALIA IN EXACTLY THE SAME WAY AS 

  WERE THE MEN AND WOMEN OF THE SERVICES WHO 

  ~ 011/015 

  07/08 '96 12:12 fr06 2813197 GOVERNMENT HO US E  " I 

  11 

  PARTICIPATED IN THEIR COUNTRY'S FORCES IN EARLIER WARS. 

  THAT BEING SO, THEIR STORY AND THE STORY OF THE SERVICES 

  IN WHICH THEY SERVED DURING THE WAR CONSTITUTE AN 

  INTEGRAL AND PROUD PART OF AUSTRALIA'S MILITARY 

  TRADITIONS AND ACHIEVEMENTS. 

  THE RAAF'S INVOLVEM .ENT IN VIETNAM COMMENCED IN 

  1964 WHEN A FLIGHT OF SIX CARIBOU AIRCRAFT WAS DEPLOYED 

  TO SOUTH VIETNAM. THAT FLIGHT WAS SUBSEQUENTLY 

  INCREASED IN SIZE AND RENAMED NO. 35 TRANSPORT 

  SQUADRON. IN MID 1966, NO. 9 SQUADRON WAS DEPLOYED IN 

  SOUTH VIETNAM EQUIPPED WITH IROQUOIS HELICOPTERS. IN 

  1967, NO.2 SQUADRON EQUIPPED WITH CANBERRA BOMBERS 

  COMMENCED OPERATIONS. TilE THRKE RAAF SQUADRONS 

  PERFORMED A VARIETY OF FUNCTIONS IN A NUMBER OF 

  DIFFERENT COMBAT AREAS. IN PARTICULAR, NO.9 SQUADRON'S 

  IROQUOIS HELICOPTERS BECAM .E AN ESSENTJAL COMPONENT OF 

  THE AUSTRALIAN TASK Il'ORCE OPERATIONS IN PHUOC TUY 

  PROVINCE. THElR AIR CREWS WERE REGULARLY EXPOSED TO 

  INTENSE GROUND F1RE FROM CLOSE RANGE WHILE THEIR 

  OPERATIONS FREQUENTLY INVOLVED HAZARDOUS FLYING 

  CONDITIONS AND CASUALTY EVACUATION BY NIGHT. NOR DID 

  THE RAAF'S INVOLVEMENT IN THE VIETNAM WAR CLOSE WITH 

  THE WITHDRAWAL OF AUSTRALIAN FORCES. IN APRIL 1975, RAAF 

  HERCULES AIRCRAFT, DISPLA VING UNITED NATIONS INSIGNIA, 

  FLEW INTO LAOS AND SOUTH VlETNAM BRINGING FOOD AND 

  MEDICAL SUPPLIES TO THE THOUSANDS OF REFUGEES. 

  ~ 012/015 

  07 /0& '96 ,12:12 ft06 2813197 GOVERNMENT HOUSE 

  12 

  IN VIETNAM, AS IN EARLIER WARS, THOSE WHO ACTUALLY 

  SERVED IN THE AIR WERE BUT PART OF AUSTRALIA'S AIR FORCE. 

  THE MEN AND WOMEN WHO TRAINED THEM, ARMED THEM, 

  SUPPORTED THEM AND SUSTAINED THEM AND THEIR AIRCRAFT 

  ON THE GROUND AND NURSED TlIEM WHEN THEY WERE ILL OR 

  INJURED HAVE, OVER THE SEVENTY-FIVE YEARS OF THE RAAF, 

  B .EEN AS MUCH AN INTEGRAL PART OF A GREAT FIGHTING 

  FORCE AS mOSE WHO HAVE FLOWN. TOGETHER T.HEY WERE -

  AND ARE- THE RAAF. THUS, WHEN ONE THINKS OF THE RAAF IN 

  VIETNAM, ONE MUST BE PARTICULARLY CONSCIOUS OF THE 

  RAAF NURSING SERVICE WHICH CONTINUED ITS TRADITIONAL 

  ROLE OF SELFLESS SERVICE TO, AND DEDICATED CARE OF, THE 

  SIC.KAND INJURED, PARTICULARLY IN M.EDIVAC OPERATIONS. 

  IN ONE RESPECT, HOWEVER, THE VIETNAM WAR Dl}"FERED 

  FROM OTHER WARS IN WHICH THE RAAF HAS BEEN INVOLVED. 

  IN OTHER WARS, THE MEMBERS OF THE RAAF AND OTHER 

  SERVICE MEN AND WOMEN RETURNED TO THE ENTHUSIASTIC 

  RECOGNITION AND THANKS OF A GRATEFUL NATION. THE 

  MEMBERS OF THE RAAF AND OTHER SERVICE MEN AND WOMEN 

  WHO RETURNED FROM VIETNAM IN THE LATER YEARS OF 

  AUSTRALIA'S INVOLVEMENT RECEIVED LITTLE OR NO POPULAR 

  RECOGNITION OR ACCLAIM FOR THE SACRIFICES THEY HAD 

  MADE IN THE SERVICE, ORDINARILY THE COMPULSOHY 

  SERVICE, OF AUSTRALIA THEIR COUNTRY SEEMED UNGRATEFUL 

  FOR THEIR SERVICE AND INDIFFERENT TO TH.EIR NEEDS. NOW, 

  LET IT BE SAID, IN UNQUALIFIED TERMS AND ONCE AND FOR ALL, 

  THAT AUSTRALIA'S DEBT TO THEM, FOR THEIR BRAVE SERVICE 

  [aJ 013/015 

  07 / ~8 . 96. 12: 13 '6'06 2813197 

  GOVERNMENT HOUSE 

  13 

  AND FOR THE SUBSEQUENT EFFECTS OF THAT SERVICE UPON 

  THEIR HEALTH AND LIVES, IS IMMEASURABLY GREATER THAN IT 

  WOULD HAVE BEEN IF THAT SERVICE HAD BEEN PRO :PERLY 

  ACKNOWLEDGED BY THE PEOPLE AT THE TIME. 

  WHILE ACTIVE SERVICE IN THE DEFENCE OF THE NATION 

  HAS ALWAYS BEEN THE RAAF'S FUNDAMENTAL PURPOSE, THE 

  SERVICE HAS ALSO BEEN INVOLVED IN A NUMBER OF 

  HUMANITARIAN ROLES. THE ORGANISATION, EQUIPMENT AND 

  SKILLS WHICH HAVE BEEN DEVELOPED FOR WARTIME 

  FUNCTIONS ARE READI .LY ADAPTABLE TO AIU TIlE NATION 

  WHEN EMERGENClES AND NATURAL DISASTERS STRIKE. ON 

  SEVERAL OCCASIONS THE RAAF .HAS BEEN CALLED ON TO ASSIST 

  IN FLOODS, .BUSHFIRES AND SEARCH AND RESCUE OPERA nONS. 

  WHEN CYCLONE TRACY STRUCK DARWIN ON CHRISTMAS DAY 

  1974 THE RAAF FLEW IN THE FIRST AIR MISSION WHICH BEGAN 

  THE BIGGEST EVACUATION AIRLIFT EVER CONDUCTED BY CIVIL 

  AND SERVICE AIRCRAFT WITHIN AUSTRALIA. 

  IN MORE RECENT YEARS THE RAAF HAS ALSO FOCUSED ON 

  PEACE OPERATIONS, WHICH DESPITE THEIR NAME HAVE ON 

  OCCASIONS BEEN NO LESS DANGEROUS THAN ARMED CONFLICT. 

  THESE INCLUDE UNITED NATIONS OPERATIONS IN INDIA, 

  PAKISTAN, SINAI, CAMBODIA, SOMALIA AND RWANDA. 

  THE RAAF HAS ESTABLISUED A PROUD RECORD OVER THE 

  LAST 75 YEARS OF SERVING THE AUSTRALIAN NATION. 

  THROUGHOUT THIS PERIOD THE RAAF liAS BUILT ITS TRADITION 

  ~ 014/015 

  07/08 ,  " 96 ~12: 13 '5'06 2813197 GOVERNMENT HOUSE 

  14 

  OF SKILL, COURAGE AND SERVICE, A TRADITION WHICH IS A 

  MEMORIAL TO ITS PAST, ENGRAVED WITH THE NAMES OF TUE 

  DEAD, THE HEROIC DEEDS, THE SACRIFICES IN WAR AND PEACE, 

  A SHRINE TO WHAT IS VALUABLE AND WORTHY OF 

  PRESERVATION. BlJT TRADITIONS ARE MORE THAN 

  MEMORIALS, FOR, UNLIKE A GRANITE BLOCK, TRADITIONS ARE 

  ALIVE. THEY ARE SUSTAINED IN THE MINDS AND ACTIONS OF 

  THE LIVING; THEY ARE PROTECTED AND NURTURED; THEY 

  GROW IN STATURE AND STRENGTH; THEY ARE HANDED DOWN TO 

  TH.E NEXT GENERATION. 

  SO TIns YEAR THE RAAF IS CELEBRATING MORE THAN THE 

  PASSAGE OF TIME. IT IS CELEBRATING 75 YEARS OF LIFE. MAY 

  THERE BE MANY HAPPY RETURNS. DISTINGUISHED VISITORS 

  AND GUESTS, MEMBERS AND FORMER MEMBERS OF THE RAAF 

  WOULD YOU PLEASE RISE. 

  TOAST 

  LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, THE ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE. 

  ACTION BY CAS STAFF OFFICER. 

  (SUBJECT TO CONFIRMATION BY HlS EXCELLENCY AT THIS POINT 

  IT IS INTENDED THE ATTENDEES BE ASKED TO REMAIN STANDING  FOR THE MARCHING OUT OF THE QUEENS COLOUR VIA A 

  MUSICAL INTERLUDE .) YOUR EXCELLENCY, LADIES AND 

  GENTLEMEN 'mANK YOU WOULD YOU PLEASE BE SEATED. 

  ~015/015 

