---
title: "Coalition fails Austudy test"
date: "1996-02-18"
creators:
  - "Free, Ross"
source: "MINISTER FOR SCHOOLS, VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211448548
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RKR20%22
---

  ,~:-:-:'\:";~: :: ,, _, '"-''∑~-- _,/, ,∑ ∑.:' . ∑ .... ' ' " . . , .. ' ... '.' ∑ .. "< ' ... ' .. ' ∑ ... ∑∑∑ .∑ ._., .. ' . ' 

  I.  " ,∑  " '  " 

  :,_ifWSRELEASE NEWS RELEASE 

  The Hon. Ross Free MP  Minister for Schools, Vocational Education and Training 

  COALITION FATI..,S AUSTUDY TEST  18 February, 1996 

  The Coalition's plan to use almost one-third of their education spending to provide  Austudy for wealthy families shows how out of touch they are with the educational needs  of the great majority of Australian families . 

  The Minister responsible for Austudy, Ross Free, said today the $45 million promise to  "relax the Austudy assets test," allegedly to help rural families, was a sham. 

  "The only people who would qualify for help are those whose family farm or business is  worth -after any debt is subtracted -between $787,500 and $1.575 million," Mr Free  said. 

  "While the Coalition has offered not one dollar for computers in schools around the  nation, they have found $45 million to ensure that millionaire families can qualify for  Austudy assistance alongside homeless students, refugees and ordinary wage earners." 

  Mr Free said the average Australian farm was worth less than $787,000 so the average  farming family would not benefit at all from the "millionaire" plan. 

  "The mechanism they are proposing is absolutely inequitable. The Austudy assets limit is  adjusted each year for inflation . This year Austudy is available to people whose family  assets do not exceed $393,750. 

  "Recognising that business assets, including a farm, are not identical with personal assets,  we offer a 50 per cent discount for family businesses, including farms. This means that  the limit for families owning a farm is $787,500 this year. 

  "What the Coalition proposes is a 75 per cent discount-that is, only one-quarter of the  assets would be counted. This would not increase by one dollar the amount payable to  Austudy recipients, would not help wage earners, but would mean that families with net  assets of up to $1.575 million would be eligible for Austudy. 

  "There are about half a million people receiving Austudy. This $45 million will benefit  just two to three thousand from families with assets that any Australian would consider  substantial. 

  "Yet this promise makes up 30 per cent of the Coalition's promises on education. 

  "Pandering to the National Party on this issues shows a sense of priorities that is not  going to be shared by most Australian families." 

  Media contact: John Miner, Mr Free's office (06) 1:17 75401247 9147 

  5013 

