---
title: "Immigration Minister visits Albury-Wodonga region"
date: "1996-05-09"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211450115
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LZ030%22
---

 IMMIGRATION MINISTER VISITS ALBURY WODONGA REGION http://164.97.143.2/minrcl/R96014.htm

 »

 Minister for Immigration  and Multicultural Affairs Mr Philip Ruddock

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860

 MPS 14/96

 IMMIGRATION MINISTER VISITS ALBURY-WODONGA REGION

 The importance o f the AJbury-Wodonga region in Australia's immigration history will be marked by  the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock who will visit the area this  week.

 Mr Ruddock will attend several engagements on Friday 10 May in the lead-up to next year's golden  anniversary celebrations o f immigration history in the region.

 The Minister will present a cheque to Albury Regional Museum to support next year's Bonegilla  Reunion Festival commemorating the 50th anniversary o f the former Bonegilla Migrant Centre.

 "Bonegilla has a special place in Australia's history, because more than 320 000 new settlers from over  30 nationalities lived temporarily at the Centre between 1947 and 1971," Mr Ruddock said.

 "Bonegilla's history belongs to the migrant communities who experienced it and it is their  achievements in the region and around the nation that we celebrate when commemorating next year's  milestone."

 The Minister will also tour the museum's Bonegilla Collection o f artefacts and memorabilia.

 Earlier in the day, M r Ruddock will make a familiarisation tour to the site o f the former Migrant  Centre, at Latchford Barracks, Bonegilla.

 "We should all recognise the generous spirit in which the community has worked to preserve the  history o f a place that has formed a crossroads in so many lives," M r Ruddock said.

 The Minister will also attend a reception at Albury City Council offices with members o f the  Albury-Wodonga Regional Immigration Settlement Planning Committee (AWRISPC) and civic  officials.

 AWRISPC, established in 1993, has 35 members, whose areas o f responsibility range from Henty to  Wangaratta and east and west o f Albury along the Murray River. Their work includes monitoring the  first local settlement services plan for migrants and refugees, launched last June.

 The Minister's final engagement will be a visit to the Multicultural Resource Centre, 464 David Street,  Albury.

 Minister's program: 0950-1025 Bonegilla Migrant Centre, Latchford Barracks

 1 of 2 08/07/96 11:10:59

 IMMIGRATION MINISTER VISITS ALBURY WODONGA REGION http://164.97.143.2/minrel/R96014 .him

 t

 1100 Reception for AWRISPC, Albury City Council offices 1215 Reception at Albury Regional Museum, 4 Wodonga Place, Albury 1415 Arrive Multicultural Resource Centre.

 CANBERRA Thursday 9 May 1996

 MEDIA CONTACT: Jenny Hoskin, Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs,  (06) 264 2726

 2 of 2 08/07/96 11:11:00

