---
title: "Australian aid to refugees in the Middle East"
date: "1996-06-25"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211450635
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DMY20%22
---



This week is National Refugee Week - a week when Australians are remembering
the plight of refugees and displaced people all over the world.

I am therefore very pleased to be able to announce that the Australian
Government is providing a $1 million package of assistance to refugees in
Lebanon, Gaza and the West Bank. This is in addition to Australia's
contribution of $2.9 million to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Political Refugees in 1995-96.

 This comprehensive package
targets Palestinian refugee women, children, and the elderly, and will be
channelled through Australian non-government organisations (NGOs). It
demonstrates our commitment to supporting Middle East peace initiatives and
to helping improve the welfare of the most vulnerable groups within the
Palestinian refugee population.

 The Palestinian refugee
situation is the oldest unresolved refugee problem in recent decades. Most
of the people living in the camps have been refugees since 1948, suffering
increasing levels of unemployment, poverty and deprivation.

More than half of the funds will be used to support child immunisation
programs in Gaza, the West Bank and Lebanon. The money will be provided to
UNICEF Australia to buy vaccines, improve vaccine delivery systems, train
local staff and promote public awareness of the importance of immunising
young children. These programs will protect hundreds of thousands of
children against a range of potentially lethal childhood diseases. Women of
reproductive age, at risk from tetanus, will also be targeted for
immunisation.

 Over $200,000 will purchase new hospital
equipment as part of the refurbishment of the A1 Hamshary Hospital in
Lebanon. The funds are being channelled through the Australian Red Cross,
and will make an important contribution to improving health care for
Palestinian refugees in Lebanon.

 The remaining $200,000 of the
package will be used to support a women's training project in Lebanon being
run by APHEDA. It will ensure that the Palestinian women involved in the
project receive adequate child care, care for the elderly, and health
education.

 Media contact:

 Peter Collins, Minister's
office, 06 277 7500; 0411 414 695

 Sally Rynveld, AusAID, 06 276
4840

 Mr Thomson is today delivering a speech at the Refugee
Week Summit in Parliament House, Canberra. Copies of his speech can be
obtained by calling Public Affairs, AusAID on 06 276 4840.

