---
title: "United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Australia"
date: "1996-07-12"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211450982
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GKZ20%22
---

 M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 MRS 32/96

 UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES IN AUSTRALIA

 The visit by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is an  indication of the importance of the organisation's relationship with Australia the Minister  for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock said today.

 The High Commissioner Mrs Sadako Ogata, will arrive in Australia on Sunday 14 July  for a four day visit.

 "This is the High Commissioner's first official visit to Australia and it is being made in  recognition of Australia's longstanding commitment to and support of UNHCR," Mr  Ruddock said.

 "Australia is pleased to welcome Mrs Ogata and looks forward to continuing its  partnership with UNHCR."

 "Australia is a major partner for UNHCR in the resettlement of refugees and other  people in humanitarian need."

 "Since Mrs Ogata was elected High Commissioner in 1990, the agency has taken the  leading role in international responses to humanitarian crises. The UNHCR is charged  with caring for some 27 million people who are refugees or in refugee-like situations and  Mrs Ogata is providing important and dynamic leadership."

 In 1995-96 Australia contributed A$13.5 million to UNHCR and supported the UNHCR's  response to the situation in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.

 Australia also assists the UNHCR through an emergency standby scheme with  RedR Australia, which can deliver senior professional engineers to join UNHCR's  emergency relief operations within 72 hours.

 During her visit to Australia, Mrs Ogata will meet Prime Minister John Howard and hold  discussions on refugee issues with Mr Ruddock, as well as meeting the Minister for  Foreign Affairs, Mr Downer and senior Government officials.

 The High Commissioner will address the National Press Club on Tuesday 16 July on  the global refugee outlook.

 On Wednesday 17 July, Mrs Ogata will deliver the annual Sir Edward 'Weary' Dunlop  A sialink Lecture in Melbourne and assist in launching the joint UNHCR-AUSTCARE  corporate fundraising programme, Forum 2000.

 The Hon. Philip Ruddock MR Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

 Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600 

 Telephone: (06) 277 7860 Facsimile: (06) 273 4144

 CANBERRA  MEDIA CONTACT: 12 July 1996 STEVE INGRAM

 (06) 277 7860 or 0419 278 715

