---
title: "Veterans vetoed on legal aid"
date: "1996-10-17"
creators:
  - "Martin, Stephen"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR VETERANS' AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211452381
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2935389%22
---

 No.41/96

 17 October 1996

 35

 JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

 VETERANS VETOED ON LEGAL AID

 Shadow Attorney-General Nick BoIlais and Shadow Minister for Veterans Affairs Stephen Martin are outraged at Government cutbacks that will see 340,000 Australian veterans lose their entitlement to legal aid.

 Cuts to Commonwealth legal aid funding, of more than $100 million over 3 years will commence next year. 'Commonwealth persons including social security recipients, refugees and war veterans, previously entitled to legal aid, will now not be able to get assistance to enforce their rights unless their matters 'arise under Commonwealth law'.

 "This decision will effectively deprive 340,000 war veterans of a basic right - access to our legal system," Mr Martin said. "These people fought to defend the right of each and every one of us to a just and fair society. The least we can do is to allow them to access justice for themselves."

 "These cuts mean that veterans will be unable to protect their rights under the common law and State and Territory laws,'' Mr Martin said. "This will include assistance for small civil claims, tenancy and consumer credit disputes."

 "Despite the fact that these cuts are not due to be implemented until July next year, the impact of these cuts are already being felt," Senator Bolkus said.

 "Victorian Attorney-General Jane Wade admitted this yesterday when she said that the Victorian Legal Aid Commission was already receiving applications for cases that would run well beyond the middle of next year."

 "The Attorney-General has admitted that he failed to consult with the States and Territories on before making this decision."

 "He also failed to find out whether the States and Territories could make up the shortfall in funding. Quite simply, the State and Territory Government have said that they are either unable or unwilling to do so. This is an unacceptable situation."

 - "The Attorney must overturn this decision now and, if not, the Minister for Veterans Affairs must make him do it."

 Contact: Simon Banks Ph: (06) 277 3388 (bh) or 0419 63 85 87 (m) Fax: (06) 277 3062

 COMMON-II/v. PAR LIAMENT41,.

