---
title: "Minister to visit Europe and Middle East"
date: "1996-09-20"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211451958
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/V7330%22
---

 M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600

 Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Telephone: (06) 277 7860 Facsimile: (06) 273 4144

 MPS 63/96

 MINISTER TO VISIT EUROPE AND MIDDLE EAST

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock will leave next  week to lead the Australian delegation at the Executive Committee meeting of the  United Nations High Commission for Refugees in Geneva.

 While in Geneva, the Minister will also meet officials from the International Organisation  for Migration and the International Committee of the Red Cross to discuss refugees,  asylum seekers and mass movement of people.

 Mr Ruddock will also visit the United Kingdom and the Middle East.

 In the UK, the Minister will address a conference of Australia migration officers from  European, African and Middle Eastern posts to outline the Government's current and  future directions in immigration policy.

 He will also meet representatives of the British Government to discuss immigration and  refugee issues and processes.

 Mr Ruddock will leave on 22 September and return on 13 October. During his absence,  Senator Short will act as Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs.

 20 September 1996

 MEDIA CONTACT: Steve Ingram 06 277 7860 0419 278 715

