---
title: "Minister holds consultations on immigration program [Darwin, Brisbane, Townsville and Cairns]"
date: "1996-04-14"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Darwin"
  - "Brisbane"
  - "Townsville and Cairns"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211449899
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/S5130%22
---

 MINISTER HOLDS CONSULTATIONS ON IMMIGRATION PROGRAM http://164.97.143.2/minrel/R96007.htm

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Mr Philip Ruddock

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860

 MPS 7/96

 MINISTER HOLDS CONSULTATIONS ON IMMIGRATION PROGRAM

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock will hold consultations this  week in Darwin, Brisbane, Townsville and Cairns on the size and composition o f next year's  immigration and humanitarian program.

 "The Government is delivering on its commitment to strengthen consultative arrangements to achieve  increased and meaningful community input into policy development and decision making," Mr  Ruddock said.

 "I will hold a round o f consultations in Darwin on Monday and Tuesday and will be in Cairns,  Townsville and Brisbane later in the week to discuss program priorities with a wide range of  community groups and organisations.

 "To be successful, the immigration program for next year must have widespread community support  and acceptance. The consultations I am undertaking around Australia will allow the community to  have input."

 Mr Ruddock will meet a range o f representatives including those from multicultural Australia, the  business community, environment groups, planning, the union movement, refugee and other welfare  organisations as well as state and local government.

 At the beginning o f the 1995-96 program year the planning level for the Non-humanitarian Program  was set at 83,000 and the Humanitarian Program planning level was 13,000.

 "The Government must have the right to vary the size and composition o f the immigration program to  take into account economic, social, environmental and international considerations," M r Ruddock  said.

 "Family reunion and the humanitarian intake will remain central parts of the immigration program. We  also aim to attract migrants who will make the greatest contribution to Australia, especially in meeting  our economic challenges.

 "I am not anticipating significant variations in the intake, however I would not want to pre-empt the  consultative process."

 Mr Ruddock has flagged skill levels in the program and ways of encouraging migrants to settle in  regional areas as issues he would like addressed in the consultations.

 Mr Ruddock has held consultations in Sydney, Melbourne, Perth and Adelaide and will visit Tasmania

 1 of 2 08/07/96 11:16:57

 MINISTER HOLDS CONSULTATIONS ON IMMIGRATION PROGRAM http://164.97.143.2/minrel/R96005.htm

 *

 CANBERRA 9 April 1996

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Steve Ingram (06) 277 7860 0419 278 715

 2 of 2 08/07/96 11:17:52

