---
title: "Labor will support government legislation"
date: "1996-06-20"
creators:
  - "Kerr, Duncan"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214170349
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02011627%22
---

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION DUNCAN KERR, MP

 MEDIA RELEASE 20 June 1996

 LABOR WILL SUPPORT GOVERNMENT LEGISLATION

 Shadow Minister for Immigration, Duncan Kerr, said today the Opposition will support  legislation introduced into Parliament last night which seeks to prevent lawyers from 'touting'  for business from people who claim refugee status.

 M r K err said, however, that the Opposition still has major differences with the Government  over immigration policy.

 "We believe that the Coalition is in breach o f its election commitments about the size o f the  humanitarian refugee intake and is proposing to cut it," Mr Kerr said.

 In regard to the new legislation, M r Kerr said that without it lawyers could continue to use  agencies such as the Human Rights Commission as a cover to make representations to new  arrivals.

 "Lawyers have been known to use mail drops, refugee information literature and other well-  intentioned means to push for new business from people who know little or nothing about the  Australian system," M r Kerr said.

 "All they are doing is comp icating the process and making it difficult to achieve fast  turnaround o f case processing.

 "The legislation will put an end to the 'lawyers' picnic'.

 "It will NOT make it difficult for arrivals to seek legal representation, and it will not hinder the  access o f agencies such as tfre Human Rights Commission.

 "The legislation will simply close a loophole which complicates the system."

 M r Kerr said the Opposition still has many areas o f disagreement with the Government over  refugees and other immigration matters.

 "It's encouraging that we can at last support them on one aspect o f their handling o f the  portfolio," M r Kerr said. COMMONWEALTH

 PARLIAMENTARY LtBRAR)

 "Mr Ruddock has already chalked up a long list o f attacks on immigration programs:

 . the closure o f immigration offices in regional Australia

 . plans to withdraw key staff from overseas posts

 . put Family payments for migrants on the two-year waiting list

 . cut funding for the outworker investigation program

 . put funding for the Adult Migration English Program 'on hold'

 . and been embarrassed by a shortfall o f at least $283.5 million in immigration savings claimed by Peter Costello before the election.

 "And we are yet to see the harm the Government's Workplace Relations Bill will bring to  migrant workers," M r Kerr said.

 Further information: George Haddad, (06) 277 2178

