---
title: "Funding to help young homeless in Melbourne"
date: "1996-11-14"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION, TRAINING AND YOUTH AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211452843
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UP630%22
---

  V anstone media release template http://www .deet.gov.aulminwnlvanstone /vI591411.htm 

  AI .of 2 

  FUNDING TO HELP YOUNG HOMELESS IN 

  MELBOURNE 

  V1S9/96 14 November 1996 

  Senator Amanda Vanstone, Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs today  announced a grant of$91,915 to the Mornington Peninsula Youth and Family Services for the  establishment of a Job Placement, Employment and Training programme, JPET, a programme for  young people who are homeless or at risk of homeless ness. 

  This funding is part of $22 million to be provided nationally over the next two years. 

  "The Mornington Peninsula Youth and Family Services is one of eight funded as the first step in the  nation-wide re-establishment of JPET", Senator Vanstone said. "The Federal Government has placed  a high priority on youth issues, and we are committed to providing assistance to young people who  face barriers so they can realise their full potential . 

  "In the lead up to the election the Coalition promised to re-establish the successful JPET programme  and provide $11 million a year in funding for the next two years. We are delivering on this promise  today. 

  "JPET will provide an individually targeted and flexible approach to assisting homeless young people.  Services are designed to help any young person who is homeless or at risk of becoming homeless,  with priority being given to those aged 15-19. 

  "Other at risk groups, such as refugees, ex offenders, wards of the State or those exiting wardship  may also get help from JPET. They do not need to be homeless. 

  "A wide range of advice, support and referral services is offered to jobseekers to assist with  accommodation, finances, staying at school, training and employment, self esteem, family mediation,  drug and alcohol rehabilitation . 

  The Salvation Army's Peninsula Youth and Family Services JPET will provide an outreach response  as well as a facility based service and will offer pre-employment training where necessary.  Competency based individually negotiated employment and training experience in hospitality will be  provided at the Burnt Toast Cafe, part of the Salvation Army's ongoing programmes to assist  disadvantaged young people and serves as a training and work experience option for JPET clients . 

  The Salvation Army expects to assist about 50 homeless young people during the six-month period of  this current JPET project contract. 

  Local Federal Member Bruce Bil\son MP said that he was pleased local disadvantaged young people  would be provided with a flexible.., individualised service to help them get back on track. 

  Further information: Christian Kerr, Minister's Office, 08 8237 7946  Virginia Wallace, Minister's Office, 0419 217 918 

  11 /2519609 :31:14 

