---
title: "Review of Australia's overseas aid announced"
date: "1996-05-28"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211450267
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LOW20%22
---

  "MEDIA RELEASE  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  ALEXANDER DOWNER 

  AA9 

  EMBARGO TUES 29 MA Y 

  9. 25am 

  28 May 1996 

  REVIEW OF AUSTRALIA'S OVERSEAS AID ANNOUNCED 

  Australia's overseas aid program will be the subject of a major independent review by a three  person committee, chaired by a leading Australian businessman. 

  The review will report to me on the overall priorities, objectives and focus of our aid program.  Its overarching theme will be to examine how the ai~ program can best contribute to lasting  poverty reduction while also serving Australia's interests . 

  This review was foreshadowed in the Coalition's foreign policy document "A Confident  Australia" and will be the most comprehensive review since the Jackson Report more than ten  years ago. 

  Australia has an aid program it can be proud of Millions of people around the world are now  better off thanks to the help they've received from Australia. Our aid program, administered  by AusAID and delivered by Australian companies, individuals , non government organisations  and academic institutions is highly effective. 

  Nonetheless I feel that our aid program has been gradually losing its way and losing its focus  on what counts most, namely helping developing countries meet the basic needs of their  people and assisting in the achievement of a more equitable and secure world. 

  The aid review will be conducted by a three person committee. The chairman of the  committee will be Mr Paul Simons AM , former Executive Chairman ofWoolworths. Mr  Simons has had a distinguished career in business, taking Woolworths from a loss making  company to the most successful in its field, through firm and visionary leadership . 

  He will be joined by Professor Cliff Walsh from the University of Adelaide, and Ms Gaye Hart,  who is currently the Director of the Hunter Institute of Tecbnology. (Biographical details of  the review team are attached .) 

  The committee will consider both policy matters and delivery mechanisms. It will consult  widely both in Australia and internationally , in order to canvass the full range of opinions,  options and realities pertaining to Australian aid. Support in this task will be provided by  AusAID, the Government's overseas aid agency.  " 

  The review committee will report to me by the beginning of next year with recommendations  about how to ensure the maximum effectiveness of Australia's aid program. I hope it will also  set a new vision for ensuring that Australia's aid program not only reflects the needs of today  but is properly positioned to face the realities of the next century. 

  Media Contact: Peter Collins (Mr Downer's Office)  Andrea McLaughlin (Au sAID) 

  Biographical Details Attached  Terms of Reference Attached. 

  06-2777500/0411414695  06-276 4966 / 282 6067 

  REVIEW OF AUSTRALIA'S OVERSEAS AID PROGRAM 

  REVIEW TEAM 

  Paul Simons, AM -Chair 

  Former Executive Chairman ofWoolworths Ltd. Mr Simons has had a distinguished  career in business, taking Woolworths to record profits through firm and visionary  leadership . 

  Welsh born, Mr Simons began his working life in the merchant navy, then joined  Woolworths in 1954 as an executive trainee. He rose to be joint general manager, but  left to join Franklins in 1978, which he built up in nine years from a small one-state base  to a three-state $1.25 billion company. 

  He returned to Woolworths in 1987, and set about turning its performance around. His  plan started to produce results almost straight away, and its ongoing results lead to Mr  Simons being named BRWBusinessman of the Year in 1989. 

  Gaye Hart, AM 

  Ms Hart grew up in central west New .south Wales. She has a Bachelor of Arts and a  Diploma in Education from Sydney University, a Masters Degree from Canberra  University and is a Fellow of the Australian College of Education. 

  In 1985 Gaye Hart was invited to join the staff of the Australian Bicentennial Authority.  She was responsible for the national program of community events, and in 1989 she was  awarded membership of the Order of Australia for her contribution to the community  and to the Bicentenary. 

  Between 1992 and 1994 Ms Hart was the National Director of UNICEF (the United  Nations Children's Fund) in Australia . She is also a member of the Australian Council  for Overseas Aid. She is currently the Director of the Hunter Institute of Technology. 

  ClifT Walsh 

  Professor Walsh is Professor and Executive Director of the South Australian Centre for  Economic Studies, Adelaide and Flinders Universities, South Australia . Before that, he  was Professor and Director of the Federalism Research Centre at the ANU . 

  He has had a distinguished career in both academic and public policy fields, and was  senior economic adviser to the Prime Minister 1981-82 . 

   " 

  , , 

  .. 

  Terms of Reference for a Review of the Aid Program 

  Objective 

  The objective of the review is to present a report to the Minister for Foreign Affairs on the  overall priorities, objectives and focus of the aid program. It will examine how the aid  program can best contribute to lasting poverty reduction, while also serving Australia's  interests . 

  Issues to be addressed 

  Policy Context 

  The review will need to take into account current international trends which are influencing  the nature of development cooperation. It will need to pay attention to overall government  directions to ensure coherence between aid and foreign, trade and domestic policies . More  particularly, the review will need to consider: 

  the appropriate role for the aid program, particularly in the Asia-Pacific region 

  how the aid program should respond to economic globalisation and the  opportunities and challenges that trend provides for developing countries 

  the instabilities generated by the post cold war period which have increased the  demand for humanitarian and emergency assistance and international  peace-keeping and placed additional pressure on aid budgets 

  the role of other donors, including multilateral institutions, and the impact on  Australia's aid program of their changing priorities, for example, the withdrawal of  many donors from the South Pacific 

  the role of the aid program in addressing global issues such as environmental  degradation and climate change, refugees and the spread of preventable diseases . 

  Geographic focus 

  Australia's aid program will continue to focus on the Asia-Pacific region. The review should: 

  assess Australia's aid priorities within this region 

  consider the nature of the future aid relationship with PNG and the South Pacific  Island states 

  consider the scope for Australian assistance outsidt? the Asia-Pacific region, In  particularly in Africa and in the Central Asian Republics. 

  Program Focus 

  The review should examine the appropriate program focus and balance between sectors within  the aid program. This will require consideration of: 

  good governance and policy dialogue issues (including economic reform, human  rights and equity concerns) 

  the appropriate balance of sectoral activities between, for example, education,  health, agriculture and infrastructure 

  the appropriate focus on cross-cutting issues such as gender and the environment. 

  Aid delivery 

  The review will need to consider the most appropriate aid delivery mechanisms - bilateral,  multilateral and NGOs. 

  Review process 

  It will be important for the review to take account of the views of those involved in Australia's  development cooperation, including: 

  recipient governments 

  Australian firms 

  Australian tertiary and research institutions 

  government departments 

  non-government organisations . 

  Timetable 

  The Committee will report within six months. This will require a concerted effort on the part  of all Committee members and the Secretariat. 

  Output 

  The Committee's report will contain recommendations to the Government about how to  ensure the maximum effectiveness of the Australian aid program. The report shol,lld also  consider the implications , if any, of its recommendations for Au sAID's organisational structure  and processes. 

