---
title: ""Human rights and Australian foreign policy": speech to the first Asia-Pacific Regional Workshop of National Human Rights Institutions, Darwin"
date: "1996-07-09"
creators:
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211450838
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2956487%22
---

 "HUMAN RIGHTS AND AUSTRALIAN FOREIGN POLICY"

 SPEECH TO THE FIRST ASIA-PACIFIC REGIONAL WORKSHOP OF NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS INSTITUTIONS

 DARWIN 9 JULY 1996

 THE HON L BRERETON MP SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 DELIVERY - 230PM

 7.s.lnk A 7 -7,T

 PARLielliazu _

 It is a great pleasure today to be able to address this, the First Asia-Pacific

 Regional Workshop of National Human Rights Institutions.

 Human rights is the one area of Australian foreign policy that most consistently

 attracts lively interest from the Australian community.

 Its not surprising.

 The pursuit of human rights at home and abroad is a matter of great importance

 to Australians.

 Support for an active pro-human rights stand is broadly based in the Australian

 community, the product not only of our liberal and social democratic traditions,

 but also of a history which has led us to uphold a strongly egalitarian culture.

 And human rights issues concern real people in often deeply distressing

 situations. By their nature they raise strong emotions, and lead people to make

 judgments not only on the basis of what might be considered good policy in the

 national interest, but on strongly held views of morality, of what is right and

 wrong, and to express those judgments vigorously regardless of whichever

 government holds office in Canberra.

 As I've said on several recent occasions, one of the few benefits of Opposition

 is that you have extra time to reflect on the p ast, the present and to look to the

 future. And in the period since the Australian federal election on the 2nd of

 March. I've had the opportunity as Shadow Foreign Minister to do some

 3

 thinking about Labor's record in international affairs and where Australian

 foreign policy should go as we move toward a new century.

 You won't be unhappy when I say human rights issues loom large. Indeed one

 of the things that has deeply impressed me as I start to understand this portfolio

 is the pervasiveness of human rights issues across the foreign policy agenda -be it in re g ard to our bilateral relations in the Asia-Pacific region and beyond:

 or our involvement in multilateral institutions; or the future of Australia's

 foreign aid programs. The protection and promotion of human rights is not one

 issue among many, it is one of the central themes of Australian foreign policy.

 This is not new. The Australia we are so p roud of has a strong tradition of

 supporting human rights as an essential element of our engagement with the

 wider world.

 In 1945, the great Australian jurist and statesman, Herbert Vere Evart played a

 leading role at the San Francisco Conference which negotiated the UN Charter.

 The preamble of the Charter, in sim p le but eloquent language, sets out the

 determination of the peoples of the world  to  reaffirm faith in fundamental

 human rights, in the di g nity and worth of the human person, in equal rights of

 men and women" and "to promote social progress and better standards of life ".

 Evan was recognised, of course, as a leader of the small powers at San

 Francisco which fought to limit the power of the permanent members of the

 Security Council to exercise the veto. What is perhaps less well known, but of

 endurin g  significance, is Evatt's key role in arguing successfully that UN

 political acti% ity would not be enough to prevent war; that the UN would also

 4

 have to address the deep-seated economic and social problems - the problems

 which give rise to injustice and as a result, threaten international security.

 Three years later. as President of the General Assembly, Evatt played a key role

 in the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as the "common

 standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations", Speaking to the

 General Assembly on that historic occasion. 10 December 1948, now

 celebrated around the world as Human Rights Day, Evatt declared, and I quote:

 "The adoption of the Declaration is a step forward in a great evolutionary

 process ... the first occasion on which the organised community of nations has

 made a declaration of human rights and fundamental freedoms. That document

 is backed by the authority of a body of opinion of the United Nations as a

 whole and millions of people, men, women and children all over the world who

 would turn to it for help, guidance and inspiration."

 In the nearly half century since the adoption of the Universal Declaration, the

 nations and peoples of the world have gone on, as Evatt foresaw, to develop an

 increasingly effective system of p rinciples, of legal regimes and machinery to

 promote human rights and protect groups and individuals from injustice.

 In 1966. the Universal Declaration was joined by two more vital, Covenants -one on Civil and Political Rights, the other concerning Economic, Social and

 Cultural Rights - to form what is often called the International Bill of Rights.

 Other instruments and declarations have followed - the Convention on the

 Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; the Convention on the

 Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; the Convention

 a.g airtst Torture and other Cruel_ Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or

 5

 Punishment; and Convention 111 of the International Labour Organisation

 covering discrimination in employment in our region_

 This evolution has not been without its difficulties, without its arguments.

 Developed countries have traditionally given more emphasis to civil and

 nolitical rights to rights of liberty and security of the person; to fair trial; to

 freedom from torture and cruel punishment; to freedom of expression and

 participation in the political process; to freedom from discrimination on the

 grounds of race, sex or national origin; and to freedom of religion.

 The governments of developing countries, those of our own Asia-Pacific

 region, have tended to emphasise economic, social and cultural rights, arguing

 that these must have pre-eminence so long as poverty exists. They argue that

 the international focus on civil and political rights invites intrusive attention in

 what they consider internal matters.

 In its more extreme expressions, this argument portrays human rights, and

 particularly civil and political rights, as Western liberal constructs of little

 relevance to non-Western societies, often pursued by the West for self-interested p olitical and economic motives.

 A great stride towards the resolution of this debate was made by the 1993

 Vienna Conference on Human Rights.

 The Vienna Declaration, emerging from that conference after tortuous

 negotiation. affirmed that all human rights are equal and indivisible, and there

 is no hierarchy of human rights. Moreover, the governments of the world

 6

 affirmed at Vienna that social and cultural differences could not be used to

 iustify abuses of human rights: As it said "While the significance of national

 and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and religious

 backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of states, regardless of their

 political, economic and cultural systems, to promote and protect all human

 rights and fundamental freedoms,"

 The Vienna Declaration was an unequivocal reaffirmation by the international

 community that human rights are equal and indivisible, that they apply to

 everyone, and that all states have an obligation to protect and promote them. In

 so doing the Declaration stands as a fundamental benchmark for the promotion

 and protection of human rights by the international community into the next

 century.

 Nov, in 1996, human rights are rightly recognised as an integral part of

 national and international activity. Close scrutiny of a country's human rights

 performance is generally regarded as legitimate in a way only dimly perceived

 with the Universal Declaration was adopted in 1948. Today, world attention

 and activity on human rights is on a scale scarcely imaginable five decades ago.

 Even the  g overnments that abuse human rights rarely reject the provisions of the Universal Declaration being applied to them; their usual defence is to deny

 the occurrence of abuses. thus implicitly acknowledging the validity of the

 provisions.

 The reality, of course. is that there is no society anywhere in the world which

 does not aspire, at least publicly, to increase respect for human life and freedom

 7

 from fear and want. Respect for life, health, dignity, the worth of individuals

 and communities is a universal aspiration and the protection of human rights

 our universal obligation.

 That said, the international debate on human rights continues - particularly in

 the Asia-Pacific, the only region in the world without its own regional

 arrangements to promote and protect these rights.

 One question so often asked, is why should governments pursue human rights

 in the international arena, given the usual sensitivity in the country in question,

 and the fact that even their successful pursuit is more often than not marginal to

 one's own country's strategic and economic interests? One answer is that for a

 country like Australia, human rights policy involves an extension to our foreign

 relations of the basic values of the Australian community: values at the core of

 our sense of self, values which a democratic society expects, indeed demands,

 government pursue in dealings with the wider world. Another is simply that

 countries like Australia believe that the moral obligation is its own justification.

 that a commitment to good international citizenship demands no less than

 seeking to secure universal adherence to all human rights.

 That said, the pursuit of human rights need not be entirely selfless. A

 reputation as a good international citizen can be helpful in pursuing all sorts of

 interests. More importantly, there is a real sense that in embracing the cause of

 those denied their rights, we also guard and reinforce the nature of those rights

 themselves. History shows very clearly that rights not defended are rights

 easily lost, and once lost in any part of the world, they are just that bit harder to

 preserve elsewhere and there can be no doubt that the evolution of just and

 8

 tolerant societies brings its own international benefits: higher standards of

 international behaviour, the contribution that internal stability makes to

 international peace and securit y . Respect for human rights inhibits mass

 refugee flows. makes states less inclined to  g o to war with each other, and

 alleviates the poverty and inequality that breed terrorism - the force that knows

 no national boundaries.

 The critical linkaue between human rights and international security,

 particularl y  regional security, was well expressed a few years ago by Our own

 Brian Burdekin. then Australia's Human Rights Commissioner, in testimony to

 the Human Rights Sub-Committee of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on

 Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade. He said then: "I think our security in this

 region is dependent on the stability of the region, and I very strongly believe

 that the stabilit y  of the rezion. in turn, is dependent on the extent to which

 governments in particular do or do not observe fundamental human rights ..

 Until e recognise that violations of human rights have costs, not only for

 individuals but also in terms of matters relating to defence, security and

 stabilit, we will not have ot the picture."

 With such considerations in mind, the Joint Committee has twice recommended

 that Australia explore the establishment of a regional dialogue on human rights

 and regular contact between the Human Rights Commissions of regional

 countries As Deputy Chairman of the Joint Committee, it is a particular

 pleasure to speak at this first Regional Workshop of National Human Rights

 Institutions, a ver y  important step in enhancing that dialogue and a vital

 element in the .reat evolutionary process" foreshadowed by Dr Evart nearly

 r-ive decades aLo.

 9

 Let me say that as we develop our regional dialogue it will be absolutely

 essential to adhere to the principle of promoting all human rights equally, and

 resist any purported hierarchy. We need to act both in word and in deed to

 promote the universality and indivisibility of human rights. Otherwise we can

 easily lapse back into sterile debates of the past and lose the great opportunity

 to advance human rights throughout the region.

 In the case of Australia, we must maintain our commitment to promote and

 protect not only "traditional" civil and political rights, but all human rights,

 civil and political, economic and social, religious and cultural, and to do so in a

 manner that is absolutely consistent and non-discriminatory.

 In this regard I must say that while there is a very strong commitment across

 Australian politics to support human rights, I do have some concerns about the

 new Government's approach to this vitally important issue. I do not doubt the

 in-principle commitment of the Government to continue Australia's tradition of

 activism in this area. The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Alexander Downer, has

 spoken at length of his commitment to advance the cause of human rights and I

 have no reason to doubt his sincerity on the issue.

 At the same time, we are yet to see the full implications of the Coalition

 Government's avowedly realist" approach to international relations - their

 emphasis on the role of power politics and narrowly-defined calculations of

 national self-interest as the bedrock of international relations. It remains to be

 seen just how effectively the pursuit of human rights within the Asia-Pacific

 reg ion fits within such an intellectual and p olitical framework.

 10

 At the moment, however, my concern lies more with the narrow approach to

 human rights issues emerging as the new government develops its approach to

 human rights diplomacy - their focus on traditional civil and political rights

 which, I fear, neglects other fundamental human rights, in particular, those

 associated with the working lives of men, women and children. It is not so

 much what the Government is saying - but what it is doing. And in human

 rights, actions unquestionably speak so much louder than words.

 Over the past few years debate has grown about the conditions under which

 people work around the world, in particular, concern about working conditions

 which constitute a violation of basic human rights. This debate has highlighted

 some deeply disturbing practices - in particular, exploitative child labour and

 forced labour - arousing widespread concern in Australia and calls for the

 Australian Government to help eradicate such practices. Complex issues have

 arisen: what are the causes of poor working conditions and what should be

 done to address them; which labour conditions can be considered part of basic

 human rights:, and what is the best way to pressure governments to promote the

 human rights of their citizens?

 in response to this important debate, the Keating Government convened a high

 level tripartite working party - of government, trade union and business

 members - to examine what should be done to promote better adherence to

 international standards for labour in the Asia-Pacific region. The Working

 Party. chaired by  my former ministerial colleague, Michael Duffy, focussed its

 investigation on those standards intrinsic to universal human rights: the "core"

 labour standards of the right to collective bargaining and freedom of

 11

 association, freedom from forced or compulsory labour; freedom from

 exploitative child labour; and equal opportunity stancinrds which ensure

 freedom from discrimination in the workplace.

 I do not propose today to discuss the Working Party's report in detail, suffice to

 say that it hi g hlighted an alarming level of abuse of labour rights in our region

 and canvassed a range of p ossible responses for Australia - from economic

 sanctions to increasing our foreign aid budget, and doing more through the

 regional activities of the International Labour Organisation. Its

 recommendations are both practical and realistic, With regard to promoting

 regional dialo g ue on labour rights issues, the report noted the limited scope

 within the (APEC) process for their promotion against the wishes of individual

 members. At the same time, the Working Party found that, and I quote;

 "having regard to the growing significance of the labour standards issue in

 international forums it will, at some stage, be necessary for APEC to address

 labour standards issues as it develops as a forum for broad-based economic

 cooperaration.”

 This is not a radical view. Many commentators have pointed out that dialogue

 on labour standards is essential to the ongoing liberalisation of regional and

 global trade Governments should not, of course, use the issue of labour

 standards to pursue an agenda of trade protectionism. But without a general

 adherence to internationally agreed core labour standards, support for free trade

 will sooner or later falter. This is the point so well expressed by US Secretary

 of Labour Robert Reich last month when he warned that "Unless citizens have

 confidence that all nations are observing these basic human rights, it will be

 more difficult to justify to them additional liberalisation of trade."

 12

 The Working Part y 's conclusion on this issue was clear. The report says; -Within the consensus-style decision making essential to APECs operations,

 the Australian Government should play a positive role in encouraging its

 counterparts to move towards a constructive dialogue on core labour

 standards." This is a sound arid reasonable p roposition. Unfortunately,

 however, it appears that this recommendation has found no favour with the new

 Government which quietly released the Working Party's report without

 comment - perhaps in the hope that it would be quickly forgotten.

 At the same time, the Government has downgraded Australia's involvement in

 the International Labour Organization (ILO) - axing Australia's special adviser

 in Geneva and slashing our representation at the ILO's annual conference

 Prospective cuts to Australia's foreign aid programs also bode ill for our

 commitment to address labour rights issues in the Asia-Pacific region.

 In budget year 1994/95, the Australian Government committed more than $4

 million of aid towards the development of core labour standards in the region,

 including in particular programs to eliminate exploitative child labour, and in

 1995;96 our commitments in this area doubled to exceed $8 million. These

 programs include helping train industrial workplace organisers in the

 Philippines, principally women process workers, to negotiate employment

 conditions and to strengthen health and safety measures. In Malaysia Australia

 has assisted occupational health and safety programs while in Nepal we have

 been working with the ILO to provide rehabilitation services to bonded

 children and income generating activities for their families. We have also been

 active in promoting adherence to international labour standards in China.

 13

 Vietnam. Thailand and Indonesia through Australian support for the

 ILO/ASILO Program and here I speak from personal experience as a former

 'Minister t'or Industrial Relations.

 These programs and many others protect and promote basic human rights in our

 region. They are a practical demonstration of our nation's cornmittnent to

 promote all human rig hts - not just civil and political rights. But it's a

 commitment now under very  considerable threat Our support for ASILO has

 already been terminated. As a result, we will be exp osed to charges of double

 standards and inconsistency. In turn, our ability to work effectively when we

 raise so-called "traditional'. human rights issues with countries in our region

 and beyond may diminish. In the field of human rights forget the talk, what

 counts is action and commitment of resources. Here the new Government, as it

 takes the axe to Australia's involvement in organisations such as the ILO and

 our foreign aid programs, is failing a critical test. Australia's role as an

 advocate of the universality and indivisibility of human rights will sadly

 diminish.

 It is with regret that I end this speech on such a negative note. But as I said at

 the outset, vigorous discussion and robust criticism is a key element in the

 formulation of Australia's human rights policies. In conclusion, I wish all the

 participants today every success in enhancing our regional dialogue in carrying

 forward the great work begun all those years ago with the adoption of the

 Universal Declaration. I thank you,

