---
title: "Minister holds consultations on migration program [Adelaide]"
date: "1996-04-02"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211449816
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/V5130%22
---

 MINISTER HOLDS CONSULTATIONS ON MIGRATION PROGRAM http://164.97.143.2/minrel/R96003.htm

 \

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Mr Philip Ruddock

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860

 MPS 3/96

 MINISTER HOLDS CONSULTATIONS ON MIGRATION PROGRAM

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, begins consultations  tomorrow in Adelaide on the size and composition of next year's immigration and humanitarian  program.

 "The Government is delivering on its commitment to strengthen consultative arrangements to achieve  increased and meaningful community input into policy development and decision making," M r  Ruddock said.

 "I will hold a round o f consultations in Adelaide over the next two days, discussing program priorities  with a wide range o f community groups and organisations.

 "To be successful, the immigration program for next year must have widespread community support  and acceptance. The consultations I will be undertaking in coming weeks around Australia will allow  the community to have input."

 M r Ruddock will meet a range of representatives including those from multicultural Australia, the  business community, environment groups, planning, the union movement, refugee and other welfare  organisations as well as state and local government.

 At the beginning of the 1995-96 program year the planning level for the Non-humanitarian Program  was set at 83,000 and the Humanitarian Program planning level was 13,000.

 "The Government must have the right to vary the size and composition o f the immigration program to  take into account economic, social, environmental and international considerations," Mr Ruddock  said.

 "Family reunion and the humanitarian intake will remain central parts o f the immigration program. We  also aim to attract migrants who will make the greatest contribution to Australia, especially in meeting  our economic challenges.

 "I am not anticipating significant variations in the intake, however I would not want to pre-empt the  consultative process."

 M r Ruddock has flagged skill levels in the program and ways o f encouraging migrants to settle in  regional areas as issues he would like addressed in the consultations.

 M r Ruddock has held consultations in Perth and in coming weeks, will visit Sydney, Melbourne,  Darwin, Brisbane and Hobart as well as some major regional centres.

 1 of 2 08/07/96 11:19:34

 http://164.97.143.2/m in re 1/R96003. ] 11 m MINISTER HOLDS CONSULTATIONS ON MIGRATION PROGRAM

 CANBERRA 2 April 1996

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Steve Ingram (06) 277 7860, or 0419 278 715

 2 of 2 08/07/96 11:19:35

