---
title: "Minister urges considered response on refugees."
date: "1996-12-18"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211453464
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/IX730%22
---

 M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 The Hon. Philip Ruddock MR Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600

 Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Telephone: (06) 277 7860 Facsimile: (06) 273 4144

 MRS 86/96

 MINISTER URGES CONSIDERED RESPONSE ON REFUGEES

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock has called on  church leaders not to undermine Australia's ability to respond to refugees.

 "I am concerned that well-meaning people will unwittingly compromise Australia's  ability to maximise its response to refugees in urgent need of resettlement," Mr  Ruddock said.

 The Minister's comments follow statements from church leaders demanding that East  Timorese asylum seekers be allowed to remain in Australia, even if they have access  to the protection of another country. The statements are also in advance of the  outcome of Federal Court proceedings examining the issue of refugee status.

 "Australia does not have unlimited resources to assist refugees around the world and  if we give places to people who already have protection, we are denying places to  refugees who have nowhere else to go," Mr Ruddock said.

 "The United Nations estimates that 60,000 - 70,000 refugees are in urgent need of  resettlement. If Australia cannot respond because it has given places to people with  somewhere else to go, those refugees will be left without hope or asylum."

 "I have visited the camps in which some of these refugees live and I can only  describe their conditions as appalling. They live in fear for their lives and they have  no choice as to where they will be resettled."

 Mr Ruddock asked people to direct their energy and resources to assisting refugees  who have no-one else to turn to.

 "On a per capita basis, Australia has resettled more refugees and humanitarian  entrants than any other country in the world. If we are to maintain the integrity and  humanity of our response, we need to ensure we concentrate our efforts on those  with nowhere else to go."

 "I would urge people who wish to help refugees to consider how they can assist  those who have no other country to turn to."

 18 December 1996

 MEDIA CONTACT: Steve Ingram 06 277 7860 0419 278 715

