---
title: "Minister begins consultations on immigration program"
date: "1996-04-01"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211449823
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/W5130%22
---

 MINISTER BEGINS CONSULTATIONS ON IMMIGRATION PROGRAM

 MEDIA RELEASE

 iU °i

 http://164.97.143.2/minrcl/R96002.1itm

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 M r Philip Ruddock

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860

 MPS 2/96

 MINISTER BEGINS CONSULTATIONS ON IMMIGRATION PROGRAM

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, begins consultations today in  Perth, on the size and composition o f next year's immigration and humanitarian program.

 "The Government is delivering on its commitment to strengthen consultative arrangements to achieve  increased and meaningful community input into policy development and decision making," M r  Ruddock said.

 "I will begin the first round o f consultations in Perth today by discussing program priorities with a  wide range o f community groups and organisations."

 "To be successful, the immigration program for next year must have widespread community support  and acceptance. The consultations I will be undertaking in coming weeks around Australia will allow  the community to have input."

 M r Ruddock will meet a range o f representatives including those from multicultural Australia, the  business community, environment groups, planning, the union movement, refugee and other welfare  organisations as well as state and local government.

 At the beginning o f the 1995-96 program year the planning level for the Non-humanitarian Program  was set at 83,000 and the Humanitarian Program planning level was 13,000.

 "The Government must have the right to vary the size and composition o f the immigration program to  take into account economic, social, environmental and international considerations," M r Ruddock  said.

 "Family reunion and the humanitarian intake will remain central parts o f the immigration program. We  also aim to attract migrants who will make the greatest contribution to Australia, especially in meeting  our economic challenges."

 "I am not anticipating significant variations in the intake, however I would not want to pre-empt the  consultative process."

 Mr Ruddock has flagged skill levels in the program and ways o f encouraging migrants to settle in  regional areas as issues he would like addressed in the consultations.

 Other cities to be visited in the near future include Adelaide, Sydney, Melbourne, Darwin, Brisbane  and Hobart, as well as some major regional centres.

 1 ol" 2 08/07/96 11:21:24

 MINISTER BEGINS CONSULTATIONS ON IMMIGRATION PROGRAM http://] 64.97.143.2/minrcl/R96002.him

 PERTH 1 April 1996

 CONTACT: Steve Ingram 0419 278 715, or (06) 277 7860

 2 of 2 08/07/96 11:21:25

