---
title: "Opposition mistake on refugee intake"
date: "1996-12-26"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211453524
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/99830%22
---

 M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 The Hon, Philip Ruddock MP Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600

 Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Telephone: (06) 277 7360 Facsimile: (06)-273 4144

 MRS 89/96

 OPPOSITION MISTAKE ON REFUGEE INTAKE

 The Opposition is either hypocritical or has demonstrated a complete misunderstanding  of the structure of its own refugee and humanitarian intake, the Minister for Immigration  and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock said today.

 'The Opposition has mistakenly suggested family reunion applicants will be moved into  the refugee and humanitarian program, displacing bona fide refugees," Mr Ruddock  said.

 "The reality is that the dependents of refugee and humanitarian entrants have always  been counted as part of that program, except where they have not been declared on the  original application."

 Of the 13,632 Humanitarian arrivals in 1994-95 under Labor, 5,116 were principal  applicants, meaning the remaining 8,516 places went to the immediate family of  Refugee, Special Assistance and Special Humanitarian entrants.

 'The Government had moved to end an anomaly in the treatment of some refugees and  their spouses and dependent children, who because of separation are unable to travel  with the refugee initially," Mr Ruddock said.

 'The impact upon the program is believed to be at worst, marginal."

 If the family had travelled with the refugee, they would be treated as refugees, meaning  the Government pays for airfares and does not impose fees. If however, the refugee's  family was separated and later reunited, Labor required the family to be entered under  family reunion, meaning they had to pay fees and airfares.

 The Government introduced Regulations to ensure the refugee's spouse and dependent  children could come under the refugee program at a later date. Labor refused to allow  this. *

 Resources are still required to provide specialist services to refugee families, even if  they arrive later, so I decided that they should be counted as part of the refugee  program. This will affect small numbers but ensure Australia responds to refugee and 

 humanitarian entrants with the compassion they deserve.

 26 December 1996

 MEDIA CONTACT: Steve Ingram 0419 278 715

