---
title: "Funding to help young homeless in Perth"
date: "1996-11-14"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION, TRAINING AND YOUTH AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211452840
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PP630%22
---

  http:// www .deet.gov.aulminwnlvanstone /vI611411.htm http://www .deet.gov.aulminwnlvanstone/vI611411.htm 

  llt OJf 2 

  FUNDING TO HELP YOUNG HOMELESS IN PERTH 

  V161/96 14 November 1996 

  Senator Amanda Vanstone, Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs, today  announced a grant of$74,775 to the Wanneroo Accommodation and Support Service for the  establishment of a Job Placement, Employment and Training programme, JPET, a programme for  young people who are homeless or at risk of homelessness. 

  This funding is part of $22 million to be provided nationally over the next two years. 

  "The Wanneroo Accommodation'and Support Service is one of eight services funded as the first step  in the nation-wide re-establishment ofJPET", Senator Vanstone said. "The Federal Government has  placed a high priority on youth issues, and we are committed to providing assistance to young people  who face barriers so they can reach their full potential. 

  "In the lead up to the election the Coalition promised to re-establish the successful JPET programme  and provide $11 million a year in funding for the next two years. We are delivering on this promise  today. 

  "JPET will provide an individually targeted and flexible approach to assisting homeless young people.  Services are designed to help any young person who is homeless or at risk of becoming homeless,  with priority being given to those aged 15-19. 

  "Other at risk groups, such as refugees, ex offenders, wards of the State or those exiting wardship  may also get help from JPET. Th~y do not need to be homeless. 

  "A wide range of advice, suppo~ and referral services is offered to jobseekers to assist with  accommodation, finances, staying at school, training and employment, self esteem, family mediation,  drug and alcohol rehabilitation . 

  Wanneroo JPET will support clients to job/training readiness with professional assessment,  development of individual program plans and ongoing client support. 

  Two specialist staff will develop employment projects and placements through marketing  programs/services and clients to local employment providers, maintaining links with providers, service  organisations and regional economic bodies, offer support to employment and training providers and  work to match clients to suitable employment placements or training and develop needs based  training . 

  "I am pleased disadvantaged young people from the Wanneroo area will be provided with a flexible,  individualised service to help the~ get back on track," Senator Vanstone said. 

  Further information: Christian Kerr, Minister's Office, 08 8237 7946  Virginia Wallace, Minister's Office, 0419 217 918 

  11125/9609:29:59 

