---
title: "Interview with Deputy Prime Minister, 24 March 1996 [Topics: IMF, current account deficit]"
date: "1996-03-24"
creators:
  - "Fischer, Tim"
source: "MINISTER FOR TRADE"
subjects:
  - "Topics: IMF"
  - "current account deficit"
  - "[Topics"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211449729
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/A3T20%22
---



PRESENTER - TRACEE HUTCHISON:

 Hello and welcome to Seven Days,
I'm Tracee Hutchison. Tonight's guest is celebrating his twenty fifth year
in Australian politics, both as a State and Federal Parliamentarian. Deputy
Prime Minister, Tim Fischer. Mr Fischer, welcome.


TIM
FISCHER - DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER:

 Greetings Tracee.

HUTCHISON:

 Well in a week that saw the international monetary
fund put Australia on notice over its ballooning current account deficit, Mr
Fischer's Trade portfolio will play a crucial role in the Howard
Government's strategy to balance the books.

REPORTER:

 This week's outbreak of mad cow disease in Britain
could be a blessing in disguise for Australia's ailing beef industry,
currently suffering its worst price slump in twenty five years.

FISCHER:

 There is no joy in the agony arising from mad cow
disease but Australian beef exporters stand ready to export where proper
opportunities arise.


REPORTER:

 With European bans
on hormone grown beef from the United States, Australia is the most likely
market. The windfall for Australia's cattle industry came as the government
prepared to beef up our involvement in the nuclear industry. The proposal to
open a new uranium mine in the Kakadu National Park sparked a rash of
criticism from conservation groups. But the government says proper
safeguards will be met.


SENATOR WARWICK PARER -
RESOURCES MINISTER:

 All lines will need a proper, open environmental
impact statement before they can go ahead.

REPORTER:

 The uranium debate came at the end of the week that
saw a warning from the International Monetary Fund that Australia's current
account deficit of more than five per cent was way too high. The government
says it can find eight billion dollars through cuts to public spending but
there's increasing speculation the money will have to come from somewhere
else. Financial analysts say the government's estimates are too low and it
may need to find in excess of ten billion dollars.


ALAN
OSTER - NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK:

 They may even have to do more if
the economy is softer than what they thought it.

REPORTER:

 So far, the Howard Government has displayed the stoic
face of a debt ridden government that means business and as such its pre
election promise of no new taxes may well be amongst its first economic re-
assessments.


HUTCHISON:

 Well Mr Fischer, you did
mention that you wouldn't want to take advantage of something so terrible as
mad cow disease, if we talk firstly about that. But how beneficial might it
be for Australia's beef industry?


FISCHER:

 Well I
think we have to be realistic of our quotas in place between Australia and
the Europeans which are a limiting factor and some of those quotas are near
filled in various categories. But there may be a third country circumstance
whereby the Europeans divert some of their export to replenish the
disruption caused by the outbreak in Britain and that my open up some
limited opportunity for Australia Certainly Australian beef exporters stand
ready to export their high quality product in a proper way to any markets
emerging.


HUTCHISON:

 It is only temporary though
and the real market for Australia is Asia and our cattle industry ... our
cattle farmers have been very much squeezed out of that market by subsidised
US cattle.

 Now, the US have done that several times with wheat and the
dairy industry last year, what are you going to do to try and evert that to
make it better for our primary produces?


FISCHER:

Let me reveal some good news for a change, that is, late last week the joint
house senate conference in the United States Congress reported out a US farm
bill which means that there's been some cautious steps down the right
direction to ease the level of subsidisation and meet some of the trade
liberalisation objectives of Australia. Unfortunately the EEP [ph.sp.] grain
subsidy and DEP [ph.sp.] subsidy programs remain in place, not activated at
times but nevertheless in place.

 There is a long way to go but
we will continue the representations as we have even since taking office, to
encourage trade liberalisation, to encourage United States further down that
path and to encourage for Europeans to look at abolishing these quotas such
as beef quotas. So there is more flexibility to meet any sudden circumstance
arising.


HUTCHISON:

 The thing though that would be
most beneficial for beef farmers and primary industry in general is a goods
and services tax.


FISCHER:

 Well that may be your
view and indeed ...


HUTCHISON:

 They say that, I
mean, it's a National Farmers Federation Policy, it's been a National Party
policy ambition for a long time ...


FISCHER:

 And
it would help all sorts of exporters including the export of hi tech ferries
from Hobart to the world or the export of bricks from Bundaberg, wide bay
brick services to Japan and we want to help facilitate that but GST is not
part of that equation. It was correct policy in the 1993 election setting,
the people made a decision, we stand by our commitment, no GST.

HUTCHISON:

 So you wouldn't change you mind, even though you've
found out that you've inherited a huge debt from the previous government?
You have got a mandate to really take the tough decisions that are going to
be necessary to pull the country out of the economic slump.

FISCHER:

 We do not have a mandate for GST. We do have a mandate
for no new taxes and for making the waterfront more efficient and for more
flexibility in industrial relations and for a range of other steps which are
going to be pro-active on the export front. And I'm very pleased as incoming
Minister for Trade to already embark on some of those bilateral trade
negotiations as part of that equation. And to have very useful, constructive
talks with my New Zealand counterpart, Philip Burden [ph.sp.] a few days ago
over a range of issues.

 The multi-lateral, the regional, the
bilateral and especially putting more momentum into closer economic
relations, CER, between Australia and New Zealand.

HUTCHISON:

 So, even though it'd be good for your constituency
and good for your portfolio you won't be taking a GST to Cabinet?


FISCHER:

 Tracee, you can temp and try any tangent but
the answer is no. There is no mandate but there are a lot of other proactive
export effort and steps the Coalition Government will be taking which will
help exporters get on the front foot not only to Asia but to the
world.


HUTCHISON:

 No, also in the last week we've
seen the relinquishing of the three mines uranium policy. It's widely viewed
that it's a buyers market at the moment. Why get into it now?

FISCHER:

 Well Warwick Parer is working through the details of
that and, yes, the policy, the illogical policy, to quote Keating and Hawke,
is dead. And I must say the Labor Caucus and the shadow cabinet has shown
how spineless they are, already, under their new leader Beazley in going
down the left wing path of not taking the opportunity to get one thing right
in opposition and change their illogical uranium policy. We have, and the
processes arising from that Minister Warwick Parer is working through
carefully.

 One aspect relating to my portfolio of course is the
division of bilateral safeguard arrangements with each and every country we
export to. And I want to give you the absolute assurance that we'll not be
exporting uranium from Australia unless it is to a market and a country
where we have a bilateral safeguard arrangement firmly in place.


HUTCHISON:

 Do you think Australians really want to see
us getting involved more aggressively in the nuclear industry given the huge
protests late last year to the Mururoa tests?

FISCHER:

 Well the world needs a comprehensive test ban treaty
and to be signed off on by all the major stake holders and the sooner the
better. But you can't switch off the nuclear power generation or electricity
power generation of the northern hemisphere. If you do so you are opening
the way of acid rain in massive quantities as bad coal is used to fire up
old coal fired power stations. When France, for arguments sake itself, is
now seventy five per cent nuclear grid. Seventy five per cent of its
electricity which it requires comes from nuclear sources.

 So we
are realistic and we are ... we have two mines already operating, or we just
export all our jobs to Canada. The choice is clear and the Coalition policy
was clear in the lead up to the elections. The ACF and everyone else knew
what that policy was and the people voted. We have a mandate to get on with
the job of seeing more jobs in the minerals area including with uranium
mining.


HUTCHISON:

 You mentioned the ACF. Now, the
environment policy has been probably one of the more contentious, given that
it is tied to the sale of Telstra. And I noticed that it's in the papers
again at the weekend. How long do you think it will be before the Democrats
and the Greens buckle in the Senate?


FISCHER:

 I
remind everyone that there was a piece of legislation in the mid '80s called
the Veterans Entitlements Bill.

 It bounced for about twelve
months between the House of Representatives and the Senate. There was a very
significant piece of legislation for that portfolio, I was shadow minister
at the time. What happened on the crunch later on in the '80s, in fact the
Democrats split half and half and the Veterans Entitlements Bill finally
passed the Senate in that circumstance. I don't rule out that when it gets
down to crunch time, when the legislation is firmly presented to the Senate
by the lower house having passed the Coalition's leg ... where it's majority
will push it through, but through the proper process of the
Parliament.

 That ultimately we could see a split in the
Democrats, it's happened before, you cannot rule out it might happen again
given the logic and sense which attaches not only to the privatisation of
one third of Telstra for which we have a superior mandate for but because of
the Land Care and other initiatives which are very good news on the
environmental front.


HUTCHISON:

 One final question
on trade. At your policy launch you said that you'd be looking to appoint an
ambassador to APEC which is consistent with the Coalition's wanting to firm
up relations with Asia. Have you got anyone in mind for that?

FISCHER:

 Well it will not be Mr Hawke or Mr Keating but we are
... the due process of that we are commencing the various formal processes
to implement that aspect of policy and liaison with Minister Downer, you'll
have an announcement down the track.


HUTCHISON:

 No
names?


FISCHER:

 No names today.

HUTCHISON:

 All right. Well the new government is certainly
wasting no time implementing its pre election commitments despite the fall
out. Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock has outlined plans to overhaul
Australia's immigration program including a crackdown on court access to
asylum seekers.


REPORTER:

 The new Federal
Immigration Minister says court appeals are overwhelming his department and
crackdowns are crucial.


PHILIP RUDDOCK - IMMIGRATION
MINISTER:

 More than fifty per cent of the total litigation in which
the department is involved involves refugee matters.

REPORTER:

 Other changes to immigration policy include a two
year ban on Social Security for new migrants and arise in English language
charges. The announcement comes in the wake of alleged racist comments made
by Coalition MPs in the lead up to the federal election. And the exclusion
of immigration from the front bench. Ethnic groups say it's a message the
government can ill afford.


ANGELA CHAN - ETHNIC
COMMISSION COUNCIL:

 When we invite people to migrate to Australia they
have to be treated as equal citizens and with equal rights.

REPORTER:

 But the government's decision to encourage migrants
to live away from the major cities, Sydney and Melbourne, is seen as a
welcome initiative.


HUTCHISON:

 Mr Fischer, do you
think the Coalition can recover from a perception it's insensitive to
migrant issues?


FISCHER:

 Well I believe that those
of us who've got the runs on the board, Philip Ruddock especially who has
the portfolio, no one has worked harder across that portfolio over the years
in liaison with Jim Short. And I myself for example with the Lebanese
community, with many other communities, Laotian [ph.sp.] community, have
interfaced well. John Howard with the Chinese community but quite apart from
all of that let me reveal one thing. The first phone call I received at an
ungodly hour on the day after the election because he forgot to look at his
watch before he dialled was from my good friend Suet Kunketee [ph.sp.] the
Minister for Agriculture in the Thai Government.

 A person who's
been to my home, to my electorate and I've been to his electorate in North
East Thailand. It is just a practical indication of the linkage we have that
he rang through to wish me well as a good friend but to wish me well also as
a senior minister in the current Thai Government.

HUTCHISON:

 But it's new arrivals. You have made it tougher,
people have to wait now for two years for unemployment benefits. You've
upped the prices for ... upped the charges for English language courses. You
have made it tougher.


FISCHER:

 I lead a party
which had one of the first ministers for Immigration, Jack McEwen had the
portfolio briefly and initiated migration from Holland to Australia. There
is a lot of goodness that has flowed out of migration but we have to be
practical, pragmatic, sensible and that's what Phil Ruddock is about and I
support him all the way. I might add, yesterday a clear cut decision on the
matter of working holiday maker visas. A very key issue, approaching the
Labor imposed cap and that would have tripped the visa out. It's good news
for the tourist industry and fruit and vegetable growers but in fact these
backpacker visas on recripricol arrangements with several countries the ante
has been lifted ... the limit has been lifted from thirty three thousand to
forty two thousand.


HUTCHISON:

 In broader terms Mr
Fischer we seem to have entered a conservative era of Australian politics,
there is only one Labor Government left in Australia now, the State Labor
Government in New South Wales. Why do you think that is?

FISCHER:

 Well that happened again ... previously in the late
'60s there was a period of about eighteen months when in fact there was no
Labor governments, the pendulum swings. We had a hard earned victory, John
Howard for credit, is the twenty fifty Prime Minister of Australia because
the people not only voted against the out going prime minister, Mr Keating,
but voted for ... to an extent which I don't think has been properly
evaluated since polling day. But it's going to be an exciting time. It's not
a status quo government that the people have elected.

 It is a
government which has a number of key agendas which we will be implementing,
whether it's regard to local issues such ... important issues such as Mascot
Airport or whether it is getting on the front foot on the export front and
industrial relations reform. You will see sensible change.

HUTCHISON:

 So, does that mean a republic's off the
agenda?


FISCHER:

 No and no, in as much as
the commitment to proceed with the people's convention will now proceed
along with ... in the next year or so, along with a referendum, whatever. I
say that very clearly because it's a good question you've raised Tracee. I
fully expect that some branches of the National Party will pass resolution
saying it was all a bad dream, this period of Keating prime ministership.
Forget about these commitments on the republic, we don't want a referendum,
I reject that here and now.

 It is an absolute obligation as
part of the equation building to the federal election policy settings of the
Liberal and National Parties that we provide that referendum. Firstly, a
people's convention, a lot of work to be done on the complexities of the
proposals. We will deliver that referendum, it's a matter for the people to
decide.


HUTCHISON:

 Could it break up the National
Party?


FISCHER:

 No way. It is something which an
exercise in democracy is something which we will rejoice in and state our
long standing support as part of the equation for the current written
constitution of Australia. The practical advantages of a constitution which
has got us through World War 1, the Great Depression, World War 2. But this
is also something different, it delivering on policy settings which were
given to the people and will be delivered on.

HUTCHISON:

 So the future of the Nats is secure, even though
this government ... the Liberal Party, have actually won enough seats to
govern in their own right and the Nats didn't manage to secure more than ten
per cent of the primary vote.


FISCHER:

 We in fact
increased our nation wide vote for the first for some time and it's more
than the Democrats. So, let's just get this relative ... get an examination
of this with acknowledgment of relativities. We, in the National Party, have
a bigger vote than the Democrats on quantum terms adding both houses
together. And further, we have gone from fourteen to sixteen to eighteen
under my leadership. Sure, I'd like to have won more seats, the National
Party would like to have won more lower house and Senate seats but we're
there, we're part of a good Coalition Government and performing in a way
which will be very cohesive.


HUTCHISON:

 Well, in
more sobering national news this week the Wood royal commission into
corruption in the New South Wales police service has entered, perhaps, its
most disturbing phase. The protection of child sex rackets by police.
Already the commission's findings have rocked the state's police services
but there's concern the next stage of Justice Wood's investigations will be
the most shocking.


REPORTER:

 With the
opening of the paedophile chapter of the Wood royal commission into
corruption in the New South Wales police service came warnings reputations
and public sensitivity would not be spared in exposing the extent of
organised sex rackets.


JUSTICE JAMES WOOD:

 We
cannot shrink from calling evidence which at times will be shocking,
distressing and offensive. The evidence is as it is and, say, for certain in
extreme situations it will not be sanitised of censored.

REPORTER:

 The commission heard of previous police
investigations into paedophile activities. Triggered by tip offs to the then
police minister, Terry Griffith, that questions would be raised in
Parliament. Earlier task forces uncovered thousands of photographs of naked
boys and evidence this material was being distributed internationally but no
charges were ever laid. Speculation has been rife all week, the commission
would name at least two MPs, senior members of the legal profession and high
profile businessmen involved in protected sex rackets with young boys.

 But to date, all names have been suppressed. Only if these people are
called to give evidence will their identities become public knowledge. This
week's revelations are the latest in a series of shock waves that continue
to threaten the stability of the state's police. With a recent poll showing
morale at an all time low.


HUTCHISON:

 Well those
findings, particularly this week are shocking, as a parent, how do you
react?


FISCHER:

 With feelings of absolute distress
in the sense of this last fortnight has seen the horrific shootings in
Scotland of school children and now on top of this paedophile of a totally
unacceptable circumstance and every circumstance associated with abusing
young children must be deemed absolutely unacceptable. Otherwise we break
down the very core of our society. So I hope at this time the truth will out
and be dealt with properly and those who are guilty will be carted off for a
very long time.


HUTCHISON:

 I guess to a certain
extent society looks very much to the police and to the government to try
and do something about these particular issues. What role do you think
government can play?


FISCHER:

 Well at the federal
level it is limited but it doesn't hurt to restate our commitment and
support to the family. To put in practical policies which will help families
in hard pressed circumstances. Whether it is in drought or whether it is
trying to educate their children and find that they trip [ph.sp.] out of
Austudy for various reasons. So, we propose to ease the burden of that
eligibility for Austudy whilst eliminating the rorts. So there are things
which we really stand up for on the taxation front, a Coalition policy
commitment, again in favour of the family.

 But let me say this.
I think we've also got to be very careful about our references to the
family. It's not for Tim Fischer to lay down a narrow, strict definition of
family. Of course it includes single parents meeting the commitment of
bringing up their children.

 It also includes single people who
are nobly, for one reason or other, above the age, say, of fifty but still
single but committed to their extended family and I think they're being
besmirched in a way to an extent as a consequence of all that is unfolding.
I just make that point very clearly I will stand up for the family, for
family values, and in fact I will not lay down the exact definition of the
family, other than to say it excludes in my book, legal recognition for same
sex, homosexual couples in marriage. That, I believe is not on.

HUTCHISON:

 Why?


FISCHER:

 Well it's
the thin end of the wedge to the whole gay parenting issue, equal rights in
adoption for gay parents and the like. In Los Angeles this weekend a mass
gay marriage is taking place as part of their campaign to open up the
statutes of the United States of America. Well, here in Australia, let us be
clear cut, marriage is male and female. It is not about two couples ... two
people of the same sex, I don't dwell on it, I just make that point. I'm
totally opposed to ... and will vote against any Parliamentary recognition
for same sex couples as being legally married.

HUTCHISON:

 There's been a lot of discussion in terms of the
philosophy of the Coalition. That it's very much about the family and you
yourself have been very much a hands on dad. Are you going to sacrifice that
for politics?


FISCHER:

 No. Indeed, you have to
keep a balance in your activities and on sunset yesterday, just fantastic to
go for a farm walk with Harrison and Judy to keep some sanity in my
scheduling which is horrific at Deputy Prime Minister. As Minister for
Trade, as Leader of the National Party and as Federal member for an
electorate which stretches from Mt Kosciusko through Albury to the South
Australian boarder. A lot of ground to cover. So you get well organised. But
I'm greatly helped by Judy and by Harrison bringing me down to earth. The
first nappy in the morning when I'm at home always brings you down to
earth.


HUTCHISON:

 Indeed. So you're the one that
gets up and does that?


FISCHER:

 When I can.


HUTCHISON:

 So when Tim Fischer isn't wearing the various
hats of your portfolios, what's he up to, aside from changing nappies?


FISCHER:

 Doing a lot of thinking, reading, especially
when at airports waiting for planes, Primary Colours is my current read
written by an anonymous author out of the White House about the previous
presidential campaign. The one before it, A Golden Warrior, Lawrence of
Arabia, a new history of Lawrence and his advantages and disadvantages in
the middle east. But it's certainly a chance to step back and think when you
can get some bush walking in which I like a great deal.

HUTCHISON:

 Indeed. You do the annual trek through ... up the
Snowy Mountains. Why do you do that?


FISCHER:

 It's
about promoting tourism in the eastern part of my electorate though the
wonderful gateways of Tumbarumba to Mckan Cove [ph.sp.] and to the western
side of the Kosciusko National Park. And it will be on again in January,
it's not a stunt, it's something I've done for eight years, nine years and
Tumba trek is building a nice momentum. I invite those journalists who half
perished on the way to the summit and didn't make it to the top last
January, come again ... try again, we'll make it this time.

HUTCHISON:

 What is it about climbing, there's something very
invigorating about that sort of past time?

FISCHER:

 I think you go to the mountains to cleanse the body
and cleanse the soul. To cleanse the mind, to meditate, to think ahead
strategically and I always find it an uplifting experience combined with
looking out at night from camp fires. Especially at the moment with the
comet in it's brilliance the last couple of nights, it makes you feel very
humble and very small. It is truly a spectacular show.

HUTCHISON:

 You mentioned strategy. You're also a chess
fan.


FISCHER:

 Yes, I play chess, bush walking in
Butan [ph.sp.] and beyond but chess and tennis and the like but three weeks
since polling day has been so hectic, all of this has been a little academic
but I hope to get a bit more balance over the second half of Easter and
beyond before Parliament starts on the thirtieth of April.

HUTCHISON:

 And I also understand you're looking for front row
tickets for the next silverchair show?


FISCHER:

We'd like to do that. I've not seen them live, I've heard them often enough.
Shade and Tomorrow and [indistinct word] I wish them well because they're
actually earning export dollars for Australia and I object to the reference
that, that non grooving Deputy Prime Minister has used the name silverchair.
My music tastes are quite broad?


HUTCHISON:

 How
far do they extend. If you like them, what else do you like?

FISCHER:

 Probably Neil Diamond and those in one sense more but
I'm looking at Oasis, starting to listen to that, Peal Jam, Baby Animals,
Smashing Pumpkins ...


HUTCHISON:

 Wow wee, very
groovy.


FISCHER:

 ... I'll think about. But at the
other end of the spectrum Beethoven's Pastoral Symphony is my
favourite.


HUTCHISON:

 No Mahler?

FISCHER:

 No, there's a change at the top, wouldn't mind some
Christmas carols and a concert in the great hall of Parliament House around
December to humanise that place and remind us all that around about
Christmas time of the good lord but also of the spirit of Christmas and the
spirit of giving.


HUTCHISON:

 Mr Fischer, it's been
a pleasure talking to you and enjoy your new portfolios.

FISCHER:

 Thank you Tracee.


HUTCHISON: And
that's another Seven Days. My thanks to tonight's guest, Deputy Prime
Minister, Tim Fischer.

