---
title: "Government blocked from managing migration program"
date: "1996-11-07"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211452724
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CK530%22
---

 M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 The Hon. Philip Ruddock MR Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2 6 0 0

 Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Telephone: (06) 277 7860 Facsimile: (06) 273 414^4

 MRS 72/96 GOVERNMENT BLOCKED FROM MANAGING MIGRATION PROGRAM

 In an unprecedented move, Senate obstruction will prevent the Government from  properly managing the Migration Program, the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural  Affairs, Philip Ruddock said today.

 "The decision by non-Government Senators to disallow migration regulations means  that for the first time in history, an elected Government will not be allowed to do its job  of managing the Migration Program," Mr Ruddock said.

 "Last year, the balance between family and skilled categories in the Program was  allowed to get out of control. The Preferential Family category rose by more than 32%,  while the highly skilled Independent category was cut by 29%."

 "The Government introduced measures to restore that balance, and to help restore  public confidence in the Program. The Opposition has sabotaged the solution."

 "The irony of this, is that the person who presided over the mismanagement of the  Program, Senator Bolkus, is the person who tabled the motion to disallow Regulations  that would enable the Government to equitably address the problem," Mr Ruddock said.

 'The Democrats who have have a policy of zero net migration, are duplicitous with their  opposition to our sensible and moderate measures. To implement zero net migration,  would mean a Migration Program slashed to 30,000 places."

 'T o bring about a Program consistent with Democrat policy would require measures far  harsher than those proposed by the Coalition and dismantled by the Democrats. They  are clearly ignoring their own catchcry and are not being honest with themselves or the  Australian public."

 As well as giving the Government equitable management tools, some of the Regulations  would have had the effect of delaying applications or implementing Government election  commitments. The regulations disallowed by the Senate would: • require sponsors in the Preferential Family category to be Australian citizens

 • allow  refugees to bring their immediate families into Australia under the 

 Humanitarian Program • recognise English language skills in the Concessional Family category which has  a high skills component • require the majority of an intending migrant's children to be in Australia before 

 they can be sponsored as a parent under balance of family • meet the Coalition election commitment to seek full cost recovery of English  language tuition charges • facilitate the Commonwealth to recoup benefits claimed by migrants within the 

 first two years

 7 November 1996  MEDIA CONTACT Steve Ingram (06) 277 7860

