---
title: "Funding to help young homeless in Newcastle"
date: "1996-11-14"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION, TRAINING AND YOUTH AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211452841
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QP630%22
---

  &n p:/l www .deet.gov.aulminwnlvanstone /vI601411.htm http://www.deet.gov.aulminwnlvanstone /vI601411.htm 

  FUNDING TO HELP YOUNG HOMELESS IN 

  NEWCASTLE 

  V160/96 14 November 1996 

  Senator Amanda Vanstone, Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs today  announced a grant of $72,275 to Newcastle Centacare for the establishment of a Job Placement,  Employment and Training programme, JPET, a programme for young people who are homeless or at  risk of homelessness. 

  This funding is part of $22 million to be provided nationally over the next two years. 

  "Newcastle Centacare is one of eight services funded as the first step in the nation-wide  re-establishment of JPET " , Senator Vanstone said. "The Federal Government has placed a high  priority on youth issues, and we are committed to providing assistance to young people who face  barriers so they can reach their full potential. 

  "In the lead up to the election the Coalition promised to re-establish the successful JPET programme  and provide $11 million a year in funding for the next two years. We are delivering on this promise  today. 

  Local Senator John Tierney, said that he was pleased disadvantaged young people from the Newcastle  area would be provided with a flexible, individualised service to help them get back on track. 

  "JPET will provide an individually targeted and flexible approach to assisting homeless young people.  Services are designed to help any young person who is homeless or at risk of becoming homeless,  with priority being given to thos~ : aged 15-19. 

  "Other at risk groups, such as refugees, ex offenders, wards of the State or those exiting wardship  may also get help from JPET. They do not need to be homeless. 

  "A wide range of advice, support and referral services is offered to jobseekers to assist with  accommodation, finances, staying at school, training and employment, self esteem, family mediation,  drug and alcohol rehabilitation . 

  Centacare Newcastle JPET will deliver a holistic service to assist young people who are homeless or  at risk of homeless ness, using a client-focused approach. 

  The program will consists of individual needs assessment, orientation workshops and development of  an individual programme plan focussing on psycho-social support, job skills training, job brokerage  and post placement support. 

  Further information: Christian Kerr, Minister's Office, 08 8237 7946 

  Virginia Wallace, Minister's Office, 0419 217 918 

  11125/9609:30:38 

