---
title: "Burma: trade and tourism must stop"
date: "1996-06-05"
creators:
  - "Bourne, Vicki"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214170287
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02011084%22
---

 + 61-2-2479681 E 663 P02 JUN 05 '9 6  2 0 :1 5

 P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A  · THE SENATE

 S E N A T O R  VICKI B O U R N E Senator tor New South Wales  Australian Democrats Whip

 5 J u n e  1 9 9 6

 NEWS RELEASE

 9 6 /3 0 9

 BURMA: TRADE AND TOURISM MUST STOP

 On the eve o f the screening on ABC TV of journalist John Pilger’s documentary on Burma, the Australian  Democrats have again urged the Australian Government to ban trade and investment with Buraia and to  launch a campaign discouraging tourism in Burma. .

 Senator Vicki Bourne, Foreign Affairs and Human Rights Spokesperson for the Democrats, said today  “When discussing Burma one basic fact over-rides everything else: the leaders of the State Law Mid Order  Restoration Council (SLORC) are murderous masters of brutality, human rights abuses and viciousness.

 “SLORC are not the sort o f people decent Australians would want as trading partners. We cannot allow  Australia’s balance of trade difficulties to blind us to these facts.

 “I have not yet seen Mr Pilger’s documentary. However, as a member o f the Parliament’s Human Rights  Committee and as a Parliamentary Vice-President o f Amnesty International I am convinced that the  international community cannot delay in acting against SLORC.

 “As we heeded the voices of the oppressed under apartheid in South Africa, so we must heed the voices o f the  people of Burma. Democracy leader, Aung San Suu Kyi, has warned Australia against fostering closer  economic ties with Burma. In a recent speech to the UN Commission on Human Rights she said:

 ‘We would like to remind those who are simply looking at economic benefits that they hope to reap  from Burma today that they are working against their own long-term interest and the long-term  interest of the international community in general. ’

 “Yet the number of Australian business delegations visiting Burma doubled last year. Three years ago, only  30 Australian business delegations visited Burma in one 12 month period, whereas last year there was an  average o f two business delegations per week.

 “Deputy Prime Minister Tim Fischer’s advocacy of a “flexible” approach would legitimise increased trade  with Burma, which in turn can only legitimise the SLORC junta.

 “Encouraging trade with Burma does not sit well with Australia’s recent appointment of Aung San Suu Kyi  as a Companion in the Order of Australia. It also contradicts the Minister for Foreign Affairs’ announcement  in March of a $2 million package of assistance to Burmese refugees living on the borders o f Thailand and 

 Bangladesh. ·

 “I commend the Government for taking this action and urge it to take the next step in helping these refugees  and other victims of SLORC by immediately imposing investment and trade sanctions against Burma.”

 Contact Senator Bourne: 02 247 3377 W or 018 205 407 H

 . N.S.W. . COMMONWEALTH m 0nW 9al,h Parll'arYient < ->tfices' 56-70 Phillip Street Sydney PAMJAMENTAR7 LIRR A t>V  Telephone (02) 247 3377X F a c s i ^ ^ t o T ^  geSI1  · Toll Free 008 651 921

