---
title: "Howard's English and TIS policies: plans for a divided society"
date: "1996-02-26"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211448814
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7PR20%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  Senator. B39/96 olkus 

  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC 

  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME 

  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

  Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860 

  HOW ARD'S ENGLISH AND TIS POLICIES -PLANS FOR A DIVIDED SOCIETY 

  John Howard's plans to charge migrants exorbitant fees for English tuition while  commercialising the Government's unique Translating and Interpreting Service will have a  devastating effect on migrants from non-English speaking backgrounds. 

  "These measures alone guarantee a divided society," the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, said today. 

  "They will place the future of Australia's internationally recognised Translating and  Interpreting Service (TIS) at risk, and dramatically reduce access to it. 

  "At the same time, Howard wants to double the fees for the Adult Migrant English Program  (AMEP) for tens of thousands of migrants. 

  "English language tuition is fundamental to their successful settlement in Australia -yet the  Coalition wants to make it unaffordable! 

  "Under its full cost recovery approach, they will have to pay up to $6000 just to rumll to  migrate, and at least $4,500 for each adult in the family to learn English if successful. That  means that if you migrate as a couple, you'd have to pay $15,000 in fees at the very least  just to get here!" 

  Senator Bolkus pointed out that Howard's plans to commercialise TIS meant that those who  could not afford tuition under the Adult Migrant English Program would certainly not be able  to afford help with translation and interpreting services. 

  "Newly arrived migrants would have to pay huge fees to have basic documents translated ":'  documents they need to find housing, get Australian drivers' licences, apply for jobs and  access critical services like Medicare," he said. 

  "At the moment, migrants have access to free translation of documents like birth and  marriage certificates, references, curriculum vitae, health certificates, drivers' licences,  educational certificates and so on. "Given that it costs between $50 and $70 to translate a  birth certificate alone, it would cost a family of four at least $1000 just to access the  Australian system. 

  "The impact of commercialising TIS would be felt not just by new arrivals, but by anyone  needing a translator or interpreter to negotiate their way through the health, legal or  industrial relations system. 

  "For example, John Howard has said that people negotiating work contracts with employers  can take a lawyer along with them. 

  "Migrants from non-English speaking backgrounds would need not only a lawyer, but an  interpreter as well to ensure that they understood the complicated language of industrial  negotiation . It would cost the job seeker hundreds of dollars just to negotiate a contract each  time they started a new job. 

  "If TIS was commercialised, community based, non-profit organisations would have to pay  for services which are currently free. 

  "Rates for public services like hospitals would have to go up for TIS to survive," Senator  Bolkus said. "That would mean public services could be forced to restrict the availability  of interpreters, and Migrant Resource Centres would have to pay more for TIS services. 

  "As well, newly arrived migants would have to pay directly for interpreters when they  negotiated leases with real estate agents, visited private health clinics, enrolled children in  school, and so on. 

  "Combined with his plans for discrimination against non-English speakers in family reunion,  for a two year waiting period for social security, and the suggestion of restrictive Citizenship  policies, John Howard has made clear his agenda for a divided Australia. 

  "His plans contrast starkly with those of the Keating Government, which is wholeheartedly  committed to an accessible and flexible AMEP program which targets special needs groups  like refugees, the unemployed and women with young families. 

  "Labor has also embarked on a major review of TIS to improve access to it while exploring  new opportunities for the service in meeting the needs of business and tourism. 

  CANBERRA FEBRUARY 261996 

  Contact: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 2777860; 0418 624 847 

