---
title: "Minister holds consultations on immigration program [Hobart and Launceston]"
date: "1996-04-14"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211449898
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MZ030%22
---

 MINISTER HOLDS CONSULTATIONS ON IMMIGRATION PROGRAM http://164.97.143.2/m inrel/R96011 .hint

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Mr Philip Ruddock

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860

 MPS 11/96

 MINISTER HOLDS CONSULTATIONS ON IMMIGRATION PROGRAM

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock will hold consultations this  Friday (26 April) in Hobart and Launceston on the size and composition o f next year's immigration  and humanitarian program.

 "The Government is delivering on its commitment to strengthen consultative arrangements to achieve  increased and meaningful community input into policy development and decision making," Mr  Ruddock said.

 "I will hold my final round o f consultations in Tasmania this week to discuss program priorities with a  wide range o f community groups and organisations."

 "To be successful, the immigration program for next year must have widespread community support  and acceptance. The consultations I have been undertaking around Australia will allow the community  to have input."

 M r Ruddock has met a range o f representatives including those from multicultural Australia, the  business community, environment groups, planning, the union movement, refugee and other welfare  organisations as well as state and local government.

 At the beginning o f the 1995-96 program year the planning level for the Non-humanitarian Program  was set at 83,000 and the Humanitarian Program planning level was 13,000.

 "The Government must have the right to vary the size and composition o f the immigration program to  take into account economic, social, environmental and international considerations," Mr Ruddock  said.

 "Family reunion and the humanitarian intake will remain central parts o f the immigration program. We  also aim to attract migrants who will make the greatest contribution to Australia, especially in meeting  our economic challenges."

 "I am not anticipating significant variations in the intake, however I would not want to pre-empt the  consultative process."

 Mr Ruddock has flagged skill levels in the program and ways o f encouraging migrants to settle in  regional areas as issues he would like addressed in the consultations.

 Aside from Hobart, Mr Ruddock has held consultations in all capital cities as well as some major  regional areas. The meetings in Hobart and Launceston will wind up the consultation process.

 1 of 2 08/07/96 11:11:58

 MINISTER HOLDS CONSULTATIONS ON IMMIGRATION PROGRAM http://164.97.143.2/mmrel/R96011 .htm

 CANBERRA 24 April 1996

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Steve Ingram (06) 277 7860 or 0419 278 715

 2 of 2 08/07/96 11:11:59

