---
title: "Zaire"
date: "1996-10-29"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211452528
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/G1530%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  ALEXANDER DOWNER 

  FA 126 

  ZAIRE 

  29 October 1996 

  I am deeply disturbed by the deteriorating security situation in eastern Zaire. The conflict is  undermining the already fragile political situation in the Great Lakes region and has serious  implications for peace and stability throughout central Africa. 

  The Australian Government urges all parties to the conflict to cease hostilities, to stop any  provocative actions, and to adopt measures aimed at defusing the mounting military tension,  particularly along the border between Zaire and Rwanda. 

  Above all, the Australian Government calls upon all parties to exercise restraint and to  demonstrate respect for the dignity and common humanity of those people inadvertently  caught up again in conflict. 

  The Government is following developments closely. We are currently developing options for  responding to the unfolding humanitarian crisis in Zaire and neighbouring countries.  Australia stands ready to cooperate with international agencies and non-government  organisations in the provision of urgently-needed humanitarian relief. 

  Australia also supports and encourages international initiatives for finding a political  solution to the conflict. In that context, we support the proposal by the UN Secretary General  for the holding of a regional conference and for the appointment of a high level Special  Representative to coordinate UN efforts to mediate a solution to the conflict. We have  previously contributed financially to mediation efforts . 

  We believe such initiatives should focus primarily on developing a comprehensive approach,  including confidence-building measures in both Rwanda and Burundi designed to support the  early, voluntary and safe return of refugees. . 

  For further information, contact Peter Collins on (06) 277 7500 or 0411414 695.  John Munro, AusAID (06) 291 7516 (AH)  Bob Bowker, DFAT on (06) 2613691 or 285 4389 (AH) 

