---
title: "Australia helps Cambodian refugees"
date: "1997-11-05"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211457105
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9KM30%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  ALEXANDER DOWNER 

  AA59 

  Aft ~",4.lJST~A~~J\,,1f≠ -~  5 November 97 

  AUSTRALIA HELPS CAMBODIAN REFUGEES 

  I am pleased to announce that Allstralia is contributing $500 000 to a United Nations  High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) appeal to assist the reintegration of  60 000 Cambodian refugees currently in Thailand. The funds are being provided  through AusAID' s humanitarian relief program. 

  The Australian Government and the international community are concerned at the  ongoing fighting in the north west of Cambodia which has resulted in an exodus of  around 60 000 Cambodians into Thailand's Surin and Trat provinces. During my  recent meetings with the Cambodian parties in New York, I urged them to cease the  fighting, which simply prolongs the suffering of the Cambodian people. 

  While the number of Cambodians in Surin province is now stable and a voluntary  repatriation program is in place, in Trat, Cambodian refugees are continuing to arrive  and no repatriation program has been introduced as yet. 

  In October UNHCR launched an appeal for US $6 million dollars. 

  Australian funds will be targeted towards Quick Impact Projects in the areas of health,  sanitation, food and infrastructure within Cambodia. These type ofprojects are  designed to assist the reintegration of returnees into their villages. 

  The projects will be implemented in partnership with the Cambodian Red Cross, the  World Food Programme, other UN agencies and specialist Non Government  Organisations. 

  Media contact: Innes Willox (Minister's office) 026277 7500/0411 414695  Mark Giffard (AusAID) 02 6206 4966 

