---
title: "Charting Australia's regional future: the White Paper on foreign and trade policy: speech to the Foreign Correspondents' Association, Sydney, 29 August 1997"
date: "1997-08-29"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211455952
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/H5J30%22
---



Introduction

 It is a great pleasure to be here, and to
have the opportunity to speak to the Foreign Correspondents'
Association.

 Yesterday, the Government released Australia's
first White Paper on Foreign and Trade Policy.

 The White
Paper's publication fulfils a key election promise made by the Coalition.
More than that, it reflects the Government's strong commitment to a
clear-headed foreign and trade policy that the Australian community
understands and supports. It sets out the principles and priorities of the
Government's foreign affairs and trade policy, and it examines the key
international challenges facing Australia over the next fifteen years.

 The quality of Australia's future over the next fifteen years and
beyond will be determined largely by its own efforts. Australia cannot rely
on others to promote the interests of Australia. Securing a future requires
a willingness and a capacity to engage the world, and thereby to influence
the events which shape the future. It also requires Australia to make best
use of its many assets.

 The White Paper demonstrates
conclusively that the next century will offer great opportunities for
Australia. But if Australia is to grasp these exciting opportunities it must
have a strong economy at home and an active voice abroad. The two must be
pursued in tandem because in a global economy there can be no separating
foreign and trade policy from domestic policy.

 The White Paper
puts Australia's national interests squarely at the centre of Australian
foreign and trade policy. In all that it does in foreign and trade policy,
the Government will apply a basic tenet of national interest: how does it
advance the security of Australia and the jobs and standard of living of all
Australians.

 The starting point of the White Paper is that
Australia has global interests. It is part of the global economy. Its
prosperity is tied to its performance as a trading nation. Its security is
tied closely to the security of its neighbourhood. But our horizons must
extend well beyond our immediate region. This is the experience of our past
and it is the key to our future. For Australia, the alternative to a foreign
and trade policy of broad scope is irrelevance and decline.

 I
want to focus my remarks today on what the White Paper says about
Australia's future in the Asia Pacific, and what the Australian Government
is doing to make the White Paper a practical reality in our regional
policies. But, first, I want to speak briefly about the overall framework
that the White Paper provides for Australia's foreign and trade
policy.


PART ONE: Advancing Australia's National
Interests

 1.1 Getting Our Priorities Right

 The
White Paper makes some very important judgements about the world in which
Australia will be operating. It brings together everything that the
Government has been doing in foreign and trade policy since March last year,
and charts the way ahead for Australia's place in the region and the world
in the 21st Century.

 Most importantly, the White Paper
identifies globalisation and the rise of East Asia as the two most profound
trends in the international environment to which Australia's foreign and
trade policies must adapt and respond over the next fifteen years.

 Globalisation offers huge opportunities for internationally
competitive economies, but also brings in its wake challenges for political
and economic management. It has profound implications for trade policy. It
blurs the division between foreign and domestic policy. It increases
competitive pressures in markets, and makes globally-based trade rules and
disciplines even more important.

 The White Paper's judgement is
that economic growth in industrialising Asia will continue at relatively
high levels over the next fifteen years. The World Bank forecasts growth for
East Asia (excluding Japan) over the next decade at 6.8 percent, compared
with 2.4 percent for Western Europe and North America.

 All of
this means that the countries of Asia will become even more important to
Australia as trade and investment partners, and in security terms. It also
has implications for Australia's relative standing in the region, and
significant consequences for the broader relativities of power and influence
in the Asia Pacific and beyond. 


1.2 Defining Practical and
Effective Strategies.

 The White Paper sets out the broad
framework for Australia to meet these challenges effectively. It contains
elements both of change and of continuity, and represents a significant
rearticulation and rebalancing of Australian foreign and trade policy. Its
key elements include: 

 .
a reaffirmation that the Asia
Pacific is the Government's highest foreign and trade policy priority;

 .
an emphasis on bilateral relationships as a means of advancing
Australian interests. Strong bilateral relationships are not an alternative
to regional and global efforts, but they form the basic building block of
the Government's foreign and trade policy strategies;

 .
a
more selective approach to Australia's involvement in multilateral issues,
concentrating on areas where Australia's national interests are closely
engaged;

 .
a recognition of the contribution that trade
liberalisation makes to Australia's standard of living, and the Government's
commitment to a `jobs foreign and trade policy';

 .
strong
support for practical measures which advance Australia's trade interests
including through the World Trade Organisation and the free trade and
investment objectives of APEC;

 .
the importance of rounded
security policies which embrace a strong national defence capability, the
alliance with the United States, expanding bilateral and regional security
dialogue, stronger regional security institutions and support for global
regimes against weapons of mass destruction; and

 .
the
adoption of a `whole-of-nation framework' which recognises that Australia's
international competitiveness in a global economy will be closely linked to
a more flexible labour market, investment in research and development,
strong education and training systems, good infrastructure and effective
savings and taxation policies.


PART TWO: Australia's
Enduring Commitment to the Asia Pacific

 2.1 Marshalling
Australia's Assets

 A fundamental message of the White Paper
is that Australia is committed to the Asia Pacific for the long haul, and
that Australia's highest foreign policy priority is to make a lasting
contribution to the region.

 The White Paper is our declaration
of commitment to our neighbourhood as we begin what surely will be the Asia
Pacific century. It reflects the weight of Australian interests which are
engaged with the Asia Pacific: with the region's three major powers and
largest economies - the United States, Japan and China - and with our
largest neighbour - Indonesia. It reflects the significant Australian
interests which are engaged in Australia's relationships with the other
ASEAN states, the Republic of Korea and New Zealand. It reflects the effort
and priority we have attached to Australia's relationship with Papua New
Guinea and the other island state of the South Pacific. And it reflects the
initiatives this Government has taken to deepen Australia's ties with South
Asia.

 As a member of the Asia Pacific, and with one of the most
East Asian-oriented economies in the world, it makes perfect sense for
Australia to build on the foundations which complementary economies and
geographic proximity provide.

 Australia brings substantial
economic, strategic and cultural assets to its regional and global
engagement. The Australian economy is bigger in absolute size than all in
the region to our north except Japan, the ROK and China. Australia has a
strong skills base sustained by quality educational and training
institutions. Australia has an impressive record of inventiveness and
openness to new technology and innovation. In overall terms, Australia is
ranked 8th in the world as a network society `plugged in' to the high-tech
world. That puts us ahead of Germany (13th overall) and Japan (16th
overall). Of the 17 Asia Pacific economies, only the US and Canada have a
higher overall rating than Australia.

 Australia's many cultural
assets include a proven capacity to change and adapt which is a feature of
immigrant cultures, particularly those that value ethnic and cultural
diversity. In short, Australia is one of the most sophisticated and modern
societies in the region. Australia's unique economic and cultural profile
makes us particularly attractive as a conduit for business between Asia,
Europe and North America.

 But none of this is to suggest that
Australia can afford to be complacent about its future. Rather, the White
Paper emphasises that Australia must marshal its considerable and growing
assets and bring them to bear on the prosperity and security of the world in
which we live.


2.2 Growing Regional Trading Links: Creating
New Jobs for Australians

 The Importance of Economic
Liberalisation

 The White Paper underlines Australia's
accelerating involvement in the economic life of the Asia Pacific, and the
enormous potential to expand our economic ties across the region. It
recognises that the sustaining force behind the Asia Pacific's dynamism is
economic liberalisation.

 Economic liberalisation is the key to
a buoyant trade and investment environment. It encourages a more efficient
allocation of resources and gives recognition to the merits of comparative
advantage. But, above all, it is the best means of sustaining the sort of
economic growth that produces new jobs and improved standards of living for
citizens in every country of the region.

 The White Paper
reinforces the importance of striving for further economic liberalisation at
three levels - through bilateral relationships, APEC and the World Trade
Organisation. Each level has an indispensable contribution to make to
increasing Australia's prosperity, none offers the only way ahead, and all
three will be needed if Australia is to continue to improve its trade
performance.

 At the bilateral level, the Government has already
had a great deal of success in building trust between countries in the
region and striking mutually beneficial deals. I want to mention just three
of the more recent highlights:

 .
The landmark
Australia-Indonesia Development Area - or AIDA - was inaugurated
successfully in May this year. AIDA is all about reducing barriers to
business investment in Eastern Indonesia so as to bring development for
Indonesia and create jobs for Australians.

 .
Agreement was
reached earlier this year that the Australian and Japanese Prime Ministers
will hold an annual summit on bilateral and regional issues. This gives us
an unprecedented opportunity to work with our largest trading partner at
Prime Ministerial level so as to achieve positive economic outcomes for
Australian firms and workers.

 .
In February this year, the
Government gained concrete results from the inaugural Australia-Thailand
Ministerial Economic Commission meeting held in Canberra. Thai and
Australian Ministers set the goal of doubling Australian-Thai trade, and
doubling our two-way investment, by the year 2000.

 
- A key
demonstration of Australia's commitment to this goal was the decision to
participate in the $1 billion dollar currency swap as part of the IMF's
package to help the Thai economy. This was a concrete example of Australia's
commitment in action.

 At the regional level - as the White
Paper indicates - we have already seen tremendous reductions in trade
barriers, partly under the auspices of APEC. ASEAN, in particular, has cut
applied tariffs on a trade-weighted basis by two-thirds and most recently
Indonesia has announced further cuts. In the same period, China has cut its
average tariff rate from 35 to 23 per cent, and will reduce the rate to 15
per cent by the year 2000.

 Australia wants to go on
contributing to the growth of regional economies as it has now for decades.
The White Paper argues that - if our region is to continue to grow rapidly,
and living standards are to rise substantially - governments must continue
to push for trade and investment liberalisation.

 APEC, of
course, gives us considerable hope that this trend will continue. Last year,
APEC economies began implementing their goal of free and open trade and
investment by 2010 and 2020 for industrialised and developing economies
respectively.

 I believe that if APEC can push ahead
successfully with its far-reaching and comprehensive agenda, it will make a
very practical contribution to sustainable growth in the region. In the
process, it will nurture a greater sense of regional community, shared
values and common interests.

 Beyond APEC, the White Paper
identifies as a key priority over the next five years the need for genuinely
closer links between CER (Australia's economic relations agreement with New
Zealand) and the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA).

 Developing
closer links between AFTA and CER is about expanding our trade and
investment. It is about looking at ways of reducing the costs of doing
business, for example by taking steps to simplify our customs regulations
and procedures and align our technical standards. It is also about
encouraging closer contact between our dynamic business communities.


2.3 Enhancing Regional Security

 The New Regional
Security Environment - Key Strategies

 The White Paper's
analysis of regional trade and investment patterns - and their wide-ranging
implications for jobs in Australia - is matched by its hard-headed appraisal
of the new regional security environment. This appraisal shows that
Australia has an historic opportunity to help lock in the peace which is
underwriting the region's extraordinary economic growth.

 The
White Paper makes it clear that Australia's security means much more than
safety from direct attack. It means preserving our nation's capacity for
independent decision-making. And it means recognising the growing
inter-relationship of Australia's security and economic interests with the
security and stability of the Asia Pacific.

 While Australia's
strategic environment is shaped by developments in the Asia Pacific, global
issues can also have significant security implications for Australia. The
risk of global conflict has diminished considerably with the end of the Cold
War, but other potential threats remain, including the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

 The White Paper demonstrates that
Australia's security interests should not be seen exclusively in terms of
potential military threats or regional conflicts. Over the next fifteen
years it is likely that even more attention will be paid to so-called
non-military threats such as pandemics, illegal migration, refugee flows,
environmental degradation, narcotics and transnational crime.

The White Paper's judgement is that the United States will continue to see
its best interests being served by maintaining its strategic engagement in
East Asia, where it has vital security and economic interests.

The White Paper also notes that China's economic growth, with attendant
confidence and enhanced influence, will be the most important strategic
development of the next fifteen years. How China manages its economic growth
and pursues its international objectives, and how other nations,
particularly the United States and Japan, respond to China will be crucial
issues over this period.

 The growth in economic and political
influence of others in East Asia, notably the Republic of Korea and
Indonesia, is also likely to affect the dynamics of regional security.

 In the face of this evolving regional security environment, the White
Paper advocates practical strategies for advancing Australia's security
interests. These strategies include:

 .
maintaining a strong
national defence capability; 

 .
the alliance relationship with the
United States;

 .
expanding Australian bilateral, regional and
multilateral security links - including through expanded security
dialogues;

 .
strengthening Asia Pacific-wide regional security
institutions, of which the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) is the most
significant; and

 .
working to ensure that the international regimes
covering weapons of mass destruction are implemented and, where necessary,
strengthened. 


Australia's Vital Contribution to a More
Secure Region

 I am pleased to say that the Australian
Government is already making substantial progress along the policy lines and
framework advocated by the White Paper.

 Last year, Australia
gave new vigour to its alliance with the United States through the AUSMIN
joint declaration - known as the Sydney Declaration - the focus of which was
very much on the contribution the alliance makes to regional security.

 Australia has also been building a wide-ranging set of bilateral
linkages which provide the indispensable foundation for pursuing mutually
beneficial objectives.

 Australia has in recent years been
extending the number of countries with which it has bilateral dialogues on
regional security issues. Last year we commenced political-military talks
with Japan and the Republic of Korea and instituted semi-official talks with
Vietnam.

 Last month I announced in Kuala Lumpur four new
important security dialogues which Australia will conduct with China, the
Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam. These represent a real strengthening of
regional security cooperation.

 The new dialogues will commence
over the coming year and will involve high level Australian officials from
both our foreign and defence ministries. With the addition of these new
dialogues Australia now has bilateral security linkages, in one form or
another, with most of the countries of the East Asia/Pacific region.

 At the regional level, Australia strongly supports the ASEAN Regional
Forum. Importantly, the ARF brings together all the countries which have an
impact on, or are involved in, the security of the Asia Pacific region.
Although the ARF is still in its youth, it is already starting to achieve
some very positive results. The first level of the ARF's activities -
confidence-building - is maturing as a useful mechanism for developing a
sense of shared strategic interest.

 The White Paper emphasises
the importance of building regional structures which promote the peaceful
resolution of differences and which foster a sense of common interests and
shared responsibility for the region's future.

 The Australian
Government will remain committed to strengthening the web of close
relationships which lie at the heart of regional security and
stability.


PART THREE: A Tolerant and Diverse Australia -
Getting the `Good News' Better Known

 3.1 The Importance of
Australia's Values

 Of course, advancing Australia's
national interests is a task for all Australians and not just their
governments. It demands communication and consultation among governments at
all levels, businesses and the community. If Australia's foreign and trade
policies are to succeed they must attract the understanding and support of
the Australian community.

 The White Paper makes it clear that
national interests cannot be pursued without regard to the values of the
Australian community, including its support for fundamental human rights.
Central to these values is an unqualified commitment to racial equality and
to the elimination of racial discrimination.

 That is why the
White Paper rejects racial discrimination absolutely and reaffirms
Australia's commitment to human rights and sustainable development. The
rejection of racial discrimination is not only a moral issue. It is
fundamental to Australia's acceptance by, and engagement with, the region
where its vital security and economic interests lie. 

Australia's accelerating engagement with the region is perhaps most clearly
reflected in the growing people-to-people links being established by
business men and women, academics and students, and the media, including
many of you in the audience today.

 What's more, Australians in
the region are finding that people are receptive to Australia's values, and
our way of communicating and problem-solving. This may be partly because
there are many people in the Asia Pacific who were themselves educated in
Australia at some stage.

 These are the people-to-people ties
which perhaps have the most enduring effects, flowing as they do across
national borders and down through the generations. They are absolutely
crucial to our understanding of Asia in a new century likely to be defined
by the increased influence of Asian powers.


3.2 Getting the
`Good News' Better Known

 The White Paper is a repudiation
of the views of those who believe that Australia's future lies in an
inward-looking and isolationist posture. Australia's historic transition
from being a European outpost to becoming one of the most innovative and
constructive members of the Asia Pacific region is one which presents great
opportunities, and most Australians recognise that.

 Australia
is home to people of some 130 nationalities. Australia is a remarkably
tolerant and diverse country with a growing web of relationships across the
Asia Pacific - this is the `good news story' about Australia which deserves
to be disseminated more widely across our region and beyond. It is news
which should be taken seriously by all those who have the responsibility of
reporting on and interpreting Australia's national life and character for a
wider audience.

 The reality is that the narrow-minded,
inward-looking views of Mrs Hanson and her supporters represent a small
segment of Australian opinion - only about 5 per cent of the population. To
put it another way, 95 per cent of Australians reject views which are
completely out of step with Australia's contemporary reality.

The media - both in Australia and overseas - has an important role to play
in putting Mrs Hanson's views and political status in the right perspective,
and in conveying balanced and accurate images of Australia's national life
to Australians, the region and the world. The image portrayed in recent
times of Australia in some overseas publications has been neither accurate
nor fair. Ms Hanson does not represent Australia. She is not even
representative of Australia. And she should not be portrayed as doing
so.


Conclusion: A Confident Australia

 In
its conclusion, looking ahead to the new millennium, the White Paper
highlights the great strengths that all Australians should draw from their
history, traditions and values.

 It is clear that Australia has
many natural endowments, but it is also the case that, throughout its
history, Australia has had to make its own luck.

 The successful
Australian experience of nation-building is one of growth, adaptation and
social progress, and it is no less remarkable for being so understated in
Australia's national consciousness.

 In the challenging period
after the Second World War, Australia showed that it could adapt to radical
changes by reshaping the priorities of its foreign policy and the focus of
its trade.

 The White Paper demonstrates convincingly that - in
this dynamic period after the Cold War - Australia should retain equal
confidence in its capacity to grow and adapt. 

 I assure you
that a clear sense of the national interest, an understanding of what is
important for Australians and confidence in the capacity of Australia to
shape its future internationally will always define this Government's
approach to foreign and trade policy. 

