---
title: "Settlement assistance for refugees"
date: "1997-05-13"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211453936
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UQH30%22
---

  r97045 

  lof2 

  ............... 

  MEDIA  RELEASE 

  http://www.immi.gov.au/minrelJr97045.htm 

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  The Hon. uddockMP 

  Parliament House, Canberra, ACT 2600 -Phone (06) 277 7860;  Facs. (06) 273 4144 

  Federal Budget 1997  MPS 45/97 

  Settlement assistance for refugees  A national framework will be set up to better assist refugees and humanitarian migrants to settle  quickly and effectively into Australian life, the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs,  Philip Ruddock announced tonight. 

  New funding of$20.8 million over four years will be directed towards introducing a more effective  and coordinated settlement service for humanitarian entrants. The additional funding brings to $18  million the sum ear-marked for humanitarian settlement services in 1997-98. 

  "The Government will provide a more comprehensive case by case needs assessment of refugees and  humanitarian entrants enabling service providers to target new arrivals who are most in need of  assistance," Mr Ruddock said. 

  "Service providers, including Grant in Aid workers, will be better trained and their services better  coordinated. Based on individual needs, clients will be streamed into appropriate services, such as  health, English language training and employment." 

  "The Government recognises refugees have special needs, so we will allocate additional resources to  establish a network of community based agencies to provide service, tailored to meet the needs of  geographic regions and local communities." 

  "I am also stressing the need to improve the accountability of community-based services so we are  meeting genuine needs and achieving measurable outcomes." 

  The extra funding will also be directed to: 

   " improving the quality of information to people who offer, as proposers, to support humanitarian  entrants settling in the community. This will strengthen their capacity to support the people  they propose;   " training and equipping the many volunteers in the community, and particularly in the 

  Community Refugee Settlement Scheme (CRSS), who help refugees and humanitarian entrants  to settle in Australia; and   " increasing the level of material assistance, including clothing, household goods and basic  furnishings, available to needy refugees and humanitarian entrants. 

  The Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council will have a key role in advising the Government on the  most effective means of delivering the initiatives. 

  "Too often, resources have not been well focused on the needs of refugees and opportunities to  accelerate their settlement have been missed," Mr Ruddock said. 

  "Through better targeting of settlement assistance as well as better coordination of effort among  service providers, the Government hopes to reduce the time taken for some refugees to effectively  settle, especially those who tend to be over-represented amongst the long term unemployed." 

  13 May 1997  Media inquiries: Steve Ingram (06) 277 7860 

  07/18/9712:31:08 

