---
title: "46 boat people returned to China"
date: "1997-05-18"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211454055
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QND30%22
---

  e d I a R e I e a s e M   " 

  The HOA. P IIIQ Ruddock MP Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600 

  Telephone : (06) 277 7S60 Facsimile: (06) 273 4144 Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  MPS 46/97 

  46 BOAT PEOPLE RETURNED TO CHINA 

  The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Mr Philip Ruddock, today  announced that 46 people who arrived in Australia unlavvful1y by boat have been  returned to China over the weekend. 

  The group comprised: 

  25 men. 11 women and 8 children from the boat codenamed the Sheoak, which  arrived in Australia on 30 April 1997; and 

  one man and one woman from the boat codenamed the Grevillea. which arrived  in Australia on 15 June 1996. 

  "These people failed to engage Australia's protection obligations and were sent back  home to China," Mr Ruddock said. 

  The weekend removals brings to 291, the number of unauthorised boat arrivals  removed from Australia in 1996-97. 

  "Under the Migration Act, my Department is required to remove people from Australia  as soon as practicable, if they do not engage our protection obligations," Mr Ruddock  said. 

  "The Australian Government appreciates the high level of cooperation from Chinese  officials in quickly returning these' people to their homes. 

  "While the Government is a signatory to the UN convention on refugees, and takes its  role and commitment to assisting them seriously, it is determined to ensure that only  those people who have a right to come to Australia do so, and that they come here  legally. 

  "Australia will, of course, continue to offer its protection to bona fide refugees, They  are, after all, the people who genuinely need our help. 

  'The Government h~s no desire to keep unauthorised arrivals in detention for any  longer than is necessary and this is evidenced by the quick and effective removal of a  group of people who have no claim to be in Australia. 

  "Measures I have introduced recently to improve the decision making process will  ensure that people making protection applications will be dealt with quickly and fairly . 

  "If they are bona fide refugees, they will be entered into Australia. If not they will be  removed as soon as practicable." 

  18 May 1997  MEDIA CONTACT: Steve Ingram 0419278715 062777860 

