---
title: "The Australian National Islamic Library complex, Canberra, 23 August 1997: address at the launch."
date: "1997-08-23"
creators:
  - "Deane, William"
source: "GOVERNOR-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211455825
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/S5J30%22
---



Let me begin by saying how pleased Helen and I are to be with you this
evening for the launch of the Australian National Islamic Library and the
Canberra Islamic Centre.

 The project is a significant one not
only for Muslims but for all of us who care about the need to reaffirm and
strengthen the genuine mutual understanding, respect and tolerance which are
the essence of the multiculturalism that is such an important feature of our
nation. The Library will eventually include some 100,000 volumes and other
works. That will make it the largest repository in the Southern Hemisphere
of material in the English language on Islam and the Muslim people.

 The heart of any Islamic Library is, of course, the Holy Koran.
Indeed, an Islamic Library is both a repository of the Holy Book and a
monument and a means to its fulfilment. As you know, the word Qur'an
(
Koran) itself derives from an Arabic verb 'to read' or 'to recite'.
The first words directly revealed to the Holy Prophet were: 'Read! (or
proclaim!) in the name of thy Lord and Cherisher ...'

 As the
commentary in my copy of the Qur'an puts it, in worldly letters the Prophet
'was un-versed, but with spiritual knowledge his mind and soul were filled,
and now had come the time when he must stand forth to the world and declare
his mission.'

 From those first words we can trace the rich
tradition of Islamic literature as it has developed over the centuries
throughout the Muslim world ... a tradition so vast that, to quote the
Encyclopedia Britannica, 'even a very large team of scholars could scarcely
master a single branch of the subject.' Works of religious importance, of
history, of poetry, of story, of scholarship in the many branches of the
arts and sciences ... geometry, mathematics, medicine, music, architecture,
language, ethics and philosophy, the domestic arts ... that have had such a
global influence on thought and expression for well over one thousand
years.

 With 
reading, of course, comes a necessary
commitment to 
writing: and it is not surprising that the art of
calligraphy came to assume such importance in the Muslim tradition deriving,
in large part, from the work of the historic school at Basra in codifying
the structure of the Arabic language. As I am sure most of you will be
aware, there are still hundreds of thousands of books that even today are
available only in manuscript form. Those Australians who were fortunate
enough to have seen the exhibition in Sydney a few years ago of treasures
from the palaces of Suleymann the Magnificent, saw some splendid examples of
the very finest Muslim calligraphy.

 My reference to the ancient
art of calligraphy should not be seen as suggesting that the Library will
not be up-to-date. To the contrary, it will be equipped with the most
contemporary of electronic communications. The cataloguing will be in a
format acceptable to the Australian National Library. When the
infrastructure is in place, the collection will be available through the
Australian Bibliographic network, not only within Australia but of course
through the INTERNET to the world at large. Hence the Library's significance
to the region, particularly to scholars interested in material in the
English language.

 Indeed, in the shorter term, one important
ancillary aim of the Library is to establish a translation service to help
readers and researchers with material that is at present not available in
English. In the longer term, and in collaboration with other academic
institutions, the organisation hopes to translate those works at present
unavailable in English but which are of interest to all Australians
interested in Islam and the Muslim people. Certainly the community here has
within it the broad range of expertise and language skills to be able to
provide a valuable service and to make available this great resource to
Australian business, governments, academic institutions and the public
generally. In this respect, I was interested to note that the Library has
already received approximately 20,000 books and journals and there are
pledges for another 15,000 works. It is already well on the way towards the
target of 100,000 volumes.

 Apart from books and manuscripts, a
collection is being made of items of cultural and historical interest that
will be incorporated within the Museum of Islamic History in Australia -
another very important element of this project.

 Contact between
Islam and Australia goes back a very long way Indeed, it significantly

pre-dates the arrival of the First Fleet. From at least the middle of
the 18th century, and possibly much earlier, seaman from Macassar, on the
Indonesian Island of Sulawesi, were spending up to 4 months a year
collecting trepang (a form of edible sea-slug) along the northern Australian
coastline There was considerable contact between the Macassans and the
Aboriginal peoples of that part of our country.  'Marege' as the Macassans
called it although it appears no permanent settlements were
established.

 The trepang trade ended in the early years of this
century, but by then Muslim divers from Indonesia and Malaya were an
important part of the pearling industry of the North-West And, of course,
there were the camel drivers from Afghanistan, the first of whom arrived in
Australia around 1860. They played such an important part in the history of
exploration and transport in the great inland deserts of Australia, that
they have become a legendary part of the story of our country Their
settlements, known as 'Ghans"' were the first real Muslim communities in
Australia. Today, the train between Adelaide and Alice Springs is known as
'The Ghan', and the descendants of many of these men continue to play an
important role in the life of our nation.

 In more recent years,
of course, there has been significant immigration by Muslims to Australia
from many parts of the world - most notably the Middle-East (Turkey and the
Lebanon), and the countries of former Yugoslavia, the Indian Sub- -
Continent and South-East Asia Currently, Islam is probably the fastest
growing of the non-Christian religions in Australia. The last census
recorded some 200,000 people who indicated they were of the Islamic Faith -
a 36% increase on the number 5 years earlier.

 Hence the
importance to our local community of the Canberra Islamic Centre which we
are also launching tonight and of which the Australian National Islamic
Library and Museum are outstanding components. The Centre itself began in
1993. Operating out of the Tuggeranong Community Centre, it has offered a
valuable range of cultural, educational, religious, charitable and social
services not only to members of the Muslim community but to the broader
community as well.

 Now, with the assistance of the A.C.T.
Government in obtaining a site, the decision has been made to construct a
new and self-sufficient Centre that will give the Muslim community a
permanent home of its own in the National Capital. The project will be
completed in stages over several years. When finished, it will include an
Auditorium, areas for community and social activities, meeting rooms,
offices, a kiosk, a retail outlet attached to the Library, medical, dental
and counselling service rooms, educational facilities for language and
cultural studies, a prayer room and sporting facilities for young
people.

 I am told that one aim of the Centre is to provide some
employment and work experience opportunities for young people and vulnerable
groups such as recently- - arrived refugees. At a time when unemployment is
such a dreadful social problem, that will be a particularly valuable
service. There is the work the Centre does by helping migrants make the
transition to Australian society through language classes and a broad
understanding of our social mores within a supportive, familiar
environment.

 The intent is, I am told, 'to produce a socially
cohesive multicultural group which would retain their own cultural identity
and yet contribute positively and affirmatively to Australian society as a
whole'.

 That objective has my wholehearted support. As I said
earlier, the essence of multiculturalism is genuine mutual understanding,
respect and tolerance. That mutual understanding, respect and tolerance has
sustained our nation over the years. Within the limits that are consistent
with the overriding obligations and loyalties of Australian citizenship and
with the duties and standards imposed by valid Australian laws,
multiculturalism means that all our citizens are entitled to expect and
demand that the mutual respect, tolerance and understanding which are of its
essence should be observed and encouraged. In that regard, multiculturalism
does not detract from or threaten our national identity or national unity.
To the contrary, while recognising and protecting our diversity of
backgrounds, cultures and beliefs, it promotes that identity and unity by
building upon and adding cohesion to what we are.

 It follows
that our multiculturalism, is not only decent, just and right in that it
reflects mutual understanding, tolerance and respect. It is in our own
interests as a nation. It is our responsibility as Australians to protect
and maintain it and to observe its standards and its dictates. In saying
that Helen and I are delighted to be with you tonight, I express the firm
belief that the Library and Centre which we are launching will continue to
flourish and to assist in promoting the mutual respect, understanding and
tolerance that lies so close to the hearts of all of us who profess the
virtues of multicultural Australia.

 Now, with much pleasure and
warmest good wishes, I officially launch the Australian National Islamic
Library and the Canberra Islamic Centre. 

