---
title: "The White Paper on foreign and trade policy: good news for Australian business: speech to the Asia Business Connection, Parramatta, 17 September 1997"
date: "1997-09-17"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211456299
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0AK30%22
---



Introduction

 Rodney Lewis (President of the Asia
Business Connection), Ross Cameron, Greg Larkin (President of the Greater
Western Sydney Connection), Betty Barry (President of the Greater Western
Sydney Region Chamber of Commerce), Distinguished Guests

 I am
delighted to have this opportunity to speak to the Asia Business
Connection

 -
You do much more than promote trade between the
Asia Pacific and the Western Sydney region - you also promote broader
government, academic and cultural exchanges with the Asia Pacific

 There are four key reasons why the White Paper on Foreign and Trade
Policy released by the Government last month - Australia's first ever -
should be of particular interest to the Asia Business Connection:

 -
First, it is a ringing declaration of Australia's commitment to
the region in which we live and trade.

 -
Second, it places
the national interest at the heart of everything the Australian Government
does in foreign and trade policy.

 -
Third, it recognises
clearly that our capacity to create new jobs, and to raise the living
standards of all Australians, depends vitally on increasing our national
wealth through trade.

 -
And fourth, it draws on the views of
a wide range of Australians, including the business community.

:
The White Paper's Advisory Panel had strong representation from the
private sector and industry groups - the NFF, TNT, Westpac, Southcorp and
the ANZ, in addition to Bruce Kean (director of many companies as well as
ex-BCA Trade Committee)

 I want to focus my remarks today on
what the White Paper offers Australian businesses and enterprises who are
looking increasingly to the Asia Pacific for new profits and
opportunities.


PART ONE: Advancing Australia's National
Interests in the Asia Pacific

 The White Paper gives
Australia's foreign and trade policy a much sharper and more
results-oriented focus on Australian jobs and living standards.

-
It reflects the inescapable reality that in a global economy the
competitiveness of the Australian economy will be the single most important
determinant of Australia' s future.

 -
It recognises that Australia's
economic strength is crucially linked to domestic reform measures such as a
flexible labour market, more investment in research and development, better
education and training systems, improved infrastructure and effective
savings and tax policies.

 The White Paper sets out the broad
framework for Australia to meet the challenges of the global economy
effectively.

 -
It contains elements both of change and of
continuity, and represents a significant rearticulation and rebalancing of
Australian foreign and trade policy.

 A fundamental message of
the White Paper is that Australia is committed to the Asia Pacific for the
long haul, and that Australia's highest foreign policy priority is to make a
lasting contribution to the region.

 -
As a member of the Asia
Pacific, and with one of the most East Asian-oriented economies in the
world, it makes perfect sense for Australia to build on the foundations
which complementary economies and geographic proximity provide.

Australian business people operating in the Greater Western Sydney region
understand this reality better than most.

 -
On a list of
Australia's top 500 exporters, the Greater Western Sydney region has 30
percent of the top 10, 22 percent of the top 100, and 18.6 percent of the
top 500.

 -
For the most part - at the rate of about 50 per
cent - the region's exports go to the Asia Pacific.

 The White
Paper demonstrates that Australia brings substantial economic, strategic and
cultural assets to its regional and global engagement.

 -
The
Australian economy is bigger in absolute size than all in the region to our
north except Japan, the ROK and China. Australia has a strong skills base
sustained by quality educational and training institutions.

-
Australia has an impressive record of inventiveness and openness to new
technology and innovation. In overall terms, Australia is ranked 8th in the
world as a network society 'plugged in' to the high-tech world.

:
That puts us ahead of Germany (13th overall) and Japan (16th
overall). 

 
:
Of the 17 Asia Pacific economies, only the US
and Canada have a higher overall rating than Australia.

-
Australia' s many cultural assets include a proven capacity to change
and adapt which is a feature of immigrant cultures, particularly those that
value ethnic and cultural diversity.

 Australia's unique
economic and cultural profile makes us particularly attractive as a conduit
for business between Asia, Europe and North America.

 But none
of this is to suggest that Australia can afford to be complacent about its
future.

 -
Rather, the White Paper emphasises that Australia
must marshal its considerable and growing assets and bring them to bear on
the prosperity and security of the world in which we live.

Globalisation and the Rise of East Asia - The Two Key Trends

 The White Paper identifies globalisation and the rise of East
Asia as the two most profound trends in the international environment to
which Australia's foreign and trade policies must adapt and respond over the
next fifteen years.

 -
Globalisation offers huge opportunities
for internationally competitive economies, but also brings in its wake
challenges for political and economic management.

 -
It
increases competitive pressures in markets, and makes globally-based trade
rules and disciplines even more important.

 The White Paper's
judgement is that economic growth in industrialising Asia will continue at
relatively high levels over the next fifteen years.

 -
World
Bank forecasts growth for East Asia (excluding Japan) over the next decade
at 6.8 percent, compared with 2.4 percent for Western Europe and North
America.

 Some commentators have been critical of this judgement
- they point to the recent currency and market adjustments in South-East
Asia as evidence that the East Asian miracle has come to an end.

 -
As Foreign Minister I do not wish to comment on the direction
that financial and currency markets may take in the short term.

:
But the knee-jerk reactions we are seeing from some commentators
underline the importance of the White Paper's more considered, longer term
approach.

 By looking at the fundamentals of the region's
economies - and where they are likely to head over a decade or more - we can
identify what is really in Australia's long term interests.

-
Importantly, several of these key fundamentals are unchanged - for
example, the commitment to open economies and continued de-regulation; and
receptivity to inward foreign investment.

 
:
The World
Bank's principal regional economist only recently pointed out that the
countries of South East Asia are all maintaining sound fiscal positions with
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand all running budget
surpluses last year.

 Let me say clearly that Australia's
confidence in the fundamentals of the region - and its extraordinary
prospects for the next fifteen years - are unchanged by recent events.

 -
The fundamentals remain and I am confident that prudent policy
settings will prevail.

 All of this means that the countries of
Asia will become even more important to Australia as trade and investment
partners, and in security terms.

 -
It also has implications
for Australia's relative standing in the region, and significant
consequences for the broader relativities of power and influence in the Asia
Pacific and beyond.


PART TWO: The Importance of Economic
Liberalisation: Creating New Jobs for Australians

 The White
Paper recognises that the sustaining force behind the Asia Pacific's
dynamism is economic liberalisation.




 -
Economic
liberalisation is the key to a buoyant trade and investment
environment.

 
:
It encourages a more efficient allocation
of resources and gives recognition to the merits of comparative
advantage.

 
:
But, above all, it is the best means of
sustaining the sort of economic growth that produces new jobs and improved
standards of living for citizens in every country of the region.

 In Australia's case, our industries have already made considerable
progress as protection has been reduced and they have had to meet world
standards.

 -
This graph from the White Paper 
(show Graph
A) clearly demonstrates that exports have grown as protection has been
reduced over the last decade or so.

 Australia is continuing to
press other countries to lower their trade barriers as well. In large part,
this process is already under way.

 -
Again we can see clearly
- with the help of some more illustrations from the White Paper - the extent
to which our major trading partners in the Asia Pacific have reduced their
tariff barriers.

 
:
It is clearly the case in South East
Asia 
(show Graph B), in North East Asia 
(show Graph C) and in
the Americas 
(show Graph D).

 But the White Paper also
recognises that lowering tariffs and other trade barriers is neither easy
nor uncontentious.

 -
The benefits of liberalisation are
usually more widely spread and are often less immediately apparent than the
costs of liberalisation for particular firms and industries, even though the
net effect is beneficial.

 -
In addition, rapid technological
change, structural adjustment and ongoing improvements in productivity drive
a continuous process of change and turnover in employment. 

 The
Government's approach to further trade liberalisation is a pragmatic one,
aimed at ensuring maximum gains to the Australian economy through improved
resource allocation, whilst minimising the structural adjustment
costs.

 -
The tariff reduction program over the last decade
means that there has already been substantial opening in all but a very
small part of the overall Australian market.

 -
Recent
Government decisions on post-2000 assistance arrangements for the automotive
and textiles, clothing and footwear industries will ensure continued
progress towards the APEC objective of free and open trade, as well as
supporting the development of sustainable employment in these industries and
export growth.

 The White Paper reinforces the importance of
striving for further liberalisation at three levels - through Australia's
bilateral relationships, at the regional level - especially through APEC
-and globally in the World Trade Organisation.

 -
Each level
has an indispensable contribution to make to increasing Australia's
prosperity, none offers the only way ahead, and all three will be needed if
Australia is to continue to improve its trade performance.

The Bilateral Level

 At the bilateral level, the
Government has already had a great deal of success in building trust between
countries in the region and striking mutually beneficial deals. I want to
mention just three of the more recent highlights:

 -
The
landmark Australia-Indonesia Development Area - or AIDA - was inaugurated
successfully in May this year. AIDA is all about reducing barriers to
business investment in Eastern Indonesia so as to bring development for
Indonesia and create jobs for Australians.

 -
Agreement was
reached earlier this year that the Australian and Japanese Prime Ministers
will hold an annual summit on bilateral and regional issues. This gives us
an unprecedented opportunity to work with our largest trading partner at
Prime Ministerial level so as to achieve positive economic outcomes for
Australian firms and workers.

 -
In February this year, the
Government gained concrete results from the inaugural Australia-Thailand
Ministerial Economic Commission meeting held in Canberra. Thai and
Australian Ministers set the goal of doubling Australian-Thai trade, and
doubling our two-way investment, by the year 2000.

 
:
A key
demonstration of Australia's commitment to this goal was the decision to
participate in the $1 billion dollar currency swap as part of the IMF's
package to help the Thai economy. This was a concrete example of Australia's
commitment in action.


The Regional and Global Level

 Last year, at the regional level, APEC economies began
implementing their goal of free and open trade and investment by 2010 and
2020 for industrialised and developing economies respectively.

-
I believe that if APEC can push ahead successfully with its far-reaching
and comprehensive agenda, it will make a very practical contribution to
sustainable growth in the region.

 -
In the process, it will
nurture a greater sense of regional community, shared values and common
interests.

 Beyond APEC, the White Paper identifies as a key priority
over the next five years the need for genuinely closer links between CER
(Australia's economic relations agreement with New Zealand) and the ASEAN
Free Trade Area (AFTA).

 -
Developing closer links between
AFTA and CER is about expanding our trade and investment.

-
It is about looking at ways of reducing the costs of doing business, for
example by taking steps to simplify our customs regulations and procedures
and align our technical standards.

 -
It is also about
encouraging closer contact between our dynamic business communities.

 More broadly, the Government will keep an open mind on options such
as preferential free trade arrangements.

 -
We will take the
course which will bring the most substantial gains in market access in the
shortest time frame.

 The White Paper also sets out Australia's
medium to long-term objectives in the World Trade Organisation.

-
These include launching a further global round, extending rules and
disciplines to new areas, ensuring WTO liberalisation at least matches
regional arrangements, freer trade in agriculture, and opposing WTO action
in areas such as labour standards.


PART THREE: Enhancing
Regional Security

 The White Paper's analysis of regional
trade and investment patterns - and their wide-ranging implications for jobs
in Australia - is matched by its hard-headed appraisal of the new regional
security environment.

 While Australia's strategic environment
is shaped by developments in the Asia Pacific, global issues can also have
significant security implications for Australia.

 -
The risk
of global conflict has diminished considerably with the end of the Cold War,
but other potential threats remain, including the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.

 The White Paper demonstrates that
Australia's security interests should not be seen exclusively in terms of
potential military threats or regional conflicts.

 -
Over the
next fifteen years it is likely that even more attention will be paid to
so-called non-military threats such as pandemics, illegal migration, refugee
flows, environmental degradation, narcotics and transnational crime.

 The White Paper's judgement is that the United States will continue
to see its best interests being served by maintaining its strategic
engagement in East Asia, where it has vital security and economic
interests.

 The White Paper also notes that China's economic
growth, with attendant confidence and enhanced influence, will be the most
important strategic development of the next fifteen years.

-
How China manages its economic growth and pursues its international
objectives, and how other nations, particularly the United States and Japan,
respond to China will be crucial issues over this period.

-
The growth in economic and political influence of others in East Asia,
notably the Republic of Korea and Indonesia, is also likely to affect the
dynamics of regional security.

 In the face of this evolving
regional security environment, the White Paper advocates practical
strategies for advancing Australia's security interests. These strategies
include:

 -
maintaining a strong national defence
capability;

 -
the alliance relationship with the United
States;

 -
expanding Australian bilateral, regional and
multilateral security links -including through expanded security
dialogues;

 -
strengthening Asia Pacific-wide regional
security institutions, of which the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) is the most
significant; and

 -
working to ensure that the international
regimes covering weapons of mass destruction are implemented and, where
necessary, strengthened.

 I am pleased to say that the
Australian Government is already making substantial progress in make all
these strategies a practical reality in our foreign policy.

PART FOUR: A Tolerant and Diverse Australia

 Finally,
advancing Australia's national interests is a task for all Australians and
not just their governments.

 -
It demands communication and
consultation among governments at all levels, businesses and the
community.

 -
If Australia's foreign and trade policies are to
succeed they must attract the understanding and support of the Australian
community.

 The White Paper makes it clear that national
interests cannot be pursued without regard to the values of the Australian
community, including its support for fundamental human rights.

-
Central to these values is an unqualified commitment to racial equality
and to the elimination of racial discrimination.

 That is why
the White Paper rejects racial discrimination absolutely and reaffirms
Australia's commitment to human rights and sustainable development.

 -
The rejection of racial discrimination is not only a moral
issue.

 -
It is fundamental to Australia's acceptance by, and
engagement with, the region where its vital security and economic interests
lie.

 Australia's accelerating engagement with the region is
perhaps most clearly reflected in the growing people-to-people links being
established by business men and women, academics and students, including the
fine work done by groups such as the Asia Business Connection.

-
These are the people-to-people ties which perhaps have the most enduring
effects, flowing as they do across national borders and down through the
generations.

 -
They are absolutely crucial to our
understanding of Asia in a new century likely to be defined by the increased
influence of Asian powers.

 The White Paper is a repudiation of
the views of those who believe that Australia's future lies in an
inward-looking and isolationist posture.

 -
Australia's
historic transition from being a European outpost to becoming one of the
most innovative and constructive members of the Asia Pacific region is one
which presents great opportunities, and most Australians recognise
that.

 -
Australia - as home to people of some 130
nationalities - is a remarkably tolerant and diverse country with a growing
web of relationships across the Asia Pacific. 

 The reality is
that the narrow-minded, inward-looking views of Ms Hanson and her supporters
represent a small segment of Australian opinion - only about 5 per cent of
the population.

 -
To put it another way, 95 per cent of
Australians reject views which are completely out of step with Australia's
contemporary reality.


Conclusion

 In
conclusion, the White Paper gives Australia's foreign and trade policy the
clear-headed direction and sharp focus it needs for the 21 st century.

 -
It charts Australia's regional future for the next fifteen
years.

 -
It will help ensure that the Government's foreign
and trade policies are closely integrated to maximise the exciting new
export opportunities that are opening up in the Asia Pacific for Australian
businesses and enterprises.

 -
It defines nothing less than a
'jobs foreign and trade policy' for Australia.

 -
And it
recommends the strategies which will help Australia blaze a more prosperous
and secure path well into the new millennium.

 That is why it
deserves the strong support of organisations such as the Asia Business
Connection

 -
The White Paper is all about taking Australia's
extensive regional engagement to a higher and more mutually profitable
level. 

