---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Duncan Kerr's Office, [Hobart]: 21 May 1997"
date: "1997-05-21"
creators:
  - "Kerr, Duncan"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "Hobart"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211454095
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2734845%22
---

 11111111 =

 Shadow Minister for Population Issues

 Shadow Minister for immigration

 and Assistant to the Leader of the Opposition

 on Multicultural Affairs

 Federal Member for Denison

 180 Collins St, Hobart 7000

 Ph (03) 6234 5255 Fax (03) 6ZZ3 85130

 GPO Box 32A Hobart Tat. 7001

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP,

 DUNCAN KERR'S OFFICE, HOBART, 21 MAY, 1997

 2.,./05 '97 WED 14:47 FAX

 444 BEAZLEY RI 002

 qr:R7,1 AL:* Du e Kerr 11/11111

 Acting Shadow Minister for the Environment

 JOURNALIST: What is your reaction to the announcements .... cuts to

 immigration numbers.

 KERR: I think it Is a direct reflection of the failure of this Government to deal

 with the problem of unemployment in Australia - when this Government has increasing unemployment as a result of its policy, it is hardly surprising as it has continued to make small reductions downward in the immigration program. But the scale of those reductions has been exaggerated, the program is still roughly in the band of the average of the last three Keating years and is still higher than the lowest year of the Keating Government.

 JOURNALIST: What evidence do you think Pauline Hanson has had on the numbers this year?

 KERR: Well I hope none, but if this is marketed as slashing the Immigration program as last year's changes were marketed, then that would be both false and a wrong message to the Australian community. The big failures in this area are because this Government has failed to tackle the question of unemployment and with increasing unemployment these are predictable. The two key groups that will lose are Australians who want to bring their mums

 and dads here, basically that part of the program has been eliminated entirely, and secondly, Australian workers will still be asking why haven't the Government done anything about the untargeted Independent Category. Thats the big increase area, 15,000 people coming here, and the program is

 still untargeted, unfocused, directly contrary to the advice the Government has received from its own Lin Committee and those people will be coming in here taking jobs that really should be filled by Australians who have the skills

 and training to occupy those positions. So we should really be focussing the skilled program entirely on those areas we have labour market shortages.

 JOURNALIST: What about the changes the Concessional Family to the skilled Australians linked category - have you got any response to that?

 Parliament House Canterra ACT 2600

 Telephone 1061 27 2178

 21/05 '97 

 WED 14:48 FAX

 444 BEAXLEY e003

 KERR: Well thats a clever idea, and one I actually suggested to the Minister.

 But the Minister is taking some credit in terms of the increase in the Skills Program because he shifted about 8,000 people from the Concessional Family Category which I concede and said to him was properly recognised as part of the Skills Program, but he shifted that over and now called it part of the Skills Program, he is claiming that 50% of the Intake is skilled compared a lower proportion previously. The truth is thats just a statistical manipulation of the numbers.

 JOURNALIST: 6,000 fewer all up - I mean why is that, I mean it doesn't sound like a very large number compared to the last few years. Why is that such a concern?

 KERR: No, well I think the point is appropriate to make - that in terms of the band in which this program is set, it is still broadly on the average of the last three years of the Keating Labor Government and the program is still higher than the lowest level of that period of time. So if this is being sold to appease the Hanson people who want to see the program slashed, then that would be

 crude and wrong politics. My criticism of this program is one, its size is a direct result of the failure of the Government to address the question of national unemployment, and secondly, it targets some losers, the people who lose are people who want to bring their mums and dads to this country, that part basically goes, and we still have an untargeted, unfocused

 Independent Category which means that Australians will still feel concerned that people are coming in here to take jobs where there are plenty of trained arid skilled Australians in the workplace already.

 JOURNALIST: Well what was your suggestion to ...

 KERR: [I seggested] that all the skilled component should be subject to labour market targeting. That's been, I think, a real deficiency in this Government's response. It wasn't such a crucial issue during our time

 because we only had a very Small Independent Category. This Government has increased the Independent Category massively, I think about threefold. So there is now about 15,000 people coming into this country and there is no relationship between the skills they bring and labour market needs here. So if you are an engineer for example in Australia, and there are plenty of engineers, it would bring 3,000 more in, what are they going to end up doing? They will either take jobs where skilled Australians will be displaced or they will end up driving taxis.

 JOURNALIST: Do you think the Government is in a way trying to appease Hanson supporters?

 KERR: Well as I say, I hope the Government is not in the business of appeasing Hanson supporters. The proof of the pudding will be in the eating if they try and sell these changes as attracted to the people who are taking

 2

 21/05 '97 WED 14:48 FAX

 444 BEAZLEY Q004

 extremist positions within the Australian community, well that will be a blight

 on them.

 JOURNALIST: Out of the Humanitarian Program there is no change in the overall figure but some of the categories have been changed - do you have any response to those?

 KERR: Well the Humanitarian Program actually has been reduced substantially. In their first year they reduced the size of the program from 13,000 humanitarian and refugee entrants to 10,000. And that now has been confirmed. This Government Is saying there is no change - what it means is no change from last years cuts.

 JOURNALIST: What about the switches in the categories - there has been an increase in the Special Humanitarian program but a decrease in the Special Assistance Category'?

 KERR: Well these are micro elements of the program, but the most important point for those who are concerned about Australia's commitment to humanitarian and refugee entrants is in fact that there is about a 25% cut to the program over the promises that the Coalition made before the last election and against the program as it was previously established. No ifs and

 buts, this is a substantial reduction in the Humanitarian and Refugee Program.

 JOURNALIST: Do you think they should QO back to the levels they had before they came to power'?

 KERR: Well I think that a mark of Australia's commitment to an international response to humanitarian and refugee needs is how we deliver on that program. So there is no doubt that they are failing the test that they set themselves. And I think there are many in the Australian community who will

 believe that that lacks a moral dimension.

 JOURNALIST: Duncan, given that there is a distinction between humanitarian and the number of skilled people who should be allowed in, what would you see as an acceptable figure?

 KERR: Sorry, I don't quite understand.

 JOURNALIST: Well, I see its 12 7000 on humanitarian grounds, how many should be permitted in?

 KERR: Well it is actually 10,000 offshore entrants and 2,000 places set aside for onshore applicants which are people like boat people. Previously, before this Government, the figures were 13,000 offshore and We accepted any

 person who met the convention obligations who was an onshore applicant. So that there has been effectively a 25% cut. I don't believe that it is a matter

 3

 21/05 '97 

 WED 14:49 FAX

 444 BEAZLEY IZ 005

 of trade off between our humanitarian and refugee obligations and the rest of

 the program. In other words I think that those two things should be seen distinctly and in fact I think the Minister himself recognises that by putting out two separate and distinct releases announcing the program. What I am critical of is in that part of the program which relates to humanitarian and

 refugees, the Minister is a) is deceitful In suggesting that there has been no change, reduction and b) I believe that it does go to the important question of what are our international obligations to those who are subject to torture, trauma and all the other things that go with humanitarian and refugee programs. My main criticism though here, of this program, is the failure to target the skilled component of the Independent Category and the price that Australian families have to pay as a consequence of this Government's failure

 across the economic front with increasing unemployment and therefore these consequential knock-on affects on the program.

 JOURNALIST: I am most probably going back but we turned up late

 KERR: thats all right

 JOURNALIST: knowing for a while that there was going to be a cut, what about the figure of 20%?

 KERR. Well, the 20% is a misleading figure, the fact is that the program that the Government has announced is still broadly on the average of three years of the last Keating Government, its still higher than the lowest year of those three years, so what we have is essentially a program which is largely unchanged, slightly reduced and you would hardly expect anything else when this Government has lost the plot entirely on unemployment in this country -when you have got rising unemployment in this country, it is entirely

 predictable that you have this response. But where this government has failed is in two areas, firstly the price is going to be paid by Australian families, basically there will be no element of the program for mums and dads

 KERR: Duncan, can I just get you to um start back .. the main two problems here?

 JOURNALIST: Yes, the main two problems here are the price that will be paid by the Australian community. Firstly Australian families, basically that will be the end of the program for family reunion for mums and dads, and secondly, the failure to target, to focus the Independent Category - there are going to be 15,000 people coming In the Independent Category and there is still no mechanism to target those to Australian labour market needs, so we will be bringing in engineers when we have got a surplus of engineers, either they will be displacing Australians who should be getting those jobs or they will be working as taxi drivers displacing job opportunities for people who are

 lower skilled. What we need In the skilled area is to make sure that every person we bring in is coming In to meet a labour market need in this country where we don't have an adequate pool of trained available labour in this

 4

 21/05 '97 WED 14:49 FAX

 444 BEAZLEY U1006

 country, so that we are not putting Australians out of Jobs as a consequence

 of that untargeted, unfocused program.

 Ends.

 5

