---
title: "Australia's Asia Pacific endeavour: speech to the Asia Society, New York, 1 October 1997"
date: "1997-10-01"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211456595
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VXK30%22
---



Introduction

 Ladies and Gentlemen.

 We are about to
enter what will surely be the Asia Pacific century.

 It will be
a century when the momentous forces shaping today's world - particularly
globalisation and technological advance - will provide more exciting
opportunities, and pose greater challenges, for every government and society
in the Asia Pacific and beyond.

 It will be a century when
success in foreign and trade policy is measured by a nation's ability to
marshal its assets and bring them to bear on the prosperity and stability of
the region in which it lives.

 And it will be a century that
offers its most enduring rewards to those countries with world- class and
competitive economies, tolerant and innovative societies, and a confident
outlook on the world.

 That is why the Australian Government
released Australia's first White Paper on Foreign and Trade Policy in August
this year. The White Paper examines the key international challenges facing
Australia over the next fifteen years.

 It is a ringing
declaration of Australia's enduring commitment to the Asia Pacific.

 It contains elements both of change and continuity, and represents a
significant rearticulation and rebalancing of Australian foreign and trade
policy.

 It draws together everything that Australia has already
achieved in its Asia Pacific endeavour and charts the way ahead for
Australia's regional future.

 One of the White Paper's most
significant judgements is that the United States will over the next fifteen
years remain the world's largest economy, leading military power and primary
source of technological innovation. The United States will thus continue to
be an indispensable element in any configuration for peace, security and
economic growth in the world.

 The shared interests and
aspirations that bring Australia and the United States together, and link
our destinies to the Asia Pacific, become more important with every passing
year.

 I want to focus my remarks today on what the White Paper
says about Australia's future in the Asia Pacific, including the enduring
importance of the Australia-United States relationship, and what the
Australian Government is doing to make the White Paper a practical reality
in its regional policies.

 But, first, I want to express my
appreciation for this opportunity to speak once again to the Asia Society.
The Asia Society continues to lead the way as the pre- eminent
non-government American body concerned with the full range of relations
between the United States and the other members of the Asia Pacific.

 I am pleased to say that the Australasia Centre of the Asia Society
was launched successfully in May this year by Australian Prime Minister John
Howard, and it is already making a major contribution to mutual
understanding and trust in the region.


PART ONE: Australia's
Future in the Asia Pacific

 A fundamental message of the
White Paper is that Australia is committed to the Asia Pacific for the long
haul, and the Australia's highest foreign policy priority is to make a
lasting contribution to the region. As a member of the Asia Pacific, and
with one of the most East Asian- oriented economies in the world, it makes
perfect sense for Australia to build on the foundations which complementary
economies and geographic proximity provide. 

 The White Paper
makes clear that Australia brings substantial economic, strategic and
cultural assets to its regional and global engagement. The Australian
economy is bigger in absolute size than all in the region to our north
except Japan, the ROK and China. Australia has a strong skills base
sustained by quality educational and training institutions. 

Australia has an impressive record of inventiveness and openness to new
technology and innovation. In overall terms, Australia is ranked 8th in the
world as a network society 'plugged in' to the high- tech world. That puts
Australia ahead of Germany (13th overall) and Japan (16th overall). Of the
17 Asia Pacific economies, only the US and Canada have a higher overall
rating than Australia.

 Australia's many cultural assets include
a proven capacity to change and adapt which is a feature of immigrant
cultures, particularly those that value ethnic and cultural diversity.
Australia's unique economic and cultural profile makes us particularly
attractive as a conduit for business between Asia, Europe and North
America.


Globalisation and the Rise of East Asia - The Two
Key Trends

 The White Paper identifies globalisation and the
rise of East Asia as the two most profound trends in the international
environment to which Australia's foreign and trade policies must adapt and
respond over the next fifteen year.

 Globalisation offers huge
opportunities for internationally competitive economies, but also brings in
its wake challenges for political and economic management. It increases
competitive pressures in markets, and makes globally- based trade rules and
disciplines even more important.

 The White Paper's judgement is
that economic growth in industrialising Asia will continue at relatively
high levels over the next fifteen years. The World Bank forecasts growth for
East Asia (excluding Japan) over the next decade at 6.8 percent, compared
with 2.4 percent for Western Europe and North America.

 Some
commentators have been critical of this judgement - they point to the recent
currency and market adjustments in South- East Asia as evidence that the
East Asian miracle has come to an end.

 There is no doubt that
recent developments in the region's financial and currency markets have
posed a challenge for ASEAN countries and Thailand in particular. But, by
looking at the fundamentals of the economies of the region - and where they
are likely to head over a decade or more - we can identify what is really in
Australia's and the region's long term interests.

 The World
Bank's principal regional economist only recently pointed out that the
countries of South East Asia are all maintaining sound fiscal positions with
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand all running budget
surpluses last year.

 Even Paul Krugman - well known sceptic
about Asia's long- term growth prospects - has pointed out that these
currency movements do not tell us much about the long term. In fact, Krugman
expects Asia's growth to resume, albeit at slower rates but driven by
education, savings, and growing labour force participation.

 Let
me say clearly that Australia's confidence in the economic fundamentals of
the region - and its extraordinary prospects for the next fifteen years -
are unchanged by recent events. The fundamentals remain and I am confident
that prudent policy settings will prevail.

 All of this means
that the countries of Asia will become even more important to Australia as
trade and investment partners, and in security terms. It also has
implications for Australia's relative standing in the region, and
significant consequences for the broader relativities of power and influence
in the Asia Pacific and beyond.


PART TWO: Advancing Regional
Prosperity and Security

 Growing Regional Trading Links -
The Importance of Economic Liberalisation

 The White Paper
underlines Australia's accelerating involvement in the economic life of the
Asia Pacific, and the enormous potential to expend our economic
liberalisation. 

 Economic liberalisation is the key to a
buoyant trade and investment environment. It encourages a more efficient
allocation of resources and gives recognition to the merits of comparative
advantage. But, above all, it is the best means of sustaining the sort of
economic growth that produces new jobs and improved standards of living for
citizens in every country of the region.

 The White Paper
reinforces the importance of striving for further economic liberalisation at
three levels - through bilateral relationships, APEC and the World Trade
Organisation. Each level has an indispensable contribution to make to
increasing Australia's prosperity, none offers the only way ahead, and all
three will be needed if Australia is to continue to improve its trade
performance.

 At the bilateral level, the Australian Government
has already had a great deal of success in building trust between countries
in the region and striking mutually beneficial agreements. I want to mention
just two of the more recent highlights:

 .
Agreement was
reached earlier this year that the Australian and Japanese Prime Ministers
will hold an annual summit on bilateral and regional issues. This gives us
an unprecedented opportunity to work with our largest trading partner at
Prime Ministerial level so as to achieve positive economic outcomes for
Australian firms and workers.

 .
In February this year, the
Government gained concrete results from the inaugural Australia- Thailand
Ministerial Economic Commission meeting held in Canberra. Thai and
Australian Ministers set the goal of doubling Australian- Thai trade, and
doubling our two- way investment, by the year 2000.




 
-

A key demonstration of Australia's commitment to this goal was the
decision to participate in the $1 billion dollar currency swap as part of
the IMF's package to help the Thai economy. This was a concrete example of
Australia's commitment in action.

 At the regional level - as
the White Paper indicates - we have already seen tremendous reductions in
trade barriers, partly under the auspices of APEC, bringing significant
benefits to Australia, the United States and its neighbours. ASEAN, in
particular, has cut applied tariffs on a trade- weighted basis by two-
thirds and most recently Indonesia has announced further cuts. In the same
period, China has cut its average tariff rate from 35 to 23 per cent, and
will reduce the rate to 15 per cent by the year 2000.

 APEC, of
course, gives us considerable hope that this trend will continue. Last year,
APEC economics began implementing their goal of free and open trade and
investment by 2010 and 2020 for industrialised and developing economies
respectively. This year, APEC is continuing to make the transition towards
implementing its agenda, including through closer involvement by the private
sector.

 I believe that if APEC can push ahead successfully with
its far-reaching and comprehensive agenda, it will make a very practical
contribution to sustainable growth in the region. In the process, it will
nurture a greater sense of regional community, shared values and common
interests.

 Beyond APEC, the White Paper identifies as a key
priority over the next five years the need for genuinely closer links
between CER (Australia's economic relations agreement with New Zealand) and
the ASEAN Froe Trade Area (AFTA).

 The United States deserves a
great deal of credit since the Second World War in helping to develop a more
open trade and investment regime in the Asia Pacific. US- led investment and
access to markets has enabled regional countries to export their way to
greater prosperity and gain access to technology.

 The White
Paper concludes that US trade policy will be an important factor in
determining the effectiveness of its leadership in the Asia Pacific and
globally. The United States will remain a critical force for regional and
global trade liberalisation. At the same time, the United States is likely
to continue to pursue reciprocity in trade arrangements, and future US
Administrations can be expected to follow and aggressive approach to opening
markets using all available mechanisms to induce its trading partners to
adopt measures which suit the interests of US business.

Clearly, as we look ahead, Australia and the United States will continue to
share a strong interest in promoting freer and more open trade and
investment, not just in the Asia Pacific but globally as well through the
World Trade Organisation.


The New Regional Security
Environment

 The White Paper's analysis of regional trade
and investment patterns is matched by its hard- headed appraisal of the new
regional security environment. This appraisal shows that Australia and the
other countries of the region have an historic opportunity to help lock in
the peace which is underwriting the region's extraordinary economic
growth.

 First, Australia does not face a direct threat or
challenge from any country. Nor can we envisage a realistic scenario where
that might evolve in the foreseeable future. It is important for Australia
that we can reach such a conclusion. And it is important for the region that
we make such statements.

 While Australia's strategic
environment is shaped by developments in the Asia Pacific, global issues can
also have significant security implications for Australia. The risk of
global conflict has diminished considerably with the end of the Cold War,
but other potential threats remain, including the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.

 Australia does not see its security
interests exclusively in terms of potential military threats or regional
conflicts. Over the next fifteen years it is likely that even more attention
will be paid to so- called non- military threats such as pandemics, illegal
migration, refugee flows, environmental degradation, narcotics and
transnational crime.

 In the absence of direct challenge to
Australia's security, our task is to help bed down wider regional stability.
The changing relationships among the major powers (United States, China,
Japan and, in the longer term, India and Russia) will largely determine the
nature of the Asia Pacific strategic environment. At the same time, the
growth in economic and political influence by others in East Asia, notably
the Republic of Korea and Indonesia, is likely to affect the dynamics of
regional security.

 The White Paper's judgement is that China's
economic growth, with attendant confidence and enhanced influence, will be
the most important strategic development of the next fifteen years. China is
expected to be among the world's three or four largest economics within the
next fifteen years. How China manages its economic growth and pursues its
international objectives, and how other countries, especially the United
States, Japan, the Republic of Korea and the ASEAN countries, respond to
China, will be crucial issues over the next fifteen years. It is important
to reaffirm that I have deep confidence in the commitment of China's
leadership in playing a fully integrated and constructive role in the future
of the region.

 In this period, the United States will remain
the single most powerful country in the world, with the largest economy, the
most advanced technology and, by a large margin, the most advanced armed
forces. Within East Asia, US strategic engagement in the region is widely
regarded as a crucial stabilising influence, and an indispensable condition
for the continuing strategic stability on which the region's economic
success is ultimately dependent. Without it, regional countries might seek
significantly to expand their defence capability in a destabilising way, and
uncertainty on the Korean Peninsula would increase.

 The White
Paper concludes that the United States will continue to see maintaining its
engagement in East Asia, where it has extensive economic and strategic
interests, as in its own best interests. The United States will retain its
regional alliances, and retain the capability and intent to protect its
regional interests and meet its security obligations. 

 The
White paper also notes, however, that the nature of US engagement may alter
and it is possible that the profile of US forces in Korea and Japan might
change if Korea is unified or as US force structure and strategic planning
doctrines evolve, and military technologies develop.

Australia's Vital Contribution to a More Secure Region

 I
am pleased to say that the Australian Government is already making
substantial progress along the policy lines and framework advocated by the
White Paper.

 Last year, Australia gave new vigour to its
alliance with the United States through the AUSMIN joint declaration - known
as the Sydney Declaration - the focus of which was very much on the
contribution the alliance makes to regional security. I will speak more
about the importance of the alliance shortly.

 Australia has
also been building a wide- ranging set of bilateral linkages which provide
the indispensable foundation for pursuing mutually beneficial
objectives.

 Australia has in recent years been extending the
number of countries with which it has bilateral dialogues on regional
security issues. Last year we commenced political- military talks with Japan
and the Republic of Korea and instituted semi- official talks with
Vietnam.

 Earlier this year, I announced in Kuala Lumpur four
new important security dialogues which Australia will conduct with China,
the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam. These represent a real strengthening
of regional security cooperation.

 At the regional level,
Australia strongly supports the ASEAN Regional Forum. Importantly, the ARF
brings together all the countries which have an impact on, or are involved
in, the security of the Asia Pacific region. Although the ARF is still in
its youth, it is already starting to achieve some very positive results. The
first level of the ARF's activities - confidence- building - is maturing as
a useful mechanism for developing a sense of shared strategic
interest.

 The White Paper underlines the importance of building
regional structures which promote the peaceful resolution of differences and
which foster a sense of common interests and shared responsibility for the
region's future.


PART THREE: Improving the Asia Pacific's
Quality of Life

 A Tolerant and Diverse Australia

 One of the most important messages of the White Paper is that the
Asia Pacific's quality of life depends on much more than sustained
prosperity and enhanced security.

 It requires a strengthened
sense of trust, genuine respect for the sensitivities and interests of
others, and a commitment to institution- building which best come through
participation in cooperative structures and processes.

 In that
respect, the White Paper makes it clear that Australia's national interests
cannot be pursued without regard to the values of the Australian community,
including its support for fundamental human rights. Central to these values
is an unqualified commitment to racial equality and to the elimination of
racial discrimination.

 That is why the White Paper
categorically rejects racial discrimination and reaffirms Australia's
commitment to human rights and sustainable development. The rejection of
racial discrimination is not only a moral issue. It is fundamental to
Australia's acceptance by, and engagement with, the region where its vital
security and economic interests lie. 

 Australia's accelerating
engagement with the life of the region is perhaps most clearly reflected in
the growing people- to- people links being established by business men and
women, academics and students.

 What's more, Australians in the
region are finding that people are receptive to Australia's values, and our
way of communicating and problem- solving. This may be partly because there
are many people in the Asia Pacific who were themselves educated in
Australia at some stage.

 These are the people- to- people ties
which perhaps have the most enduring effects, flowing as they do across
national borders and down through the generations.

 The White
Paper is a repudiation of the views of the almost negligible minority who
believe that Australia's future lies in an inward- looking and isolationist
posture. Australia's historic transition from being a European outpost to
becoming one of the most innovative and constructive members of the Asia
Pacific region is one which presents great opportunities, and most
Australians recognise that.

 Like the United States, Australia
is a successful and sophisticated immigrant society. People from all across
the globe and the Asia Pacific have come to live and work in Australia. We
are home to people of some 130 nationalities. It is one of the major reasons
why Australia is such a remarkably tolerant and diverse country with a
growing web of relationships across the Asia Pacific.


PART
FOUR: The Importance of the Australia- United States Relationship

 Finally, I want to return briefly to what the White Paper has to say
about the enduring importance of the Australia-United States
relationship.

 The White Paper concludes that Australia's
alliance relationship with the United States is an asset both redefined and
strengthened by the end of the Cold War. It is a central component of
Australia's defence and continues to provide Australia with beneficial
access to technology, military equipment and intelligence. It complements
and reinforces Australia's policy of closer engagement with East Asia.

 The White Paper makes clear that - beyond its significance to the
defence of Australia - the alliance strengthens United States strategic
engagement in the region: an engagement which has underwritten the regional
stability on which the East Asian economic miracle has been built.

 A key objective of the Australian Government will be to strengthen
further the relationship by expanding the already close links that exist at
the bilateral, regional and multilateral levels. Australia will be looking,
in particular, to broaden its dialogue with the United States on Asia
Pacific issues, and to encourage it to accord sustained high-level policy
attention to the region.

 This means that Australian policy
objectives will be directed at ensuring a continuing constructive United
States engagement with the region, reflected in productive relations between
the United States and its key regional partners, as well as in an active US
role in key regional instructions.

 The White Paper makes it
clear that, despite its large trade surplus with Australia, the United
States can be expected to continue to advance its interests vigorously on
issues which it regards as significant, such as protecting intellectual
property. The White Paper concludes that the United States will continue to
use measures such as export subsidies or imposing restrictions on the access
to its market in areas such as agriculture. The Australian Government urges
the US Government to bring such anti- competitive measures to an end.

 At the same time, the United States remains a key economic partner
for Australia, particularly in relation to investment, and the Australian
Government will be working to ensure that the wider economic relationship
further expands over the next fifteen years. The Australian Government will
also work towards expanding cultural and educational links in a way which
reinforces a genuinely multi- dimensional relationship.

Conclusion: Our Shared Asia Pacific Endeavour

 Like the
extraordinary experience and history of the United States spanning more than
two centuries, the successful australian journey of nation- building is one
of growth, adaptation and social progress, and it is no less remarkable for
being so understated in Australia's national consciousness.

 In
the challenging period after the Second World War, Australia showed that it
could adapt to radical changes by reshaping the priorities of its foreign
policy and the focus of its trade.

 The White Paper demonstrates
convincingly that - in this dynamic tod after the Cold War - Australia
should retain equal confidence in its capacity to grow and adapt to the
changing nature of our region as we approach the new millennium.

 Each period of history brings with it unique challenges. In order to
progress with our region, Australia must be part of the solution to these
challenges. That is why our actions on four recent crises demonstrate
Australia's fundamental commitment to the region and the importance of
Australia to the region.

 First, our US $1 billion contribution
to the IMF Thailand package was a deep commitment to the economic health of
our neighbour.

 Second, we have been deeply involved, in
particular this week, in helping to build a unified regional approach to the
strategic problems which flow from the recent events in Cambodia.

 Third, we have attempted to address a severe humanitarian crisis with
our assistance drought relief in Papua New Guinea.

 Finally,
only this week we have taken a lead in addressing the regional environmental
crisis caused by the forest fires in Indonesia, with major contributions of
medical supplies, technical experts and aerial water bombing
capabilities.

 Taken together, these actions are tangible proof
of our inextricable commitment to the region's economic, strategic,
humanitarian and environmental health. It is also evidence of the fact that
not only is the region important to Australia, but that Australia is
important to the region. 

