---
title: "Asylum to three Chinese women: Minister must explain without delay"
date: "1997-02-25"
creators:
  - "Kerr, Duncan"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211551163
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736568%22
---

 146-

 4

 a ki- 741M AUSTRALIA -'-)-} R-4(<4

 Duncan Kerr

 Shadow Minister for Population Issues Shadow Minister for Immigration

 and Assistant to the Leader of the Opposition

 on Multicultural Affairs

 Federal Member for Denison

 r a y. (23':

 fj.5:ara7 .-. Tan 72P:1

 Media Release 25 February 1997

 Asylum to Three Chinese Women - Minister Must Explain Without Delay

 Newspaper reports today claim that three Chinese women have been granted the right to stay in Australia by the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Mr Philip Ruddock, using his Ministerial discretionary power to intervene .

 The reported decision appears to effectively overturn the effect of a High Court decision won by the Government on the basis that the women who objected to returning to China because of that country's one child policy were not eligible to be classified as refugees.

 The Minister will not confirm or deny that he has made the decision. His office would only say that the Minister will table a report on the circumstances under which he has invoked his special discretionary powers.

 Under the provision in the Act the Minister would not be required to table a report in respect of this decision until around 1 October 1997.

 The coincidence of this report with the High Court's decision handed down yesterday raises some urgent and legitimate concerns by all Australians.

 The coincidence of the High Court's decision with the cases of the three Chinese women calls for a 'please explain now' on this occasion:

 has the Minister made the decision?

 if so, in making the decision has the Minister overridden the High Court's decision?

 given the Minister's own criticism of similar decisions, was it his own decision, or what factors were taken into account?

 and, very importantly, what is the Government's position on where Australia should stand on this issue? Fariiarnenl' Huune: Canberra ACT/200

 Tele.71 .K,rt: 02(7,', 277 717a

 . . , . . . .

 - 2 -

 In view of the significance of the ministers reported determination and the policy issues involved, it's not good enough for the Minister to leave it for more than six months to explain.

 Given that the Minister has roundly criticised, on a number of occasions recently, the Refugee Review Tribunal decisions with similar features to the matter won by the Government in the High Court, it's perfectly reasonable to expect him to explain the apparent inconsistency without delay.

 Further Information: Duncan Kerr (06)277 2178, or0418 125161 George Haddad (06)2772180, or 0419 009214

