---
title: "Immigration Minister launches report on Cambodian refugees"
date: "1997-10-14"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211456758
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GAR30%22
---

  r97104 

  MEDIA  RELEASE 

  Page 1 of2 

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  The Hon Philip Ruddock MP  Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600  Telephone (02) 6277 7860 Facsimile (02) 6273 4144 

  MPS 104/97 14- 00-. 

  Immigration Minister launches report on Cambodian  refugees  A report which looks at the settlement progress of Cambodian refugees who came to Adelaide in  the 1980s has been launched today by the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs ,  Philip Ruddock. 

  'Resuming Settled Lives: Cambodian Refugees in Adelaide' , compiled by Dr Christine Stevens,  examines the social and economic aspects of their resettlement experience and provides a profile  of their characteristics, circumstances, strengths and needs. 

  The report is based on 150 interviews undertaken in Adelaide in the three months June to August  1995 with Cambodians aged 20 years and over. Consultations were also held with representatives  of Cambodian organisations in South Australia . 

  It focuses on their labour market experience , English language competence and educational and  training needs, levels of literacy in Khmer and Chinese dialects , health issues, social relationships  and service usage patterns of the participants. 

  Some 3000 Cambodians settled in South Australia between 1980 and 1988 following turmoil in  their home country. 

  The report found that their resettlement was difficult because most arrived after prolonged  periods in refugee camps, with little English, few possessions and little awareness of life in  Australia. As many were from rural areas in Cambodia, they also had low levels of education. 

  "This report provides a great insight into some of the problems that refugees face when resettling  in a new country," Mr Ruddock said. "It also shows that some groups of refugees may have  ongoing or longer term settlement needs that require different or additional support tailored to  their particular needs. The report also gives feedback that will help provide more relevant  settlement support and assistance. 

  "It is only by better understanding the settlement needs of refugees that we can provide the help  and support that will allow them to settle more quickly and effectively and become contributing  members of their new community. 

  "In this regard, the Government announced in the Federal Budget for 1997 that a national  framework will be set up to better assist refugees and humanitarian entrants to settle quickly and  effectively into life in Australia . 

  "New funding of $20.8 million over four years will be directed towards introducing a more  effective and co-ordinated settlement service for humanitarian entrants. The additional funding  brings to $18 million the amount ear-marked tor humanitarian settlement services in 1997-98. 

  "The Government will provide a more comprehensive case-by-case needs assessment of refugees  and humanitarian entrants enabling service providers to target new arrivals who are most in need 

  http://www.immi.gov.aulminrel /r97104.htm 12/0211998 

  r97104 Page 2 of2 

  of assistance. 

  "This strategy should go a long way towards reducing and alleviating the type of settlement  difficulties which Dr Stephens has identified in her report." 

  14 October 1997  Media contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860 

  [Media Release index] [ Home Page] 

  http://www.immi.gov .auiminrel/r97104.htm 12/0211998 

