---
title: "New child care support for refugee children"
date: "1997-10-17"
creators:
  - "Wooldridge, Michael"
source: "MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND FAMILY SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211456809
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UIQ30%22
---

  Aus~alia's .mmonwealth Departme ... es. Media Release-Dr WooldridgtW)'siwyg: //264/http://www.health.gov.au/mediarel /mw 1 0997.htm 

  I of2 

  Media Release  Dr Michael Wooldridge 

  MW 109/97 

  17 October, 1997 

  NEW CHILD CARE SUPPORT FOR REFUGEE CHILDREN 

  Refugee children who have been subjected to the horrors of torture and trauma can now access  personalised child care under the Coalition Government's Special Needs Subsidy Scheme, Federal  Minister for Health and Family Services, Dr Michael Wooldridge, said today. 

  Launching community language information targeted to recently-arrived refugees at Box Hill in  suburban Melbourne, Dr Wooldridge said at least half of the 10,000 refugees who arrive in Australia  each year had suffered some form oftorture or trauma including many young children*. 

  "Refugee children who have experienced torture and trauma have not in the past received the extra  care and attention they need," Dr Wooldridge said. 

  "One in four refugees are children, and many have personally suffered from the awful sorts of torture  that are still common in war tom lands. Others suffer enormous trauma from seeing their older family  and friends tortured or killed. 

  "Often these children experience these things when they're too young to verbalise their feelings,  which are then repressed, and they manifest themselves later in signs of withdrawal, outbursts of  unexplained anger and difficulty in communicating or forming normal childhood relationships and  associations. 

  "The Government's Special Needs Subsidy Scheme provides extra help and resources so that these  children can receive the special attention they need to participate in mainstream child care," he said. 

  The Minister released information brochures about the Special Needs Subsidy Scheme which have  been translated into sixteen community languages appropriate for recently-arrived refugees including  Bosnian, Somalian and Khmer. 

  "It is particularly appropriate to launch these brochures as part of the Refugee Week celebration as  Australia remembers its proud history of welcoming refugees," Dr Wooldridge said. 

  "The Scheme demonstrates the Federal Government's commitment to the humanitarian cause as well  as responding to community needs and developing initiatives that will strengthen all Australian  families, old or new, the child care industry and the community. 

  "The Special Needs Subsidy Scheme allows children with severe disability or refugee children who  have been affected by torture or trauma to access child care, enjoy being with other children and to  take part in the many experiences that child care can provide. 

  "The Scheme gives the parents of these children new choices; they will now have the opportunity to  work, study and participate in the general community. Previously many had to stay at home as  . full-time carers for these children with high support needs," he said. 

  The type of support offered under the Special Needs Subsidy Scheme(SNSS) varies depending on the  needs of the child, their family and the child care service . It may include funding for ongoing  additional staffing, advice, training and specialised resources and/or equipment essential for including  the child in normal activities. 

  "We want to help these children have a normal childhood and move beyond the horrible memories  and trauma that make hold them back," Dr Wooldridge said. 

  01/08/98 14:32:14 

  Australia's 'tmmonwealth Departme ... es. Media Release-Dr Wooldridgwysiwyg:// 264/http:// www .health.gov.au/mediarellmw 10997 .htm 

   " 

  2 of2 

  "With this help, these children can aim for enhanced levels of participation in the community that are  based on the social skills that they learn by being with other children and taking part in the  experiences and opportunities that child care can provide," he said. 

  Central to the Scheme is the collaboration by the child care provider, parents and support workers to  develop an Inclusion Support Plan. This Plan identifies the needs of each child and child care service  which must be met to ensure the child is able to enjoy the range of activities and experiences offered  by child care. 

  The $10 million per annum Special Needs Subsidy Scheme commenced on 1 July this year and  complements the existing Supplementary Services (SUPS) Program. To date some 400 applications  have been received for additional assistance under the SNSS. The SUPS Program has been operating  since 1983 and focuses on helping child care services to provide access to children with additional  needs such as children with disabilities, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children or children  from diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds. 

  Brochures are available in Bosnian, Arabic, Serbian, Chinese, Spanish, Vietnamese, Khmer, Turkish,  Amharic, Croatian, Tagalog, Portuguese, Somalian, Russian, Farsi and Laotian. 

  Further information about the Special Needs Subsidy Scheme and the Supplementary Services  Program are available from the Health Information Line on 1800 020 613. 

  Media Contact: 

  Bill Royce, Dr Wooldridge's office (02) 6277 7220  Kate Gumley, Department of Health and Family Services (02) 6289 3709 

  *EDITORS PLEASE NOTE: Australia currently allows up to 12,000 new entrants annually under  the refugee and humanitarian program, comprising up to 10,000 applications from overseas posts and  up to 2,000 applications for onshore asylum from people already in Australia. In the last 12 months  about 9,000 people have been granted entry under the refugee and humanitarian program. Of those  seeking entry through overseas posts, about 48% claim to have suffered torture or trauma. It is  generally believed that for a variety of cultural , religious or social reasons the recorded claims  understate the incidence of torture and trauma among applicants . 

  Last updated 11 /28/97 09:32:02  by Dirk Nissen 

  [Hom e page] [About the Department Page] [Comments] 

  01/08/98 14:32:15 

