---
title: "Landmines [contribution of $500,000 to mine awareness program]"
date: "1997-05-23"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "contribution of $500"
  - "000 to mine awareness program"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211454258
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Y2E30%22
---



I am pleased to announce an Australian contribution of $500,000 to a United
Nations mine awareness program in Afghanistan, as part of this Government's
ongoing commitment to a principled and compassionate response to the crisis
caused by the misuse of landmines. The Afghanistan program provides mine
awareness activities for both returning refugees and those living in mine
infested areas.

 This brings the total Australian contribution
to the demining process announced since March 1996 to almost $18 million - a
figure which makes Australia a world leader in demining efforts.

 On 15 April last year this Government announced its support for a
global ban on the production, stockpiling, use and transfer of
anti-personnel landmines and a unilateral suspension on the operational use
of APL by the Australian Defence Force. I am pleased that international
support for a global ban on landmines has subsequently increased steadily.
In this context I welcome the UK Government's announcement on 21 May of a
unilateral ban on the import, export, transfer and manufacture of
anti-personnel landmines (APL), and a moratorium on the operational use of
APL.

 The Government is taking every opportunity in
international fora to add its weight to the growing international movement
in favour of eliminating APL as a weapon of war. We believe the institution
best placed to deliver a meaningful, legally-binding solution to the global
problem of landmines misuse is the Conference on Disarmament, in which we
are making a major push to start negotiations for a global ban.

The question of stockpiles is best addressed in the context of negotiations
for a global ban in the Conference on Disarmament. In the meantime, ADF
stocks will be used for training and research purposes only, notably for the
training which has been essential to enable our army engineers to
participate in mine clearance programs in countries such as Cambodia.

 Australia will continue to participate in the series of `Ottawa
process' meetings throughout this year. We hope this process will prove to
be complementary to work in the Conference on Disarmament on landmines. Our
overriding concern is to achieve a treaty which is comprehensive in scope
and which can achieve the adherence of all relevant states. The Conference
on Disarmament has shown it can deliver that sort of treaty. I am
particularly pleased at the UK Government's commitment to redouble its
efforts to achieve a global ban in this forum.

 Australia does
not produce and, like the UK, will not export landmines.

 While
determined to do all we can to see an effective, verifiable ban concluded as
soon as possible, we realise that people around the world are suffering now,
and will continue to suffer tomorrow, from the past misuse of APL - from the
estimated 110 million mines currently in the ground. This is why the
Government is also committed to supporting practical measures to tackle the
humanitarian disaster caused by landmines. In addition to the contribution
to the Afghanistan mine awareness program announced today, I have previously
announced other significant increases in funding for international
mine-clearance and assistance to victims, including:

 .
a
contribution of $4 million over 3 years, announced on 30 January this year,
for mine clearance and rehabilitation work in Cambodia and Mozambique

 .
another $1.3 million, committed on 8 April 1997, to be channelled
through Australian non-government organisations working to rid Angola of
landmines and rehabilitate landmine victims

 .
financial
support for the participation of delegates to a regional seminar on
landmines, organised by the Australian Network of the International Campaign
to Ban Landmines, to be held in Sydney on 14-17 July 1997.

.
the $12 million de-mining program for Cambodia and Laos, which I
announced on 5 May 1996; and

 .
the deployment at various
times of our army engineers to assist with de-mining work in Cambodia,
Mozambique, Afghanistan and Angola.

 Australia is working with
other countries to improve de-mining technology. We have developed what we
believe to be breakthrough technology which has the potential to make mine
detection faster and more reliable, particularly in highly mineralised soils
such as are found in countries like Cambodia.

 Contact: 

Kirk Coningham, 06 277 7500; 0411 414 695 

