---
title: "Australian Volunteers Abroad Awards dinner, Sydney, Friday, 21 August 1998: address on the occasion of the opening."
date: "1998-08-21"
creators:
  - "Deane, William"
source: "GOVERNOR-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211462223
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JF905%22
---

 ADDRESS BY SIR WILLIAM DEANE

 GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA 

 ON THE OCCASION OF THE OPENING OF THE 

 AUSTRALIAN VOLUNTEERS ABROAD AWARDS DINNER

 SYDNEY

 FRIDAY, 21 AUGUST 1998

 Last month 72 people left this country under the Australian Volunteers Abroad  program of the Overseas Service Bureau.

 Among them were young men and women in their 20s, recently graduated from  University. There were 4 families including between them, 7 children under the age of 12.  There were teachers and nurses, carpenters and plumbers. There was a Civil Engineer  who will be working on reconstruction projects in Afghanistan, an Occupational Therapist  helping disabled orphans in Malawi, and a Psychologist working with children in a Kenyan  refugee camp. There were people versed in the law, in farming and agriculture, the  environmental sciences, in hospitality and tourism.

 People from all over Australia, from all kinds of backgrounds, going to destinations  all over the world. People who were united by a common sense of initiative and  independence, and a shared dedication to place their individual skills and abilities at the  service of their fellow human beings in developing countries ... among them some of the  poorest and most disadvantaged people on the face of the globe.

 The Australians who went overseas under the Australian Volunteers Abroad  program last month included the 4000th person to have been recruited by the Overseas  Service Bureau over the past 36 years, almost all of them under the Australian Volunteers  Abroad program. It is that achievement -  that remarkable milestone in both individual  commitment and collective responsibility -  that we are celebrating at tonight’s dinner. It  is a celebration that will be marked by the presentation of an inaugural AVA Recognition  Award to a representative volunteer from each of the four decades. In dpe course, a  Recognition Award will be sent to the other Australian Volunteers Abroad who have  served under the program during those past 36 years.

 Equally important is the continuing significance of the theme of this celebratory  dinner, Building A Better World, and the knowledge that lives with the volunteers that,  through the transfer of skills and through their periods of service they have contributed to  the sense of partnership and the two-way exchange of knowledge and friendship which lie  at the heart of the Australian Volunteers Abroad program. By their efforts, they have  helped build a better world, to the lasting credit of themselves and increased respect and

 2

 goodwill for our country. As Governor-General, I publicly acknowledge all that they have  done and achieved and sincerely congratulate and thank each of those 4000 men and  women.

 Even as we gather here, there are at present more than 500 Australian Volunteers  Abroad working on local salary rates and living often in very difficult conditions in some  50 countries throughout Asia, Africa, Latin America and the Pacific. They are teaching,  learning, working and striving. They are improving the circumstances of others across the  spectrum of human need: in health, education, administration, services, agriculture and  fisheries, engineering and the skilled trades, in environmental management, in scientific,  economic, legal and social development.

 The program is supported by funding provided by the Commonwealth, through  AusAID, for travel and recruitment expenses. That support is, of course, of vital  importance. It represents, however, only part of the burden. Thus, it has been said that  the monetary value of the contributions to the local communities made by Australian  Volunteers Abroad is close to 3 times the basic annual amounts provided by the  Commonwealth. Those contributions include such things as salary and benefits foregone  by the volunteers, lower advertising costs, the services provided by auditors, academics,  consultants, returned volunteers and other supporters of the Overseas Service Bureau. But  the real value of the Australian Volunteers Abroad program simply cannot be measured in  monetary terms. How much is the value of human lives, human health, human education,  human knowledge, human dignity, human happiness? And how can one measure in  monetary terms the value to our own country’s international relations of the direct and  indirect effects in so many foreign places of the personal qualities and of the achievements  of our Volunteers Abroad. The effects of those qualities and achievements will truly  persist for as long as human memory of them exists.

 Moreover, the importance of the Australian Volunteers Abroad program is not  confined to the countries in which the volunteers have served and to Australia’s relations  with those countries. It extends within our Australian community.

 The longer I am Governor-General, the more convinced I become that the ultimate  measure of our worth as a truly democratic nation is how we treat the most disadvantaged  and vulnerable among us. The experiences of our Australian Volunteers Abroad have a  profound impact on their knowledge and understanding of the causes of poverty, on their  respect for people of other races and on their appreciation of the worth of tolerance, mutual  respect and compassion. In other words, the experiences of our Volunteers Aboard tend to  reinforce the qualities and characteristics which led them to become volunteers in the first  place. The result is that they are, on their return, more convinced and effective advocates  and exponents of the mutual tolerance, respect and responsibility which uncjerlie our true  worth as a nation.

 In conclusion, ladies and gentlemen, I again express my warmest congratulations to  all that the Overseas Service Bureau and Australian Volunteers Abroad have achieved over  the past thirty six years both for the countries in which the volunteers have served and for  our own country. And I offer my best wishes for all that will be accomplished by the  program and those who serve in it during the future years of what, I hope, will be a very  long remaining life.

