---
title: "First contract signed for English language tuition in NSW."
date: "1998-03-20"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211552192
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7N005%22
---

   

  Media Release

  The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

  Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600

  Telephone: (02) 6277 7860 Facsimile: (02) 6273 4144

  

  MPS 29/98

  

  FIRST 
CONTRACT SIGNED FOR ENGLISH LANGUAGE TUITION IN NSW

  

  The first contract has been 
awarded for the delivery of the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP) 
in New South Wales, in the South Sydney and Illawarra region, the Minister 
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, announced 
today  .

  

  The contract, between the Department of Immigration 
and Multicultural Affairs and a consortium led by the Australian Centre 
for Languages (ACL), is the first to be awarded in New South Wales under 
the open tendering process.

  

  Mr Ruddock said English language ability is one of 
the key factors in the successful settlement of migrants into the Australian 
community.

  

  "Studies have shown that migrants with a low 
level of English language skill tend to have a poor employment experience 
and can face social isolation.

  

  "The new service delivery arrangements will 
provide better services for clients including a wider choice of provider, 
more flexibility in service delivery options, and better pathways to 
further study or employment".

  

  The consortium, including Wollongong International 
College (University of Wollongong), Mission Australia, and St George 
and Sutherland Community College, will begin delivering language services 
in July 1998.

  

  "The Government's aim in moving to open tendering 
was to improve the flexibility and effectiveness of English language 
tuition, while ensuring best value for money," Mr Ruddock said.

  

  Mr Ruddock said advances in technology would help 
providers deliver English language services that are responsive to the 
changing needs of clients.

  

  "The measures introduced by this Government 
will significantly improve the quality and sustainability of the Adult 
Migrant English Program and will also enable ongoing improvements to 
how English can and should be taught."

  

  Individuals entering Australia under the Refugee 
and Humanitarian stream will also have access to additional preparatory 
tuition to prepare them for the courses.

  

  20 March 1998

  

  Media inquiries:

  Minister's Office:   Mr Brad Robinson 0419 278 715

  DIMA (AMEP):    Mr David Doherty 02 6264 2993

  

  

  Immigration information is also available on the Internet at www.immi.gov.au

