---
title: "Reform of Merits Review Tribunals"
date: "1998-02-03"
creators:
  - "Williams, Daryl"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211458363
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XIQ30%22
---

 NEWS RELEASE

 Attorney-General THE HON DARYL WILLIAMS AM QC MP

 3 February 1998  386 REFORM OF MERITS REVIEW TRIBUNALS

 The Government will proceed with the amalgamation of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal  (AAT), the Social Security Appeals Tribunal (SSAT), the Immigration Review Tribunal  (IRT) and the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT) into a new single tribunal, to be called the  Administrative Review Tribunal (ART).

 The ART will streamline the merits review process by improving administrative efficiency  while maintaining independence and providing a cost effective process for review of  Government decisions.

 The decision follows the Cabinet in-principle agreement in March 1997 to reform tribunals  and the establishment of an interdepartmental committee to advise on implementation of the  amalgamation.

 The Government has largely adopted the key recommendations of the Administrative Review  Council and Australian Law Reform Commission “Better Decisions” report.

 The ART is to be located within my portfolio, and will be divided into separate review  divisions, based on the previous specialist review tribunals.

 The Government has decided to retain the Veterans’ Review Board in its current form as a  separate tribunal with full appeal rights to the ART. This recognises and respects the special  needs of veterans in seeking review of Government decisions.

 The VRB is a very specialised, low cost, non-legalistic tribunal that has achieved significant  improvements.

 Similar to current arrangements with some tribunals, funding will be through the running  costs of departments whose decisions are reviewed by the specialist divisions. The funding  arrangements will be clearly linked to workload and caseflow figures, thus preserving the 

 independence of tribunal decision making.

 The ART will be headed by an independent, statutory President, who will be responsible, in  consultation with Executive Members, for the overall management of the ART including  developing best practice, ensuring members’ productivity performance and liaison with  portfolios to facilitate improvement in primary decision making.

 Each of the ART divisions will be headed by an Executive Member. Members will be  appointed on the recommendation of the relevant portfolio Minister in a specialist division,  but will be appointed also to other divisions where appropriate.

 The ART will have a non-adversarial approach and there will be limited access to second tier  review of first instance ART decisions. There will be a presumption against the ART being  bound by strict adherence to the rules of evidence.

 It is expected that legislation to establish the ART will be introduced this year.

 Media Contact: Nicholas Harford (02) 6277 7300

