---
title: "Australian aid for Bangladesh"
date: "1998-02-11"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211458456
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/K8R30%22
---



I am pleased to announce the Australian Government will fund a new
initiative aimed at improving human rights and strengthening governance in
Bangladesh.

 Increased funding for practical human rights
initiatives has been one of my priorities as Foreign Minister. I was able to
discuss this issue at length with the new United Nations Human Rights
Commissioner, Mary Robinson, in Switzerland last week. Australia believes
effective and transparent governance, which includes the protection of human
rights, is crucial to national development.

 This new $200,000
initiative will provide training and technical assistance for Bangladeshi
officials, including training in human rights law and in legislative
drafting. 

 I am also pleased to announce funding of $500,000 to
continue to assist some 21,000 Rohingyan refugees currently living in camps
along the Bangladesh/Burma border. The World Food Programme will receive
$300,000 to assist it to provide food to the refugees and the United
National High Commissioner for Refugees will receive $200,000 for programs
which provide refugees with clean water, sanitation, food and shelter.

 The Australian Government will also contribute funds for two health
initiatives in Bangladesh. The International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease
in Dhaka will receive $325,000 and the Dhaka Dental College will receive
$88,200 to assist with their important work. 

 Australia will
contribute a total of $33.3 million in aid to Bangladesh this financial year
to assist the country to pursue its development objectives.

Under Australia's Development Scholarship program, 80 Bangladeshi students
are currently studying in Australia.

 Australia also continues
to provide Bangladesh with about 86,000 tonnes of wheat in food aid but
hopes that this form of assistance will decline as food production and
distribution improves in the country over time.

 During meetings
with Bangladeshi Ministers, I indicated Australia would be pleased to
consider assisting the Government of Bangladesh in furthering the peace
process in the Chittagong Tracts through redevelopment of the region.

 DHAKA

 Media contact:

 Innes Willox, Minister's
Office, 02 6277 7500; 0411 414 695

 Geoff Adlide, AusAID, 02 6206 4967;
0417 683 126 

