---
title: "Protection visas allocated to people in humanitarian need overseas."
date: "1998-04-06"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211552521
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/C3105%22
---

   

  

  M e d i 
a  R e l e a s e

  

  The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural 
Affairs

  

  Parliament House, Canberra ACT 
2600

  Telephone: (02)  6277 7860  
Facsimile: (02) 6273 4144

  

  

  MPS 34/98

  

  PROTECTION VISAS ALLOCATED TO PEOPLE

  IN HUMANITARIAN NEED OVERSEAS

  

  The Minister for Immigration 
and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, today announced that 500 
places not required for protection visas in Australia this year will 
be re-allocated to resettle people who have suffere  d human rights abuses overseas.

  

  This year only 1,500 places of the 2,000 originally 
allocated for on-shore protection visas in 1997-98 will be required.

  

  The Minister said the re-allocation ensures that 
not only will Australia's total Humanitarian Program of 12,000 be met, 
but it demonstrates the Government's strong and continuing commitment 
to assisting people in humanitarian need.

  

  “The Government's humanitarian program is notionally 
divided into 10,000 places for overseas people deemed to be in need 
of humanitarian resettlement and 2,000 people in Australia that are 
found to be refugees.

  

  “I have consistently made the point that because 
our capacity to assist is not unlimited, if more than 2,000 places are 
required onshore to meet our international obligations they will come 
off the offshore component.

  

  “At the same time, as we do not need the entire 
2,000 onshore places this year the remaining places will be used overseas 
to assist those who are in humanitarian need of resettlement,” Mr 
Ruddock said.

  

  Last year, 2,251 on-shore protection visas were required, 
251 places more than the planning figure. These additional places came 
from the offshore part of the Humanitarian Program.

  

  ENDS

  

  Monday, 6 April 1998

  

  Media inquiries  : Brad Robinson (02) 6277 7860 or 0419 278 715

  

  Immigration information is also available on the 
Internet at www.immi.gov.au

