---
title: "Population threatens environment."
date: "1999-09-14"
creators:
  - "Thin, Aung"
source: ""
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477039
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6RX16%22
---

  Australian Council 

  of Social Service 

  Level 2 

  619 Elizabeth St   Redfern 

  Locked Bag 4777   Strawberry Hills   NSW 2012 

  Ph [02] 9310 4844   Fax [02] 9310 4822 

     www.acoss.org.au 

  International Council on Social Welfare 

  28’h Asia and Pacific Regional Conference of ICSW 

  14-l 7 September, 1999, Sydney, Australia 

  Social Welfare and Social Development 

  in the New Millennium 

  Open Forum 

  Population Threatens Environment 

  Presenter:   Aung Thin 

  Federation of Trade Unions - Burma 

  International Council on Social Welfare 

  28th Asia and Pacific Regional Conference of ICSW 

  14-17 September 1999   Sydney, Australia 

  Social Welfare and Social Development in 

  the New Millennium 

  II -- II 

  I 

  Population Threatens Environment I sopulation Threatens Environment   Aung Thin 

  BY BY 

  Aung Thin 

  Federation of Trade Unions-Burma (FTU-B) Federation of Trade Unions-Burma (FTU-B) 

  co-sponsors   Department of Family and Community Services, The Mjer Foundation,   Commonwealth Department of Health and Aged Care, NSW Department of   Community Services, City of Sydney. 

  Introduction 

  The study of population has produced several schools of 

  thought. There are those demographers who are fearfbl that population growth would 

  jeopardize economic prosperity. Other theorists argue that population growth actually 

  Population Threatens Environment 

  has a stimulating effect on the economy, or is beneficial to the community for 

  political, social, military or other reasons for human resources. Hence, they entertain 

  no fear of overpopulation. It is observed that in a period of intensive economic growth 

  and optimism, few are interested in a population theory, which explains poverty and 

  misery. The period after World War II was characterized by a formidable population 

  explosion in the entire world. As a result, attention is given to the studies warning 

  against the dangers of overpopulation. 

  It is found that those who do not fear population congestion and 

  those who do constantly confront each other. This paper is concerned with just one 

  side of the coin, that is, it presents how the population grow has a negative effect on 

  the environment. Among so many problems, some of which will be discussed as foot 

  notes and the others will be explained in the conclusion. And from that point of view 

  we all people should continue to consider the role of population policy and the 

  management of environment in the new millennium. 

  Some Concepts of Over-Population 

  Population Explosion 

  In this paper overpopulation is defined in the context of 

  population explosion and as a phenomenon of economic underdeveloped. 

  A rapid up-surge in population is the population explosion. 

  Discoveries that have reduced mortality rates are the main contributors to the 

  population explosion. As more of these discoveries combat disease and death, 

  population growth will accelerate. Formerly the population trend was determined 

  2 

  Population Threatens Environment 

  - 

  wholly by the balance between the forces of fertility and mortality, but since the 

  forces of mortality are being greatly reduced, it appears that, in the long run, control 

  of fertility alone can prevent disaster in the shape of famine. The problem is 

  particularly acute in under-developed areas in which new medical discoveries are just 

  being introduced. 

  The period after World War II was characterized by a 

  formidable population explosion in the entire world. The rate of increase itself began 

  to accelerate regularly. In Asia, Africa and Latin America the rapid population growth 

  was due to the dramatic decline in mortality. In the Western World it was caused by a 

  rise in the birth rate (the so-called baby boom). The rapid population growth of the 

  world has been a great issue since the beginning of the 19th century’. The main 

  reasons may be summarized as follows: @bgw   1. -. As the colonial powers shifted from trading settlements in order to 

  exploit more effectively their new interest in plantations and mines, fisheries, 

  forests (and later in petroleum), they followed policies which tended to reduce 

  death rates. 

  2. When Westerners settled in their colonized country they became more 

  interested in public health. In protecting themselves from malaria, typhoid, plague 

  and other diseases among the native people as well. 

  3. Improved transport lessened the impact of famine. 

  4. Another effect was an initial rise in per-capita incomes even of native 

  peoples. 

  This improvement in living standards permitted, if it or perhaps 

  it caused a more rapid rise in the size of the population. Educational standard also 

  rose, which may have had an indirect effect on the decrease in mortality rates. In some 

  1 Total Population (in millions) and average annual growth rates (%) by decade 1960 - 2000   1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 

  3,019 3,696(2.05) 1,450 (1.57) 5,292 (1.75) 6,251 (1.6s) 

  Source: UN calculated from country data on World Population Prospects- The projection for 1990 and   2000 are based on the “medium variant” projection.   ss 

  3 

  Population Threatens Environment 

  - 

  countries industrial investments and the arbitrary population policies may have 

  offered incentives for raising larger families’. 

  Impact of Population on Environment 

  In modem times, population studies are concentrated on 

  economic growth and environmental problems. It is argued that growing populations 

  and sustained development damage the world’s natural resource base. Population 

  processes influence many environmental problems. 

  Population processes play an important role in several 

  environment al areas. With respect to developed economies, the “Commission on 

  Population Growth and the American Future” estimated that-: “A one percent 

  reduction in population would reduce consumption of resources in the Year 2,000 by 

  0.2 to 0.7 percent, whereas the equivalent percentage reduction in per capita GNP 

  would reduce consumption in that year 0.6 to 3.5 percent. ”   -- 

  It is clear that population processes play an important role in 

  several environmental areas, even if not as important a role as economic development 

  in the United States, for example, several minerals will shortly be or are at present 

  already in limited supply. Under a two-child rather than a three-child family model, 

  demand for these minerals will be reduced by 1 to 8 percent by the year 2,000. By 

  the year 2020 the demand would be reduced by 14 percent.( NAM/ GUSTAVUS,) 

  Other considerations in developing nations include the amount 

  of land available for recreational use. For example, it has been estimated that if all the 

  land in the United States were divided up equally among the country’s population of 

  1972, each citizen would have 11 acres. If families average three children between 

  ’ Factory with family quarters and housing facilities can support family convenience-tends to larger   family size-   India according to demographers, is about to hit the one billion mark. There are 72,000 Lndians born   every day, which translates to a population growth rate of 1.7%. Thailand’s growth rate is 0.97% 1.6% 

  for East Asia, 1.8% for South Asia and 1.1% for China. Roughly one in six people on earth is Indian.   And population grows by about 16 million a year- almost the equivalent of adding the whole   population of Australia every 12 months. The only country in the world to reach 1 billion people so far   is China, which hit the mark in 1980 and now has 1.27 billion citizens. But China instituted tough birth 

  control policies, and sharply curbed its growth rate. Lndian growth rate has shrunk too. but it still of   outpaces China and its population is projected to exceed China by 2030. (Bangkok Post, 15.8.99) 

  Population Threatens Environment 

  - 

  now and the year 2000, that number will shrink to 7 acres. By 2020, it will be down 

  to only 5 acres. Under a two-child model, there will be 7.5 acres per person in 2020. 

  As population grows, regardless of the rate, the amount of land available for leisure 

  use such as parks, forests, preserves, and the like diminishes. 

  Developed nations also use massive quantities of water, not 

  only for personal use but for industrial uses as well. Water shortages already exist & 

  the southwestern United States, and the “Commission on population ” has anticipated 

  that such shortages would spread. With a two-child family model, savings in water by 

  the year 2000 would be 23 percent over the three-child model, a substantial 

  difference. 

  In addition to these environmental considerations, there is a set of 

  pollutants about which little is known except that they are extremely dangerous. This 

  set of pollutants include radioactive wastes, pesticides, and various chemicals emitted 

  by industry, all of which continue to have an impact over a long period of time. The 

  environmental damage caused by these pollutants may be far worse than the standard 

  emissions from combustion processes because of their long-lasting nature, their ability 

  to affect large areas, and because their effects take a long time to make themselves 

  manifest. While it is difficult to project the exact impact in such cases of reducing 

  population growth, there would at least be more time in which to carefully test and 

  evaluate advanced technology and its side effects’. 

  All these environmental catastrophes posed a difficult problem 

  for the developed nations. 

  In the case of developing nations, some ecologists and 

  population experts predicted that massive famine would occur in much of the 

  developing world. But, these estimates were in error, because of phenomena known 

  as the Green Revolution 

  ’ One of the biggest cities, Bangkok is the good example, now it has faced with water pollution air   pollution and noise pollution because of urbanization problem with over population. 

  Environment 

  Population Threatens 

  The Green Revolution refers to the development of new higher- 

  yielding strains of wheat, rice, and other products. These new grains made possible 

  greater yields from the same amount of land under cultivation. The change in the 

  amount of food produced by some nations was so dramatic that some populations that 

  had formerly been net importers of food became self-sufficient or even exporters. 

  Norman Borlaug, Nobel Prize winner for the development of the new grains, 

  estimated that the Green Revolution, if used to its utmost, would eliminate famine for 

  thirty years. Thirty years is certainly not very long, but this appears now to be an 

  overestimate. The developing nations of the world are again facing massive starva- 

  tion and are likely to continue to do so unless population growth is reduced 

  drastically. This has led us to speculate on whether the developed nations’ can 

  continue to feed both themselves and those developing nations indefinitely. The 

  answer to such a question is clearly no. What is in doubt is how much more time -.   technology or foreign aid can buy for these rapidly growing nations that face 

  continual food shortages. 

  The other difficult problem in developing nations is crowding 

  and the consequent environmental damage. In the cities of India, for example, 

  millions live in the streets, with sanitation facilities sadly lacking air pollution, noise 

  pollution and disease running rampant. Poor diet and poverty are the rule. To 

  properly clothe, educate, and employ these millions is an almost impossible task. The 

  environmental conditions themselves work against such changes. 

  In case of developing countries, lacking in resources: the 

  impact of fast population growth puts more pressure on the environment. Almost 

  everywhere amount of productive land per person is estimated at barely 0.20 hectares, 

  diminishing from 0.60 hectares in 1969. But since better land has to be used for cash 

  crops, agriculture is made unprofitable or impossible for poor peasants. In order to 

  Population Threatens 

  Environment 

  survive, many rural people are forced to become land-less farm workers or join the 

  mass migration to the world’s cities’. 

  Conclusion 

  This paper is mainly concerned with the threat of 

  overpopulation in developing economies. As we have mentioned that it is only one 

  side of the coin, arguments against overpopulation ideas are not presented in this- 

  study. For example, Cohn Clark believed that the earth can accommodate any 

  increase in the population and that no justification for birth control therefore exists. 

  With regard to the food problem, Clark argued that if mankind would be satisfied with 

  a diet mainly based on cereals, the earth could provide for 90 billion people by the 

  year 2050. This means that the population of the world can increase for an 

  extremely long time before it will come up against the limitations of the space it 

  occupies.- - Similarly some authors suggest that the dangers of over population lessen 

  with the development of civilization. 

  The negative effects of population expansion can be observed 

  in many developing nations. Unchecked population growth can result in deterioration 

  of natural resources and environment. UN statistics show that (1) Tropical forests 

  shrink by 11 million hectares each year. (2) Topsoil is being lost at the rate of 6 

  billion tons a year. (3) Six million hectares a year are lost to desert-alike conditions. 

  (4) One and one half million hectares of prime agricultural land is lost annually to 

  sterilization. (UN ,UN Day Issue, 1989). Population growth, urbanization, loss of 

  arable land and degradation of the environment add up to major challenges for 

  developing and developed countries. Some amount of populations from Burma(both 

  * The most serious effect on social and economic welfare for one country is migration problem.   Migration has always been a part of human history. In particular. undocumented migration is on the   rise within Asian regions. Among the migrants. the majorities have been found to be economic   refugees, trafficked persons, and political asylum seekers. It is expected that with the economic crisis   in Asia, the number of undocumented migrants will increase. Now, Thailand has nearly one million   undocumented unskilled workers, mainly from Burma and neighboring countries. Burma, on the other   hand has no official programs to send its labor supply to work aboard. but about two million persons 

  from Burma se now working or living in Thailand, and other countries. Japan and South Korea have   tough policy of labor immigration both have used an indirect policy called “close the door, open the   window” by receiving semi-skilled foreign workers through trainee programs. (Kritaya Archavanitkul,   April 1999). 

  -- 

  - _-.- - -_ 

  Environment 

  Population Threatens 

  legal and illegal) are not the only issues that come across Thailand’s borders. Trees are 

  also going to move across Thailand’s borders from all directions. Situations of forest 

  resources in Burma, Cambodia and Lao PDR are the more threatening by the two 

  problems during recent 

  (1) First, uncontrolled 

  environmental damage 

  years. 

  logging for export has led to rapid deforestation and serious 

  (2) Second, revenues from logging activities have been largely diverted away from the 

  budget to off-budget funds. 

  The cause of deforestation under these conditions is not simply population pressure 

  but also they desire for foreign exchange. The IMF Deputy Managing Director 

  Stanley-Fisher said ” the environment itself may effect macroeconomic condition. 

  Indeed, that environmental degradation and depletion can give rise to structural 

  balance of payments and can reduce economic growth”. I also believe that over 

  cutting will cause the loss of forest-based livelihoods, increase soil erosion and down- 

  stream flooding, and accelerate the decline of rare genetic resources and the loss 

  of endangered species. 

  To be concluded, we would like to point out that individual, 

  families and communities are often responsible for decisions on family size 

  conservation and sustainable resources. Each government should be responsib 

  educating its own citizens regarding their effect on the environment as 

  consumers and producers. If individual, local and group interests can be alignet 

  e for 

  both 

  with 

  ‘11 

  national policies, both fertility targets and plans for conservation of environment win 

  be easier to achieve in the new millennium. 

  Population Threatens 

  Environment 

  Reference: 

  1. Aung Thin, M. Phil(Papers), ” The Threat of Over Population in Modern Times” 

  1989-92 

  2. Baldwin, G.B. ” Population Policy in Developed Countries ” Finance and 

  Development Vol. 10. No.4, Dee 1973 

  3. Birminghan, W. ” Planning and Growth in Rich and Poor Countries ” and A.G. 

  Ford Gorge Allen and Unwinj Press, 1966 

  4. NAM / GUSTAVUS Population: ” The Dynamics of Demographic Change ‘I, 

  Houghton Mifflin, 1965 

  5. Overbeek, J. ” History of Population Theories ‘I, Rotherdam University Press, 

  1974- - 

  6. Weiss, D ” Urban Agglomeration Problems and National Housing Policies in 

  Egypt ‘I, Economics, 198 1, Vol.24 

  7. UN Global Outlook, ” Economic-Social-Environmental ‘I, 1990 

  8. Ved P. Gandhi, ” The IMF and the Environmental ‘I, IMF, Washington D.C 1998 

  9. Kritaya Archavanitkul and Philip Guest, ” Managing the jlow of Migration: 

  regional Approaches ‘I, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand, April 1999. 

  Population Threatens 

  Environment   - 

  Mr. Aung Thin 

  Mr. Aung Thin sits as an activist-economist of the Federation of Trade Unions - 

  Burma (1999). He was formerly an investment adviser- economist in Lazard Asia 

  Co.,Ltd, Yangon branch, Singapore based (1995-1996). He was also a lecturer at 

  Worker’s College, Rangoon Institute of Economics and Dagon University in Burma 

  for more than 22 years (1973 - 1995). 

  Population Threatens Environment. 

  Abstracts: 

  Today world’s population is more than 6 billion. It is estimated that over one billion 

  persons are being added every 15 years, and the world population is growing at a rate 

  that is 304rnes as high as the average rate of growth between the first century AD and 

  1650. It is believed that world’s population will continue to increase a very 

  considerable extent. In this paper the thereat of over-population is presented in the 

  following fashion: The impacts of population on environment: The other impacts on 

  migration issues are stated as foot not es in brief. 

  10 

