---
title: "The value of diversity: keynote address at the Business Council's Conference on Population Policy for Australia. Sheraton Towers, Monday 15th November 1999"
date: "1999-11-15"
creators:
  - "Gobbo, James"
source: ""
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211478618
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1LH16%22
---

  - 

  KEYNOTE SPEAKER AT THE 

  BUSlNESS COUNCIL’S CONFERENCE   ON POPZKATION POLICY F0.R AUSTRALIA.   “THE VALUE OF DIVERSITY” 

  nt the 

  Sheraton Towers 

  Monday, 15th”hmnber 2 999 

  HE. The Honourable Sir James Gobbo, AC   Governor of Vie toria 

  I am glad to be involved In this Conference on Population Policy for 

  Australia and I congratulate the Business Council of Australia for Its initiative. 

  Population Policy and lmmlgratlon are, of course, inseparable. 

  Australia has always been a country of immigration and so there is 

  no reason to believe that It will not always be a pressing and topical subject, for 

  only a few would suggest that we should or could bar all immigration, much 

  less all refugee entry, to Australia, All the more so now that our falling birth 

  rate foreshadows zero population growth. 

  There are In addltion, compelling moral and practical imperatives for 

  an ongoing immigratlon program. The moral factor is one that is easily 

  understood in relation to refugees and other humanitarian programs but It is 

  relevant to lmmlgratlon generally. We have demonstrated enormous 

  generosity and courage In the past in the way we have provided hospitality to 

  2 

  so many, We need to think carefully before we abandon this moral position 

  which we share with other countries, in partlcuiar the United States and 

  Canada, 

  The practical imperative is that there Is a perceptlon elsewhere in the 

  world that Australia has the capacity to accept some immigrants. if Australia 

  chose without a very compelling case to turn away from its history and to have 

  no immigration program, there would be a real risk that we would lose many 

  friends Internationally. We might even risk attracting widespread 

  condemnation with possible adverse effects on our trade and other linkages. 

  I have been asked to discuss one partlcular aspect of immigration, 

  namely, cultural diverslty. invariably thls was perceived In the past as being a 

  problem, rather than a benefit, associated with immigration. We have always 

  _ had a diversity of ethnic groups In the European settlement of this country. 

  Before that, our indigenous peoples covered a wide variety of cultures and 

  languages. 

  Australia was always a land of many cultures, Even the first British 

  settlers were not exclusively English and it was not long before the Scats and 

  the IfISh came in significant numbers, And in due course, whether at the tlrne 

  of gold or thereafter,--there were. many non-8ritish groups, the largest groups 

  coming after the Second World War. More recently, we have adopted a wholly 

  non-discriminatory entry poilcy which has meant In excess of 140 ethnic 

  sources are represented amongst our immigrants. 

  --- _..- - 

  3 

  It is not surprising that we should have seen diversity as a necessary 

  problem, especially where Engllsh was not spoken by our newcomers. I 

  personally understand how absence of English is seen as a major problem, 

  There was a time in my life when I knew absolutely no English at all 

  because my parents were ltallan migrants who came here from Northern Italy 

  and I was born shortly after they arrived. Then, the Depression occurred and 

  everything went wrong and the whole family returned to Italy, so I was brought 

  up as a child in a small town near Venice. My father and my mother who were 

  very proud, I would say gutsy people, said that they loved Austtalla and so 

  would try agaln - which is quite a major thlng for people to relocate themselves 

  twice in a short space of time, so they came back in 1938. In Italy, I attended 

  primary school. We spoke only Italian at home. Recently a Professor of 

  Llnguistlcs said to me “Do you mind my asking whether you spoke ltallan at 

  home or whether you spoke English”. I said “We never spoke English. ” He 

  said “Web, that confitms my view. You speak English without any trace of an 

  accent. It is because you learnt English at school in Melbourne and not from 

  your parents. Had you ieamt it even in part from your parents, they would 

  have been speaking it to you incorrectly because they would have learnt it as 

  adults. It is the best thing that could have happened to you”. I often use that 

  observation when I am talking to schools 30 as to encourage the preservation 

  of a second language which can be very valuable. In my own case, whilst 

  visiting Italy as Governor last year, I had quite a number of meetings - 

  4 

  conducted in Italian - which turned out to be fruitful for Victoria in both trade 

  and cultural terms. 

  I should add that we actually spoke the Venetian dialect at home. 

  This gives me the added bensfit that when I go to Venice, I can hire a gondola 

  without worrying as to whether 1 am really being taken for a ride1 

  Our cultural diversity could have been a very great problem if we had 

  not managed this dlverslty well, thanks to the good sense of the Australlan 

  people and the enllghtened democratic lnstitutlons and tolerance which are 

  part of our lasting British heritage. 

  Thls is very well illustrated In our great natidnal project, the Snowy 

  Mountalns Scheme, which this year celebrates its 50th Anniversary. One of 

  the most slgniflcant benefits of the Scheme was the undoubted enhancement 

  of our sense of natlonal pride. r\lo other engineering and construction 

  achievement in Australla’s history could rival the Snowy Mountains Scheme in 

  terms of its vision, size, excellence and sheer overcoming of enormous 

  difficulties. But of equal significance was the way the Scheme enhanced and 

  underpinned our lmmigratlon program and our phllosophy of harmony. There 

  could have been very destructive tensions and rlvaltles In the great diversity of 

  cultural origins sharing the workface and the harsh living conditions, Nearly 70 

  per cent of the workers employed were lmmlgtants and most of these were not 

  British - the bulk being Germans, Italians and Yugoslavs, 

  There is little doubt that here was the acid test for our new and 

  ambitious immlgratlon program which brought so many different and 

  - 

  5 

  sometimes even hostile groups Into close stressful proximity. Some of them 

  had been former war enemies, Had there been serious ethnic discord or 

  violence, rather than harmony and Joint achievement, the rest of our ambltlous 

  immigration programs would have faltered, possibly even been abandoned, 

  But in fact the Snowy worker became an early symbol of a muitlcultural 

  program which has now become something of a model for the rest of the world. 

  This success on the Snowy was not the result of any elaborate or profound 

  social planning - rather it came about because that was how the workers 

  responded to each other in the extraordinary circumstances in which they 

  found themselves. 

  Usually the great diversity of our immigrants in the post-war period is 

  associated with urban growth and the spread of our cltles. They are seldom 

  linked with the bush. 

  The concept of the bush is a powerful one in Austrailan culture and 

  all the traditional values associated with It have never had a stronger influence 

  than now, even though the rural population has never been lower as a 

  percentage of the whole. Our best poets and artists depict it with affection. 

  The cltles are full of incurable romantics about our bush which is embedded in 

  our culture. 

  These two concepts of bush and dlverslty are sometimes in tension. 

  Some see dlverslty as detracting from outback values, In fact there is much 

  commonality between them. Both new and old settlers reflect a search for new 

  values and a departure from the privileges and abuses of the Old World; they 

  are both practical and resourceful and suspicious of abstract theories. They 

  both reflect that Australians are more concerned with protecting a way of life, 

  rather than an abstract idea of nation, 

  The Snowy Mountains Scheme is the clearest evidence of this 

  commonality and of the link between these two powerful concepts of bush and 

  cultural diversity. 

  There is a tension between the bush and cultural diversity In 

  Australia, A similar tension exists between regional Australia and immigration, 

  with which cultural diver&y Is equated. Regional Australia is more affected by 

  unemployment than urban centres and so is less easily persuaded of the long 

  term economic benefits of immigration. This affects its perception of cultural 

  diversity which is In any event less evident there - and so its benefits less 

  obvious than it is in the cities. 

  It s a plty that this Is so, for the great pioneering achievements in the 

  opening up of outback Australia were carried out by a vast cross sectton of 

  immigrants. The Snowy Mountains Scheme is a vivid example of this in our 

  own Ilfetlmes, 

  This perceptlon of cultural diversity as an urban creature is not borne 

  out in the direct experience of many of us. So many Immigrants, both before 

  and after the war, made their homes in the outback when they cut timber or 

  worked on the land, usually sometlmes in rugged conditions. Many settled in 

  small towns; most of the fruiterers were from the Aeolean islands and every 

  second cafe was called Acropolis. My own parents moved to the country, In 

  7 

  our case Kerang, at the time of the Depression, for like most ltallan immigrants 

  they were used to rural living. 

  But this Is past hlstory,.rather than the present, It would help to ease 

  the bush’s suspicion of dlvereity if it received more of Its benefits. Perhaps that 

  will happen when more overseas firms Invest their capital and some of their 

  experts in new developments In regional Australia or, again, when the first 

  French fast traln links and stimulates our regional centres. 

  Cultural diversity or, If you llke multicuituralism, is a fact of Australian 

  life, it is, more Importantly, an asset. It gives us valuable skills in language, 

  understandlng of cultures and linkages which can and do assist us greatly in 

  our trading and international relations. 

  I see this at first hand when I visit the winners of the Annual 

  Governor of Victoria Export Awards. it is clear that Australian and Victorian 

  firms have been able to turn their diverse workforce to advantage. 

  I saw this only a few days ago when I visited Robert Bosch at 

  Clayton, the winner of thls year’s Export Award, It was a very diverse 

  workforce which works very well together and which provides direct skills and 

  interface wlth the markets into which they are selling, to the tune of some $190 

  million dollars per year in manufactured products, 

  These actual benefits of diversity need to be Identified and discussed 

  regularly, otherwlse we are prone to equate cultural diversity to a restaurant 

  menu or some quaint folk dances. We have moved on from this gastronomic 

  romanticism or “post steak and eggs modernism”. 

  8 

  It is Important to have open and serious analysis and discussion on 

  every aspect of immlgratlon, so that all possible arguments against are 

  carefully considered, especially those concerned   about the posslbie effect on 

  our environment. We need especially to involve at the grass roots those who 

  are in disadvantaged areas and are especially affected by lack of growth or 

  recession or unemployment. 

  At the same time, we need occasionally to recapture some of the 

  warm and generous and imaginative advocacy of the   past. I have seen this 

  illustrated, interestingly, in the United States which still has the hlghest intake 

  of immigrants and refugees in the world, May I In conclusion quote some 

  excerpts from a speech of President Clinton which drew wide praise In the 

  United States of America and beyond. He was talking about immigrants and 

  _ diversity and sald thle: 

  In each generation they have pmved to be the most restks, the 

  most adventurous, the most innovative, the most industrious of people, 

  Bearing different memories, honouring different heritages, they have 

  strengthened our economy, enriched our culture, mewed our promise of 

  freedom and opportunity for all, 

  Let me state my view unequivocal/y. I believe new immigrants are 

  good for America. They are revifelizing our cities, They are building our new 

  economy, They are strengthening our ties to the global economy, just as 

  earlier waves of immigrants settled a new frontier and powered the industn’al 

  revolution. 

  -.- - 

  9 

  They are energizing our culture and broadening our vision of the 

  world. They are renewing our most basic   values, and reminding us s/l of what 

  it truly means to be an American, It means working hard, like a teenager from 

  Vietnam who does h/s homework as he watches the cash register at his 

  fern//y’s grocery store. 

  We see the spirit   that built America, the drive to succeed, the 

  commitment to family, to education, to work, the hope for a beff er life. In their 

  stories, we see a retkction of our own parents’ and grandparents’journey, a 

  powerful reminder that our America is not so much a place as a promise, not a 

  guarantee, but a chance, not a particular race, but   an embrace of our common 

  humanity. 

  This is stirring stuff which I commend to you, But whilst there is a 

  place for idealism and Insplratlon, the biggest challenge is in the area of frank 

  and careful discussion. It will be a slow business to convey the possible 

  benefits of lmmlgration and diversity to those who are affected by 

  unemployment or falling services and living standards - especially those in 

  regional Australla. But it must be pursued - and somehow - it has to be led by 

  those very groups which seem to be most suspicious of the benefits of 

  immigration. 

  00000000 

