---
title: "Challenges of developing a change agent in a socialist system."
date: "1999-09-14"
creators:
  - "Sultan, Mainus"
source: ""
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477077
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NQX16%22
---

  4iiliil~ 

  - 

  liEI   0 

  RI l 0 

  Australian Council 

  of Social Service 

  Level 2 

  619 Elizabeth St   Redfern 

  Locked Bag 4777   Strawberry Hills   NSW 2012 

  Ph [02] 9310 4844   Fax [02] 9310 4822 

  cacoss@acoss.org.au>   www.acoss.org.au 

  International Council on Social Welfare 

  28fh Asia and Pacific Regional Conference of ICSW 

  14-l 7 September, 1999, Sydney, Australia 

  Social Welfare and Social Development 

  in the New Millennium   r-l - ISR 

  Human Resources for Welfare   Organisations 

  Challenges of Developing A Change   Agent in a Socialist System 

  Presenter:   Mainus Sultan 

  Co-Field Director, Quaker Service, Laos 

  Challenges of Developing A Change Agent 

  in a Socialist System 

  by Mainus Sultan, Co-Representative   Quaker Service Laos/American Friends Service Committee 

  28’h Asia and Pacific Regional Conference of ICSW   September 14-17, 1999, Sydney Australia 

  Summary 

  Focus of the Study: Since the New Economic Mechanism was officially established in   1987, the Lao PDR has been experiencing radical economic changes notably increased   assistance by the international donor community and international development   agencies (INGO’s). Typically, Lao nationals implement development activities on   behalf of the international donor community as well as INGOs. A generation of local   individuals are being trained on the job as they carry out social development tasks in   both urban and remote mountainous locations. 

  This paper will look into the factors effecting the process of developing local social   change agents in Lao PDR. The purpose will be to analyse the issues which influence   the growth of indigenous change agents within the context of a socialistic political   system. This brief study will identify the potentials of an emerging civil society within   the current social system. 

  Methodology of the Study: This study will draw upon four and half years of   experience developing training opportunities for Lao national, INGO staff and   government official in the areas of Community Development and Participatory Project   Management methodologies. My perspective will reflect the interaction with diverse   grass roots level development workers as well as aid recipients (provincial. district and   village level) in the remote areas. To examine the issues, fifteen individuals, both 

  expatriate and Lao nationals who are involved in rural Development sector were   interviewed. Additionally, two focus group discussions were conducted with Lao   development workers to include their viewpoint. 

  Current Social Situation in the Lao PDR 

  The Lao society, fragmented by many different ethnic subcultures, has been going   through multiple layers of social and political changes notably starting with the   Revolution in 1975. (For County Background, please see Annex 1) The socialist   revolution isolated the country for about a decade but it did not freeze the social   system from evolving. Still the core values of revolutionary ideology of the one party   system, centralised economy and administration as well as limited access to   information, remain mostly unchanged. 

  A major milestone policy change was adopted in late eighties when the forth party   congress of the Pathet Lao accepted the principles of market economy. (Khan: 

  1980) 

  This decision presents a dual approach of maintaining a centralised government and the   introduction of market economy at the same time. Since then, a vibrant economic   sector, (although not steady due to Asian Economic Crisis), has been fuelled by foreign   investment and is growing. In 1995 Foreign Direct Investment was US$ 1.2 billion 

  which decreased to US$ 150 million at the end of 1997. (Bangkok Post, 1998). 

  I hels 

  has been no sign of changing centrally controlled planning mechanism which might be   more responsive to a wide range of consumer interests and business growth. 

  The pragmatic decision of economic liberalisation continues to generate an appetite for   information. The Lao political authority is responding to this need cautiously. At the   end of the year 1998, the use of the Internet was legalised. However, the   dissemination of information remains controlled by the political administration. 

  The introduction of market economy has been coupled with the influx of development-   aid in recent years. Both sectors need trained people to manage either a consumer   oriented business or a community based development activity. The existing   educational infrastructure or training institute in the country appears to be rudimentary   to address this emerging need of human resource development. 

  Civil Society in Lao Context: Until the mid seventies, the Lao PDR had a feudal   social system with a monarch on top of the social hierarchy and numerous rural ethnic   minority communities living in remote mountainous terrain. The country has had a   subsistence economy for centuries and never had the opportunity to evolve into an   industrialised market based economy before accepting socialism as state management.   The Lao society skipped this step of social evolution. As a result, a network of basic   education systems could have been the outcome of a semi industrialised market based   system b

  There are three suggested components of a modern state - a) a mechanism for   government, b) a market and c) a civil society. An analysis of Lao society in relation   to these may shed light. During the royal Lao period, the country did have a   government, although challenged in military terms by socialist revolutionaries. Some 

  aspects of a market mechanism was also present mainly in the urban areas. However, a   strong feudal mode of social management did not allow the growth of a civil society   institution. 

  The socialist revolution replaced the feudal hierarchy with a one party political system.   Since then, the government appears to be the strongest institution. Further, a vibrant   market sector is growing in conjunction with the of&&l acceptance of economic   liberalisation, penetrating even in remote locations. However, a civil society remains a   point of discussion within the framework of recent day socialist cum market oriented   Lao society. 

  Existing Elements of a Civil Society in the Lao PDR   On the surface, it appears that Lao PDR lacks the key components of a civil society.   Discussion about freedom of press or the development of independent media is still   taboo. There is no legal flexibility for a citizen to form their own organisation.   Independent research institutions or a mechanism for a citizen to participate in an 

  electorate process in a pluralist manner is non existent. However using a different lens,   one might discover that there are numerous areas where potential seeds of a civil   society wait to germinate. Although restricted by legal barriers, some leeway for   dialogue in relation to civil society rights is being created. 

  Some of the barriers which are not conducive for the emergence of a civil society lie 

  within the inflexible nature of a written legal framework, However, most of the   citizens of Laos follow an oral discourse in terms of their day to day life management.   For example, indigenous institution building is discouraged by the written law except   the ones that already exist under the auspices of government and the party. However,   when a group of farmers manage an irrigation facility, they function like an local 

  organisation making decisions through a democratic, participatory manner. This   freedom is accepted verbally, although written law suggests differently. 

  Another example is that there is a perception that information dissemination is strictly   controlled by the government in Lao PDR. However, local governments do allow the   organisation of study tours which facilitate exchange between different ethnic groups.   An expatriate development worker who spent a decade implementing activities in   different parts of the rural Laos commented the following in an informal interview: 

  “It is not that important what is written in the form of law or in the   constitution. No one generally reads. But the way to do things here is to   develop an understanding with the authority in a personalised manner. You see   they allow gender training. INGOs are organising development activities. All   these projects are managed by recipients, local people. Their decision making   is participatory. These are not formal institutions but doing the same things as 

  Ci’local organisation would have done.” 

  The above reflection indicates that the climate for growth of a more liberal society is   already there. A recently retired high level Lao government official explained this issue   in a metaphorical way, he said: “A seedbed is being prepared. Now there is a need for   a good farmer who knows how to nurture the young seedlings.” An expatriate who   works for an INGO in the area of Human Resource Development suggested the   following: 

  “The environment is being created bit by bit. It is not the same as it used to be   ten years ago. Now Lao people are participating in different meetings and   forums, getting exist visas to go to other countries for training and study tours,   coming back with new ideas. Development of local organisations, access to   information all are alien ideas. In the past, there wasn’t any need for these   things. Now things are a little more open. People see the benefit of doing a 

  development project. But the challenge is, since they never did it, they do not   really know how to do it. All you need to do here is to develop a group of   people who can do things in a new way, who can facilitate a change.” 

  The above comment emphasises a great need for “human resource development”. The   assumption behind this idea is that trained individuals and social workers may facilitate   a change process which would be conducive for the emergence of a civil society in Lao   PDR. 

  Challenges of Developing Social Change Agents   The followmg is a summary of the insights and ideas that emerged from interviews   with experienced Lao and expatriate development workers. Additionally, comments 

  3 

  generated in two focus group discussions participated by Lao national staff working 

  for international development agencies are included. 

  Modest Educational Infrastructure: The modem education system which may have   generated a pool of trained individuals did not begin in Laos long ago. Only in 1902,   “one saw the beginnings of public education with the opening of an elementary school   in Luang Prabang and another in Vientiane.” (Evans,G: 1998. p. 155) These schools   were established by the French colonial power. Although, the French introduced 

  modem education in present day Laos, their focus was the aristocratic class “through   whom they would rule.” (Ibid p. 15 5) 

  The absence of modem education is related with the traditional need to work the land.   People who are living in the geographical territory of current Lao PDR have been   subsistence farmer for centuries. The Buddhist temple was the only place where Lao   Lum young could get (spiritual) education as a novice monk or a nun. Otherwise, 

  education was viewed as an unnecessary decoration for the commoner main stream   people or ethnic minorities. “People worked as farmers. Literacy was not necessary,   nor was it highly valued as a source of social mobility as it was in neighbouring   Confucian societies.” (Ibid p. 

  154). 

  Although not in a large scale, the public educational infrastructure grew bit by bit in   the 60s and early 70s. As a researcher described in the 80s that there were “merely   two post secondary educational institutions but no university” (Khan, A-R: 1980. p.3).   At present, there is a national university in Lao PDR, however, “there are no true   liberal arts universities”. (Gillespie, A: 1998. p. 1) 

  Flight of Educated Population: Despite the limitation of basic educational   infrastructure, some Lao citizens have pursued education. They went to Hanoi, Saigon   or Paris for study and personal growth. All contributed to the emergence of a modest   educated population in the country. This trend did not continue. A large number of   trained population had to accept the uncertain fate of a flight from their birth place in   response to the socialist revolution. “One consequence of the revolution was that Laos   lost up to 90 percent of its already minuscule educated population as refugees.” 

  (Evans, G: 1998. p. 158) Over time most of them managed to resettle in France, the   USA or Australia leaving Laos behind in a human resource vacuum. The educated   people were also comparatively wealthy who could have contributed to the growth of   local economy since the market had been liberalised in the mid eighties, however, they   “mostly left the country during the various wars, and few are ready to come back.” 

  (George, M: 1996. p.30) 

  Fragmented Soviet Assisted Education: The Socialist revolution generated some   enthusiasm in the educational sector. Thousands of Lao nationals were sent to the   former Soviet Union, Eastern European countries, Vietnam or Cuba for education.   This large scale educational adventure did not necessarily facilitate the creation of a   pool of socially conscious individuals who might have functioned today as a change 

  agent. The main reason of this constraint is that “the training they received was   primary in-engineering and medicine, and not in the arts or social science.“(Gillespie,   A: 1999. p.4) Additionally, their language of instruction was different in different 

  4 

  -- -- 

  countries. 

  Therefore, they suffer a great deal in terms of communicating with each   other in professional fields. 

  A spectator described this issue in a typically light hearted Lao way about how he and   others would “sit around a table pouring over dictionaries trying to find a common   technical language given that each had been trained in a different country. But it was a   chaos.” (Evans, G: 1998. p. 161) 

  Due to lack of a systematic planning, these group of Soviet-assisted trained individuals.   were generally not employed in their relevant field. An INGO worker noticed the   following: “The woman who works as my seamstress has a Masters level degree in   journalism from the Ukraine. I have seen a person with a degree in Meteorology from 

  Azerbazian working as civil servant and a medical doctor trained in Vietnam is   employed as human resource development trainer.” 

  Commercial Education: After the introduction of market economy, a good number   of commercial schools have mushroomed in the capital city of Vientiane and some   other urban locations in response to the critically short supply qualified human   resource. They offer courses mainly in English language, basic computer technology,   typing, letter and memo writing and driving. These business schools emerged to cater   to the needs of employment created by either an international company or a 

  developr5ient agency. A close look at the curriculum of these commercial schools   suggests that a de-contextual, educational approach is limiting Lao youth knowledge   of history, geography or literature. 

  Uneven Training Provided bv International Agencies: In order to combat the   above obstacles, the international development agencies which include INGOs,   bilaterals and UN agencies have been organising and sponsoring training in relevant   fields for Lao nationals. An examination of their training initiatives suggests that some   training were provided without assessing the individual’s educational need or, the   needs assessment was done in a very generalised way which did not highlight the   personalised need of a Lao national staff. 

  Another difficulty includes finding an appropriate course for Lao development   workers. There are institutes in the neighbouring countries which offer training   courses in social development. The Lao national workers are often sent to these places   and later report that the development experience in the region too different from the   Lao context and they can not apply their learning back home. 

  Temptation for Frequent Job Changes: Due to an increased of business firms as   well as the influx of development aid, a large number ofjobs have been created for the   Lao nationals. The national educational institutes can not keep up with the demand.   So competition over a small number of skilled people steadily raises. Trained staff 

  often leave a job with a very short notice for better pay. Due to quick changes of job,   national staff can not focus on the single goal of self development. 

  Changing %Skills Requirements: A large numbers of jobs recently created in the Lao   PDR were non-existent prior to the economic liberalisation. Now, Lao national   employees are expected to cope with the changing job opportunities. They are further 

  5 

  expected to upgrade or learn new skills. However, the basic educational facilities have 

  not been either upgraded or the curriculum reformed to equip the Lao with the   expected skills. A middle aged Lao woman who has been working for an bilateral   commented: 

  “I was asked by my boss to learn typing thirteen years ago. In school, I studied   only French and had never seen a typewriter. In my new job, I have to learn   Word Perfect (on the computer) five years ago. Now they changed computer   programs. Everybody is using Window, EXEL. It is hard but I am trying to   learn. They are using e-mail too. I don’t know how to learn it.” 

  In these days, Lao employees are forced to readjust and retrained their skill levels   frequently in response to changing job requirements. They also have to learn a new   language of office instructions over and over. An NGO worker described this issue: 

  “I studied French in school but found not useful when I went to Odessa, Soviet   Union for higher education. I have to learn Russian for two years. Back home   I never used Russian. In my office, work is being done in English. I do not   have extra time to go to a language school in the evening. It is very hard to   learn English.” 

  Conflic&3etween Western and Lao Work Stiles: Employers in business and   development sectors are mostly westerners with few exceptions. They introduce a   work culture which demands a faster pace. Frequently, national staff do not see the   need or reason to do things quickly. This fast pace work environment requires   knowledge and skills in areas such as computer technology, report writing, punctual   deadlines and donor relations which is unfamiliar for the Lao staff. In both sectors,   there is an emphasis on training local staff with western work approaches. However,   too often little initiative is taken to validate the traditional knowledge and skills the   national staff already have. 

  No Ownership of Process or Proiect: The Lao constitution does not provide legal   flexibility for a Lao development organisation to emerge. Therefore, Lao nationals   who have potential to become change agents typically work with an international   development agency. Generally, this group of mid level staff implement activities   which are not their own initiative but donor or employer driven. They often struggle   to adjust with the unfamiliar work environment of an international development office. 

  This situation appears to be not conducive for local development workers to feel   ownership of the implementation process. As a result, their ability to provide   leadership towards facilitating a change process stagnates. 

  Hierarchical Social Svstem: The traditional social norms of the Lao people have the   younger generation follow their senior without question. Individual initiatives are   viewed as inappropriate. If the individual is a junior member of society, it is expected   that he or she would wait patiently to receive instruction from the seniors. A Lao 

  development worker commented in this regard; 

  “Juniors are allowed to avoid taking responsibility. You do not go ahead, take 

  initiative to do something or make a decision. You need to understand that   decisions are subject to consultation and listening to what the elders say.” 

  This social context appears to be less conducive for innovative social work which   requires initiative, self motivation and, at times, independent decision making. 

  No Research on Existing Traditional Skills: An informal analysis of the training   courses being offered to the Lao development workers in recent days indicates an   emphasis on the “deficit” approach. Educational events for staff development   purposes appear to be organised on an assumption that Lao workers lack components   needed to carry out social work. However, no assessment or research has been   conducted to document what knowledge and skills Lao individual workers already   have. An INGO worker who is engaged in human resource development for several   years suggested; 

  “Our Lao staff have a very non confrontational approach. Also, they follow a   traditional way of consultation process which is participatory. They are slow   but very reflective. All of these qualities could have been tapped as vital   resources for staff development purposes.” 

  Vision fi; an Indigenous Training Institute: At present, no educational institute   exists in the Lao PDR which might offer courses relevant to Social Development.   Importantly, there is a critical need to design tailor made curriculum in response to   localised educational needs. An in-country training institute will allow a process of   building upon the strengths that Lao people possess. The creation of an educational   climate with a local flavor could facilitate an adaptation of imported knowledge into   the Lao context. 

  References:   Bangkok Post. 22 January, 1998. “ The New Unequal Treaties”. Bangkok: Post   Publishing Public Company Limited 

  Evans, Grant. 1998. The Politics of Ritual And Remembrance: Laos Since 1975.   Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press 

  Gillespie, Anna. 1999. Report of the Lao working group for CEDAW: Rural Women   and Economic Opportunity in the Lao P.D.R 

  Khan, Azizur Rahman & Lee,Eddy. 1980. Employment And Development in Laos.   Bangkok: Asian Employment Programme & Asian Regional Team For Employment   Promotion (ARTEP) 

  QSL (Quaker Service Laos). 1994. QSL Country Report. Unpublished. Vientiane: QSL 

  7 

  Saignasith, Chanthavong. 1996. “Transitional Economy of the Lao PDR: Current 

  Economic Performance, Progress and Reforms.” In Mathews George Chunakara’eds.   Indochina from Socialism to Market Economy.Hong Kong: Indochina (WC) concerns   & Christian Conference of Asia 

  Ratnam, Perala. 1980. Laos And The Superpowers. New Delhi: Tulsi Publishing   House 

  UNDP (United Nations Development Program). 1999. Development Co-operation :   Lao PDR. Vientiane: UNDP 

  UNDP (United Nations Development Program) . 1995 Development Co-operation:   Lao Vientiane: UNDP 

  Annex 1 

  Country Background: Laos is a small, landlocked country in Southeast Asia,   officially known as Lao People’s Democratic Republic or Lao PDR since 1975. It is   one of the five remaining socialist countries spread over a geographic area of 236.800   square kilometre (UNDP: 1999). Two thirds of the country is mountainous covered   with green tropical forest except the Mekong delta.(Evans: 1988) 

  Judging by the available Human Development Index (HDI) data which includes life   expectancy at birth (5 1.7 years), adult literacy rate (57%) and per capita income   (US$362) in 1997, Laos is considered a very poor country. Out of 174 countries of   the world, Lao PDR has recently fallen five places to 140th. Only 44 percent of the   total population of Laos has access to clean drinking water and 18 percent have access   to sanitation facilities. Ten percent of the people suffer acute malnutrition and 47% of   the population is estimated to have chronic malnutrition. 4000 remote rural Lao   villages lack access to primary school facilities. (UNDP: 1999) 

  The population of Laos, divided into 68 ethnic minority communities (or up to 2 16   depending on the definition), comprise a population estimated as 4’58 1,258 in 1995   with a remarkably low density of only 19.4 persons per squire kilometre. The annual   average growth rate is assessed as 2.4% (UNDP: 1999). The whole country has 

  approximately 11,935 village clusters known as “ban” and the average family size is   6.7 people. 

  The different ethnic groups are broadly fragmented into three major categories. The   mainstream ethnic group, known as “Lao Lum” or lowland Lao, traditionally live in   fertile lowland plains and constitute approximately two third of the total population.   They tend to have the highest per capita income, and greatest access to education,   health care and national development program. 

  The second largest ethnic division is the “Lao Theung” or mountain slope dwellers,   (ex. Khamu people) which comprise 22% of the population. The third ethnic division,   “Lao Soung” or highland dwellers, (ex. Hmong people). They generally live on the   mountain tops and are 10% of the population. The minority groups of the midlands   and highlands are the poorest and have less access to arable land, health or educational   facilities. (UNDP: 1995). 

  8 

  Laos is dwarfed by it’s mega neighbours in all sides. The six neighbours which include 

  Vietnam, Thailand, China, Burma and Cambodia all have a better track record in terms   of growth and development achievement in comparison with Lao PDR. All   neighbouring countries also have more available resource in the form of arable land,   industrial infrastructure, communication net work and educated human resource. 

  The country of Laos entered into a period of independence and political unity under a   king and a civil government in 1954 when French colonial rule declined in Indo-China.-   However, this period of Lao self rule was short lived. The flame of US war in Vietnam   soon gulped up the country of Laos. The fragile royal government was able to obtain 

  strong political, military and financial support from the US, however, this patron   administration did not hesitate to secretly bomb part of the country dropping an   estimated two tons of bombs for every inhabitants at a cost of over sever billion   dollars (QSL Country Report: 1994). The legacy of bombing remains a problem for   the people of Laos in certain geographical locations to this date. A child who loses her   limb while playing with a cluster bomb or a farmer got blinded when a splinter hits his   eyes when tilling a piece of land is still a frequent news in the local media. 

  The leftist forces under the Pathet Lao (Lao People’s Revolutionary Party) leadership   came to control of the political arena of Laos on 1975 by abolishing the US backed   monarchy. (Ratnam: 1980). Since then, the state was declared as the Lao People’s   Democratic Republic with an one party management system according to the socialist   tradition. A significant political change occurred in 1987 when the politburo of the   Pathet Lao party agreed to embrace market economy titling the policy shift as the   “New Economic Mechanism”. 

  9 

