---
title: "Inauguration of the Jesuit Lenten seminars to celebrate the sesquicentenary of the Jesuits in Australia, Melbourne, Wednesday, 17 February 1999: address on the occasion."
date: "1999-02-17"
creators:
  - "Deane, William"
source: "GOVERNOR-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211473086
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/X9406%22
---

   

  

  ADDRESS BY SIR WILLIAM DEANE

  GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA

  

  ON THE OCCASION OF 
THE INAUGURATION OF THE

  JESUIT LENTEN SEMINARS 
TO CELEBRATE THE SESQUICENTENARY OF THE JESUITS IN AUSTRALIA

  

  MELBOURNE

  WEDNESDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 
1999

  

  

  It i  s now 150 years since the first Jesuits came to Australia.   
They were Austrian Priests under the leadership of Father Aloysius Kranewitter.   
Their primary mission was to care for the German speaking migrants, 
many of them refugees, arriving in South Australia.   Two 
or three years after their arrival, they established Sevenhill in the 
Clare Valley which has fulfilled so many purposes over the years:  
mission, school, seminary, Jesuit house of studies and, continuously, 
parish and winery.   During the years to 1900, almost 60 Austrian 
Jesuits - 59 to be precise - served in South Australia, Victoria … 
and the Northern Territory.   

  

  It was in 1886 that the Jesuits established their first Aboriginal 
mission site at Daly River.   In 1899, a century ago this 
year, they departed the last mission site there.   Its name 
was Uniya - “bend in the river”.   More than 90 years 
later, that name was, as you know, adopted by the Jesuit Social Justice 
Centre in Kings Cross in Sydney which has become such a powerful influence 
for reconciliation and for human rights within our country and region.

  

  Meanwhile, the combination of the preponderance of Irish among the 
Catholics of the Colonies and the gift by Father Therry of his estate 
to the Irish Jesuits combined to encourage the arrival of Jesuits from 
Ireland.   They came first to Melbourne in 1865.   
In 1877 they accepted an invitation to extend to Sydney.   
They established schools and parishes which served and continue to serve 
the Catholic community.   At the tertiary level, they staffed 
University Colleges and Chaplaincies and, in addition to their own training 
houses, the diocesan seminary for Victoria and Tasmania.

  

  It is, of course, impossible to accurately assess the full extent 
of the contribution which the Jesuits have made to our Australian Catholic 
Church and our Australian nation.   Possibly the most important 
contribution to the nation has been the indirect one through the lives 
of the countless students whom the Jesuits have educated at schools 
such as this College - Xavier - in Melbourne, St Ignatius in Adelaide, 
Riverview, St Aloysius and much more recently, Loyola in Sydney.   
That indirect contribution to the nation has, of course, also been through 
the priests and University graduates whom the Jesuits have trained or 
helped educate in the Seminary or at the University.   It 
has also been through the many other Australians, both Catholic and 
non-Catholic, whose thinking, whose morality or whose approach to life 
has been influenced by the Jesuits.

  

  The   direct  influence of the Jesuits for good 
on our nation has also been formidable.   As has been mentioned, 
the Jesuits’ mission of outreach to the disadvantaged goes back all 
the way to their arrival in South Australia 150 years ago.   
The intensity and effectiveness of the discharge of that mission seems 
to me to have increased in recent years notwithstanding that, in conformity 
with the general trend in this and most other countries, numbers have 
declined.   

  

  In so far as the Jesuit influence on the Australian Catholic Church 
is concerned, the critical impact has, I suggest, been on the intellectual 
life, the spiritual quality and the essential morality of the Church 
itself.   That influence has, particularly in recent years, 
been an influence for tolerance and for recognition of the essential 
equality and the claim to a “fair go” of all Australians - indigenous 
and non-indigenous;  immigrant or refugee and native born;  
the privileged and the disadvantaged;  those who have and those 
in need.

  

  The series of Seminars which are commencing here this evening -   The Jesuits Lenten Seminar Series  - constitutes 
an outstanding means of celebrating 150 years of Jesuit achievement 
in Australia.   It invites a discerning assessment of our 
country as we approach the third millennium of the Christian era and 
the second century of our nation.   It provides the opportunity 
for a hard look at the widening gap between rich and poor;  at 
the need for all Australians to be reconciled with one another and with 
the facts of our history;  at the need for all persons with a social 
conscience to accept that there   is  time to speak and to contribute fully 
to our national life;  at the challenge for those of us who are 
Christians to recognise that the heart of our Universal Christian Church 
lies in its mission of outreach to the disadvantaged;  at the need 
for all Australians to address the fact that the ultimate test of our 
worth as a truly democratic nation is how we treat our most vulnerable 
and disadvantaged.   

  

  And the starting point must surely be a frank 
identification and appraisal of our standards and qualities as a people 
- of our “Australian values”.

  

  That, of course, is the subject of tonight’s 
Seminar.   The speakers - the former Chief Justice of Austra  lia under whom I was privileged to serve, Sir Gerard Brennan, and 
the editor of Eureka, Ms Morag Fraser - are 2 outstanding Australian 
thinkers.   The Responder is Father Peter Steele, the former 
Provincial Superior of the Society of Jesus in Australia who holds a 
personal chair at Melbourne University and has been a Visiting Professor 
at a number of overseas Universities.   Their task is a challenging 
one.   We can be confident that they are worthy of it.

  

  Let me conclude these brief comments by expressin  g Helen’s and my own sincere congratulations to the Australian province 
of the Society of Jesus and all its members on their sesquicentenary 
and on the devotion, the work and the achievements of the past one and 
a half centuries.   

  

  And now, as His Excellency Mr Samaranch might say, let the first Jesuit 
Lenten Seminar begin.

  

  

  

  jy

