---
title: "Harradine calls on Government to expand Chinese deportation inquiry."
date: "1999-06-24"
creators:
  - "Harradine, Brian"
source: "Office of HARRADINE, SEN BRIAN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211476583
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PWA06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  THE SENATE

  

  Harradine calls on Government to expand Chinese 
deportation inquiry

  

  Senator Harradine said he was disturbed to learn of allegations that 
there were two other pregnant Chinese women deported along with Zhu 
Quing Ping who was ab orted 10 days before the due birth date 
of her child.

  

 Senator Harradine called on the Government to widen 
the Ayers inquiry to examine these latest allegations. “It is essential 
that Mr Ayers be instructed to investigate whether there were other 
pregnant women deported on the same flight and the circumstances of 
their deportation,” he said.

  

 “It also needs to be established exactly how many 
pregnant Chinese women have been deported in the past.”

  

 Senator Harradine condemned Minister Ruddock’s statement 
(AAP June 24) that the concern he and the Prime Minister had expressed 
“was in relation to a person who is near-term”.

  

 “Does this mean that unless you’re about to deliver 
the baby, it doesn’t matter that you’re going to be sent back to 
a likely forced abortion? One of the women in the latest claims was 
five months pregnant. Does the Minister really believe there is no risk 
at all for these women, or doesn’t he care?”

  

 Senator Harradine said he knew of at least two other 
pregnant women who were deported despite their fears and pleas to be 
allowed to give birth prior to departure.

  

 One Chinese woman was deported from Port Hedland in 
January 1997 when five months pregnant. Deportees with her had contacted 
refugee advocates in WA to say she had been seized on arrival by family 
planning officials and taken away to be aborted.

  

 A 1996 appeal for another woman pregnant with her 
fourth child also failed. Detention centre staff had allegedly refused 
her requests for a check up on a defective Chinese IUD which was causing 
her pain and inflammation. She became pregnant (with the IUD in place) 
and feared a late forced abortion, fines and imprisonment if returned 
to China. She was deported in May 1997. The Minister had refused to 
intervene

  

 Senator Harradine said it was unacceptable that the 
Immigration Minister had appeared to have done nothing to ensure Mr 
Ayers would obtain evidence from Ms Zhu about her deportation from Port 
Hedland. “Ms Zhu is ‘Exhibit A’, the key witness in this whole 
tragic affair. They can’t say they can’t find her when they know 
exactly where she is. How can we ever know all the facts unless she 
is given the opportunity to give evidence?”

  

 Commenting on Ayers preliminary report which stated 
the woman had not been sedated before boarding the aircraft, Senator 
Harradine said “So what?”

  

 “Whether she was or was not sedated is immaterial. 
The fact is she pleaded not to be sent back and aborted. She begged 
to be allowed to give birth so she could return with a live baby. She 
asked for mercy and was shown none, and as a result her human rights 
were violated.

  

 “I am getting the impression that a number of highly 
placed people would rather wash their hands of the whole matter.”

  

  

  

  

 Senator Brian Harradine

 Canberra

 Ph: 02 6277 3737

 June 24, 1999

  

  

  cm  1999-06-28  13:30

