---
title: "Senator Harradine."
date: "1999-05-05"
creators:
  - "Harradine, Brian"
source: "Office of HARRADINE, SEN BRIAN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211475209
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/B3806%22
---

   

  

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  

  Senator Harradine

  

  Mercy and compassion fallen victim to forces of economic rationalism. 
People in genuine need of our protection falling through the cracks.

  

  Governments and Immigration Ministers of both colours have been complicit 
in f orcibly returning women who have suffered or will suffer 
systematic abuses of their human rights.

  

 China perpetuates violence against women through the 
most barbaric fertility control plan in the world. Its policy has resulted 
in forced sterilisation, forced abortion, forced fitting of IUD’s, 
female foeticide and infanticide and prenatal sex selection. A small 
number of Chinese women, men and their children, have sought help on 
our shores. Unfortunately, we have turned most of them away.

  

 The woman aborted 10 days before due to give birth 
and whose case I raised yesterday in Senate Estimates yesterday, is 
not the only woman to be deported despite her please to remain so she 
and her child would be safe.

  

 Another woman deported from Port Hedland in January 
1997 when five months pregnant was also taken for a forced abortion 
by family planning officials. Deportees with her had contacted refugee 
advocates in Western Australia to say she had been seized on arrival 
and taken away to be aborted.

  

 A 1996 appeal for asylum for a Chinese woman pregnant 
with her fourth child also failed. Detention centre staff had allegedly 
refused her requests for a check up on a defective Chinese IUD which 
was causing her pain and inflammation. She became pregnant and feared 
a late forced abortion, fines and imprisonment if returned to China. 
She was deported in May 1997. The Minister refused to intervene, saying 
that he had not considered and did not propose to consider whether to 
exercise his power to allow her to apply for refugee status.

  

 Another woman who had suffered six forced abortions 
(two of them at six months) and had narrowly escaped forced sterilisation 
by seeking safety on our shores also lost her case for asylum.

  

 This Government cannot claim to be unaware of the 
human rights violations which face women like this. They have had first-hand 
evidence since 1995.

  

 (extracts from Dr Wong testimony to Senate hearing 
in 1995). The deportation and forced abortion of Chinese women must 
not be allowed to happen again.

  

 If the Government wants to demonstrate it is truly 
distressed about what has happened in the case of the woman forcibly 
aborted at eight and a half months pregnancy and whose life has been 
destroyed as a result, it could demonstrate some political will by doing 
what Bill Clinton (who I must say I don’t have all that much in common 
with) did three years ago. President Clinton enacted the Illegal Immigration 
Reform and Immigration Responsibility Act of 1996 which states:

  

 “For purposes of determination under this Act, a 
person who has been forced to abort a pregnancy or refusal to undergo 
such a procedure or to undergo such a procedure or for other resistance 
to a coercive population control program, shall be deemed to have been 
persecuted on account of political opinion, and a person who has a well 
founded fear that he or she will be forced to undergo such a procedure 
or subject to persecution for such failure, refusal, or resistance shall 
be deemed to have a well founded fear of persecution on account of political 
opinion.

  

 Australia should also accept this ground in fertility-control 
based persecution cases. The PRC views any violation of its one-child 
policy as a political act, a crime against the State. We should do what 
the US has done.

  

 We cannot allow any more women to be forced to return 
to Government-sanctioned torture.

  

  

  CONTACT: Senator Harradine 02 6277 3735

  

  5 May 1999

  

  

  

  LK

