---
title: "Dams: the dilemma. Paper presented at the Crawford Fund Sixth Conference on "Food, Water and War: Security in a World of Conflict", 15 August, 2000, Canberra, Australia."
date: "2000-08-15"
creators:
  - "Blackmore, D. J."
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Resource sharingWorld Commission on Dams"
  - "Regional conflict"
  - "Developed countries"
  - "Water rights"
  - "Dams"
  - "River systems"
  - "Overseas item"
  - "Peace"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211206159
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XBT26%22
---

  Dams : The Dilemma 

  Don Blackmore   01/01/2000 

  The Crawford Fund   Food, Water and War : Security in a World of Conflict 

  Tuesday   15 August 2000 

  Dams : The Dilemma 

  D J Blackmore, Chief Executive   Murray-Darling Basin Commission 

  Water is fundamental to human well-being in ways that are integral to the survival   life and protection of health on the planet, as well as to every single form of   economic production - starting with food and drinking water. One of the many way   we control water is by building dams. Dams are unique. The:y epitomise   developmental policy dilemmas concerning large infrastructures, and at the same   time have consequences more profound than for any other kind of mega- 

  installation. The intervention of a large dam in the riverine environment - not only a   the site, but upstream and downstream - has impacts on the eco-systems, politics,   sub-economies and socio-cultural patterns in the entire river basin. 

  The purpose of this paper is to reflect on the current situation with regard to large   Dams and to discuss what the future may hold as we continue to strive to support   basic human needs and development. In the myriad of issues associated with Wate   and Dams it is proposed to focus on the trans-boundary water sharing issues and   the question of whether we are heading for water wars or whether water will be the   catalyst for “peace”. I also develop a frame of reference to test whether trans- 

  boundary water sharing arrangements are robust and will stand the test of time,   improved knowledge, changing community values and in maany cases substantial   increases in population. 

  The framework against which 1 test robust river basin management arrangements   includes: 

  does a stable institutional organisation exist supported by an agreement or treaty   are decisions based on a sound knowledge base?   are processes in place to enable integration across natural resource issues?   are governance arrangements transparent and do they in&de strong community   participation? 

  While the framework is objective the position of riparian countries is usually   anything but objective. The rellative power relationship in River Valleys have to dat   largely determined the water sharing arrangements. 

  Turkey and India have been in such a position to use their political power on the   Euphrates and the Ganges, respectively. In contrast, the development plans of an   upstream riparian state may be held in check by a downstream power as have, for   example, Ethiopia’s plans for Wile development by Egypt. 

  The question is how do we create an environment of “enlightened self interest” tha   will promote an integrated and balanced approach to the shlaring of water in a Rive 

  Page 1 of.5 

  Basin. 

  Before discussing the broader agendas involved in trans-boundary water   more correctly wealth sharing, let us review the state of the clams debate.   sharing o 

  I am a Commissioner of the World Commission on Dams which was established tw   years ago to examine the development effectiveness of large dams and to advise o   criteria and guidelines for future investment. The work of the Commission has   produced the most comprehensive knowledge base yet created associated with   dams, their contribution to society and their costs and impacts. The examination of   this knowledge base, together with over 800 public submissions from 79 countries, 

  has provided a unique perspective on the role of dams in society and the sharing o   natural resources, both within countries and between countries. 

  The World Commission on Dams was born8 out of an lUCN4Vorld Bank sponsored   workshop held in Gland in Switzerland in 1997. 

  At Gland, the moment came at which key protagonists in the long-running and bitt   dams debate agreed that the turmoil of controversy surrounding large dam project   n88ded resolution. The parties to the ‘war of words’ had reached the point where,   however warily, they wanted to embark on ‘peace negotiations’ in a spirit of 

  reconciliation. 

  That spirit has been carried forward into the work of the Commission. The   Commission and an independent international team, within whose ranks all sides o   the debate are represented, have conducted their business rather like peace   negotiations. Its role is to propose an accord which all parties will be able to agree   to. The ending of hostilities and the protection and support of the ‘innocent affecte 

  are our primary point of departure. 

  On the World Commission we have listened to 8aCh others’ Idifferent viewpoints in   genuine spirit of openness and desire to find a common path through the shoals of   our diversity. For all of us, it has been a learning process. 

  Ain enriching if sometime 

  uncomfortable experience. 

  We have guided the work programme in such a way as to adld an independent body   of extra knowledge to existing data bases and large dam analysis. We have also   looked at alternative ways of meeting water supply, energy and flood control   requirements. Along the way we have had discussions with affected people,   environmental activists, the dam construction industry, the external credit agencie   and private investors, and the international development community. 

  As a result the World Commission on Dams has produced a ‘knowledge base’ whit   provides an authoritative resource for analysis of policy and practice concerning   large dams in general. 

  The Commission has pioneered a new path for independent international   Commissions on issues relating to sustainable development and rights fulfilment i   today’s rapidly globalising world. For we are more than aware that the Commission   is delivering its product in a rapidly changing international environment, in which 

  debates proliferate. We have to conserve the world’s precious resource base while   meeting the needs of expanding populations ever more hungry for economic   progress and a better quality of life not just for some, but for all humanity. Terms o   investment, terms of trade, democratisation, the role of the state, the role of civil   society, the obligation to preserve planet earth for future generations, the need to   counteract the forces of marginalisation which leave some people languishing whit   others forge ahead: all these factors are part of the wider context in which any 

  policy regarding large infrastructural projects has to be developed - whether for   dams, or for highways, power stations, or other mega-installations. 

  Enough of the World Commission on Dams- what are the lessons learnt? 

  If you define a dam as a structure at least two metres high, in the past century   humans have built 800,000, at the unprecedented rate of nearly one dam per hour   since 1900. Since 1950 that includes 40,000 large dams fifteen metres high, more   than two per day. 

  Page 2 of 5 

  We have built, and are building dams for excellent reasons. Dams use and divert 

  water for consumption, for irrigation, for cooling, for evaporation, for construction,   for mills, for power and for recreation. 

  However, even though we have constructed 40,000 large dams since 1950 we still   cannot satisfy basic human requirements. 

  Despite all our dams, pipes, canals and levees, I.2 billion people, or one in five   world-wide, currently lack acc8ss to safe drinking water. Three billion, or half th8   world, live without basic sanitation. Each year five million children die of waterborn   diseases. Farmers face new competition for water due to increasing urban 

  demands. We mine fossil aquifers at an unprecedented rate. Saltwater intrudes on   coastal groundwater. From China to Mexico to India, water tables are falling a mete   a year. 

  Worse, in twenty five years we must find 20 percent more w#ater for 3 billion new   people. We are shoved hard up against a concrete wall of finite freshwater supplies   By 2025 one in three people will battle just to find water to drink and bathe, much   less grow food. 

  In short, water supply in the areas where it is critically needled is miniscule and   finite; water demand is massive and unlimited. Scarcity locks both developed and   developing nations into a desperate struggle in which governments must satisfy th   thirst, hunger and hygiene of restless populations confined within political borders 

  Trans.national waters 

  In 1978 there were 214 international river basins. With the break-up of the Soviet   union and Balkan states, there are now 261. 

  These rivers cover 45.3 percent of the land surface of the earth, and carry 80 perce   of its available fresh water. They include parts of 145 nations. 21 nations, such as   Bangladesh, lie entirely within a shared basin. Tensions ancl disputes are inevitabt   with national interest so hard to define. Water, or even sediment, used or diverted i 

  your country, upstream, is not available for me, struggling clownstream, and I am   likely to get rather tight jawed over your plans to develop it. 

  The negative vision for catchment management that we often see is communities   looking towards the mountains but rarely towards the sea. lfhey look upstream at   what affects them and rarely consider people downstream affected by themselves.   Their primary interest is in what drives them rather than a broad River Basin 

  perspective. 

  There are a number of “hot spots” and “flashpoints” arouncl the globe -the Middle   East, Southern Africa, South Asia, Central Asia and the Nile - all with water sharing   issues unresolved. 

  In 1991, a senior international figure predicted that “the political tensions between   certain neighbouring countries over the use of international rivers, lakes and   aquifers may escalate to the point of war, even before we move into the 21st   Century.” 

  “My fear is that we’re headed for a period of water wars between nations,” Klaus   Toepfer, head of the United Nations Environment Programme, was quoted as sayin   in Newsweek. “Can we afford that in a world of globalisation and tribalisation, wher   conflicts over natural resources and the numbers of environmental refugees are   already growing?” 

  “Environmental scarcities are already contributing to violent conflicts in many   parts of the developing world,” writes Thomas Homer Dixon. “Moreover, these   conflicts may be the early signs of an upsurge in violence in the coming decades--   especially in poor countries -- that is caused or aggravated by environmental   change.” 

  “The wars of the next century will be fought not over ideology, but over natural 

  Page 3 of 5 

  resources...like water,” argued Robert Kaplan in a famous and widely influential 

  essay in Atlantic Monthly. 

  “We view water scarcity as one of the most serious threats to peace and   prosperity” said lsmail Serageldin, who convened World Waiter Forum. 

  Michael Gorbachev maintains “The potential for a conflict over water is perhaps at   its most serious in the Middle East where water supplies are extremely limited,   political tensions traditionally run high, and water is just one of the issues that ma   divide countries and make cooperation difficult.” 

  There is certainly a strong body of opinion that if we   usual’ then this will inevitably lead to armed conflict.   continue with ‘business as 

  On the other hand the   nations to cooperate.   fear of water wars, like the prospect of nuclear war, can fort 

  Water, by its very nature, tends to induce even hostile co-riparian countries to   cooperate, even as disputes rage over other issues. The weight of historical   evidence demonstrates that organized political bodies have signed 

  3600 water 

  related treaties since AD 805. Against this there have been Si8VBll minor water-   related skirmishes, all of which began over non-water issues. Most of these 3600   treaties dealt with navigation, but since ‘I814 states have ne’gotiated a number of   treaties deals with flood control, water management, hydropower projects and 

  allocation for consumptive and non-consumptive use. 

  Without dismissing the concerns of others about water wars, I’d rather explore wha   is needed if we are to help communities and countries determine what is a fair an   equitable outcome for them. After that we need to workout how to promote   cooperative solutions. The question is how can we create an environment of   “enlightened self interest” between riparian states and the River Basin State? 

  My own observations are that there are a number of trans.boundary water sharing   arrangements which fit within the framework mentioned earlier. Examples include   the Rhine River Commission and the Boundary Waters Treaity between the US and   Canada. The treaty between Brazil and Paraguay for the world’s largest hydro- 

  electric dam on the Parana River has also successfully endured its first 25 years. 

  However if we look at those parts of the world with extreme development pressure   the record is not nearly so encouraging. 

  The current arrangements for the Jordan, Nile, Euphrates, Mekong and the two mai   central Asian rivers do not come close to meeting my criteria for stable river basin   management. For many basins the knowledge base on which decisions are made i   both narrow and thin and generally only focussed on water quantity with little   consideration of water quality or environmental issues. Sorne do have institutional   frameworks in place 

  but generally they are poorly resource& narrowly focussed an   only fully activated when the matter is in the interest of all parties - a rare event. 

  An example is the Aral Sea Basin. Under the former Soviet IJnion rapid expansion   irrigation occurred from the early 1960’s. This has resulted in approximately 7   million Ha of irrigation and a massive reduction in the size of the Aral Sea. With the   break-up of the former Soviet Union the area is managed by five independent   countries. Water sharing arrangements were in place, howejver these have not   proved to be robust. For example, major dams, on which one country depends for   its irrigation, are now entirely within the borders of a neighbouring country. Perhap   the most concerning aspect in this case relates to salinity. The irrigation   development of the region has now resulted in over 100 million tonnes of salt bein 

  mobilised into surface water systems each year. Despite this, no pollution sharing   treaty exists even though salinity problems are likely to threaten the very existence   of these nations. 

  The Way Forward 

  Given that we   could   have very few trans-boundary agreements that by any objective test 

  be seen to be robust, what contribution can we collectively make to improve 

  Page 4 of5 

  the situation? 

  First -we must recognise that there are no repeatable, objective rules for sharing   water between countries. Sharing arrangements are a negotiated outcome. There   needs to be an international body that can provide consistent, objective,   dispassionate support to the negotiation process. 

  Second -the process must be empowered with knowledge. It has never been   cheaper to collect data. The problem is to convert it into knowledge which is   relevant to the range of issues to be addressed. Too much eimphasis is still being   placed on dealing only with water quantity. 

  Third - communications must be kept open and transparent. 

  Fourth - the international community must be consistent in the sanctions they plac   on non-performing countries. It is interesting to note the behaviour of export credit   agencies who fill the gap left when the World Bank or Asian Development Bank   withdraws from a project because it does not meet their guidelines on operation 

  between countries. 

  Fifth - realistic milestones need to be set for the development of the “stepping   stones” of trans-boundary water sharing. Institutional arrangements, water sharing   principles, water sharing details (the heart of any agreement), environmental   protection etc. This is needed to assist in the management of the four points above   by both the countries involved and by the international community via Aid or other   means. 

  The jury is still out on whether there will be water wars but there is no doubt there   will be every increasing demand for scarce water resources and that the current   trans-boundary agreements are consistently weak. 

  There are few examples of trans-boundary water sharing fralmeworks that meet my   criteria for sustainable management arrangements. But disciplined and coodinated   international approach holds out the best hope for supporting riparian countries as   they strive to establish robust trans-boundary arrangements. 

  In summary, there are currently no examples of countries who are at war over wate   War is expensive and very destructive of infrastructure. Negotiated outcomes, no   matter how protracted the process, have to date been seen as preferable. However,   if the needs of current and future generations are to be fully met then further large 

  dam infrastructure is inevitable, as is further pressure on trains-boundary water   resources. 

  Water for peace has the right ring - let’s hope the bell tolls. 

  Page 5 of 5 

