---
title: "A personal tribute to Charles Perkins by ATSIC SA Zone Commissioner and ATSIC national Social Justice Commissioner Brian Butler."
date: "2000-10-18"
creators:
  - "ATSIC"
source: "ATSIC"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211218732
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2YP26%22
---

 Return to Media - Return to Media Releases List   

 Media

 Media Release

 A Personal tribute to Charles Perkins By ATSIC SA Zone Commissioner and ATSIC national Social Justice Commissioner Brian Butler

  

 18 October 2000

  

 The death of Dr Charles Perkins provides us all with an opportunity to reflect on the life of a great Australian and all that he fought for as a campaigner for this nation’s Indigenous peoples.

 Charles rose from humble beginnings in Alice Springs to become a champion international soccer player, a leading Aboriginal rights activist, Chairman of the Aboriginal Development Commission, the Secretary of the Commonwealth Department of Aboriginal Affairs, media figure and social commentator.

 As a young university student he was the figurehead of the now famous Freedom Ride through country towns in outback NSW in 1963 which highlighted the plight of Australia’s original inhabitants - they had become refugees in their own land.

 In those days he spoke about the problems Indigenous people faced regarding a lack of housing and poor health which resulted in high infant mortality rates, disease, blindness and low life expectancy. He spoke about unequal opportunities in regard to education, employment and training. He spoke about the legal system, policing, constitutional change, customary law and how Indigenous cultures and languages were being destroyed.

 It is ironic that three decades later his words still ring true and that our great nation is still to effectively address so many of the issues that Charles spent his whole life talking about.

 Many people will only remember Charles as an angry man, a radical and an activist who had a natural instinct for making challenging statements which grabbed headlines across the country and even the world. He was certainly all those things but to remember him only in this way would be a tragedy for all Australians no matter which walk of life they come from.

 Charles was my brother, my friend; we went to school together. He was a tremendously caring man with a great sense of humour, equally at ease talking to someone on the banks of the Todd River as he was to Heads of State. He was a husband, grandfather and a father who was immensely proud of the achievements of his children - few people saw this side of his life.

 Charles Perkins was a man of courage with a burning conviction that injustice must be tackled head on.

 He committed his life and considerable energy to fighting against racism, ignorance and paternalism and had the knack of pricking Australia’s collective conscience over many years about the way Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people were being treated in the “Lucky Country”.

 Every nation needs a Charles Perkins. He was to Australia what Nelson Mandela is to South Africa.

 He was a great Australian who fought to try and make Australia a fairer and better country for us all. In his last few months I know he was heartened by the way the push for Reconciliation in Australia was developing through people power.

 The march across the Sydney Harbour Bridge and the nation’s pride in Cathy Freeman’s Olympic triumph gave him hope that his life’s work would go on and that one day all of Australia’s citizens could truly proclaim that this is the “Lucky Country”

 Brian Butler ATSIC SA Zone Commissioner ATSIC national Social Justice Portfolio Commissioner

  

 Return to Top of the Page

   Return to Media - Return to Media Releases List

