---
title: "Refugee week 7-15 October: a time to reflect on a disastrous policy."
date: "2000-10-10"
creators:
  - "Theophanous, Andrew"
source: "Office of THEOPHANOUS, DR ANDREW, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211217837
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/R0L26%22
---

  ?,qRLIAMENT OF A,USTRALIA 

  H3USE OF REPRESEPITATIVES 

  PRESS RELEASE 

  The Hon. DR ANDREW THEOPHANOUS, M.H.R.   FEDERAL MEMBER FOR CALWELL 

  REFUGEE WEEK 7-115 OCTOBER: 

  A TIME TO REFLECT ON A DISASTROUS POLICY 

  “This year we have the saddest Refugee VVeek in the history of .Australia”.   the Federal Member for Calwell said in Parliament today. Dr Theophanous   made this comment during a cluestion without notice regarding the disastrous   policies that the Government has been pursuing on refugees over the past two   years. 

  Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Tmmigration why the Government‘s   refiAgee policies have been condemned by Amnesty International, the Refugee   Council of Australia, Ethnic Communities Councils, the National Council of   Churches. the Catholic Commission of Justice, and many other organisations. 

  He asked the Minister how he could pretend that his refugee policies are   pos’itive in the light of this condemnation. 

  In response, the Minister, Mr Ruddock, continued to avoid concerns which the   above organisations have about the Government’s refugee policies. He tried to   disl.ort fjcts and figures to pretend that Australia’s’ refugee program is the   largest per capita in the world. However, he fails to take account of the fact that   many nations (such as Germany) accept displaced persons on a Humanitarian   program which is much larger than that of Australia. In fact, Australia has   abolished its general Humanitarian program for displaced persons. 

  The Minister had no genuine answer to the concerns of the community   organisations that ob.ject to the mandatory detention policy. which is creating   untold suffering. 

  As Mr Chris Sidoti pointed out during his term as Human   Rights Commissioner, there are more than 3000 people in detention, 

  including over 300 children. 

  “In his reply to me the Minister spoke of the cost of the refugee policy. but   these costs are primarily the Government’s own fault. More than $I30 million   is spent per year on the mandatory detention refugee policy. This money   would be much better spent on faster-processing and greater assistance to more   ref\lgces if the Government were prepared to adopt a more generous and   humanitxian approach.” 

  /2... 

  Office 6, BROADMEADOWS RAILWAY STATION COMPLEX   1100 PASCOE VALE ROAD, BROADMEADOWS, VIC. 3047   TEL. %t: (03) 9302 1114 FAX. 2: (03) 9302 1181 CANBERRA:Z(O2) 6277 4230 FAX: (02) 6277 8579   EMAIL: Andrew.Theophanous.mp@aph.gov.au. 

  “The Minister also failed to respond to the other concern of the community 

  organisations which relates to the imposition of a three-year Temporary   Protection Visa on ‘boat-people’, even when the,y have been granted genuine   refugee status by Australia’s Refugee Tribunal. The people who live under the   conditions of this three-year visa, are not entitled to the same rights as citizens   or permanent residents. Many have to rely on welfare agencies just to survive 

  in Australia. What is worse, these genuine refugees are unable to bring their   spouses and dependant children to live with them here. This means a forced   sepIaration of families for three-to-five years.” 

  “No wonder then, that the Government’s policies are being condemned and that   these various organisations are coming together for a rally in Melbourne on the   14” of October.” The rally will take place at 2pm at the State Library in   Latrobe St. 

  ‘-Minister Ruddock continues to rationalise his actions in relation to refugees.   and refuses to listen to this broad spectrum of protest about his policies. It is   time that he and the Government. reflected on their approaches. and sought a   fairer and more humane approach to these issues.” 

  “If the Minister is genuine it   announce the abandonment   Protection Visa. and replace   advocated by the Refugee C   organisations. 

  I wanting to celebrate Refugee Week, he should   of mandator,y detention and the Temporary   them with more human policies on refugees. as   ouncil of Australia. and many other community 

  “Our policies on refugees are in direct contradiction of the image of 

  Australlia as a tolerant and multicultural society, which we presented to   the world during the Olympic Games. We should keep faith with the 

  words of our National Anthem, “For those who’ve come across the seas,   we”ve boundless plains to share.” 

  For, further information, please contact Josh I3ihary on 04 12-927- 166. 

  10 October 2000 

