---
title: "Leo Cussen Memorial Lecture 2000 at the Leo Cussen Institute, 18th October 2000 by the Governor of Victoria."
date: "2000-10-18"
creators:
  - "Gobbo, James"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Corporate culture"
  - "Judicial review"
  - "Rights of accused"
  - "Legal profession"
  - "Victims of crime"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
  - "Social values"
  - "Immigration criteria"
  - "United States"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211218776
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/EIQ26%22
---

  LEO CUSSEN MEMORIAL 
LECTURE 2000

  

  at the

  

  Leo Cussen Institute

  

  on

  

  Wednesday, 18  th  
October, 2000

  

  by

  

  H.E. The Honourable Sir 
James Gobbo, AC, CVO

  

  Governor of Victoria

  

   

  

   

  

   

  

  There are some black clouds hanging over the 
practice of the law in Victoria, even if the sky is mainly sunny.

  

  Never have there been more young people trying 
to enter the profession and yet - quite possibly - never have there 
been more seriously thinking of leaving it. Never have the financial 
rewards been higher and yet never has the level of disenchantment of 
its practitioners appear to have been so great.

  

  Far from the secure, almost smug confidence 
of past generations, there is much anguish, discussion and concern about 
lawyers losing their souls, about a fall in idealism. When the phrases 
"noble profession" or "learned profession" are used, 
there is some uneasiness in the air, possibly conveying - erroneously 
I believe - that few lawyers have the time, or the disposition to 
be noble and learned. Distinguished papers from Sir Daryl Dawson and 
Justice Michael Kirby, list the various symptoms of a growing sickness 
whilst at the same time warning us all not to engage in tiresome nostalgia. 
Nor is this a local or national condition - it is a malaise beyond 
our shores which led Professor Kronman, the Dean of the Yale Law School, 
to write a profound book entitled "The Lost Lawyer - Failing 
Ideals of the Legal Profession". Kronman writes of a profession 
in danger of losing its soul.

  

  The American lawyers’ pre-occupation with 
loss is also illustrated in a book by one Benjamin Sells, entitled "  The Soul of the Law"  . Sells 
is a former member of a leading Chicago law firm who is now a psychotherapist 
specializing in counselling lawyers. He begins as we all do by recognizing 
that the law is one of the pillars of civilizations, one of humankind’s 
great achievements. And yet, he says, the Soul of the Law is suffering.

  

  "Everywhere you look nowadays, the symptoms 
of this suffering are apparent. In the courts, where the Law seems most 
at home, litigants are unable to have their cases heard because of an 
onslaught of litigation unparalleled at any other time or in any other 
place. Some politicians warn that we are suing ourselves into economic 
stagnation, while others rabidly defend the ‘right’ to sue over 
the least little thing. Across the nation, judges retire in disgust 
and helplessness after years on the bench, their twelve-hour days unable 
to dent an ever-mounting backlog of cases. [Lawyers are forced to tell 
clients that although they are indeed entitled to their day in court 
they might not live long enough to see it."]

  

  He goes on to write of individual lawyers.

  

  "A survey of 105 occupations showed lawyers 
first on the list in experiencing depression, another study reports 
that fully one third of all attorneys suffer from either depression, 
alcohol or drug abuse [substance abuse is so bad that some attorney 
disciplinary groups estimate upwards of seventy-five percent of all 
complaints against lawyers involve substance abuse]; anxiety and obsessive 
behaviour afflict a disproportionately large number of lawyers, sometimes 
to the point of incapacitation; many lawyers report strong feelings 
of isolation and social alienation; and upwards of sixty percent of 
lawyers say they would not recommend the law as a career to their own 
children. Worst of all, the most common psychological complaints by 
lawyers are feelings of inadequacy and inferiority in relationships. 
Lawyers n today’s world are lonely, painfully lonely."

  

  Sells goes on to support his alarming conclusions 
with more statistics. I will not pursue these except to say that my 
own reading does not suggest that his comments hold true in our own 
community. But there are grounds for concern. Let us begin at almost 
the beginning - namely at the point of entry to the profession.

  

  Those about to enter a noble and learned profession 
might be expected to be nurtured on expectations of idealism and public 
benefit. But this is distinctly doubtful to judge from the publications 
prepared to welcome them. I refer in particular to one of the most popular 
such publications entitled - "A Career in Law" - edited 
by Professor Corkery. The first chapter addresses the question - why 
study law? The answers are revealing - the first reason given is that 
it is a popular profession, the second section is entitled - "Sustaining 
the high life" and only after these priorities are acknowledged 
is there reference to "idealism" and "a bastion against 
tyranny". Thereafter in nearly 230 pages the issue of idealism 
is barely mentioned.

  

  Let me hasten to say that the equivalent text 
in my day, namely Glanville Williams - Learning the Law - did not 
refer to ideals at all, but then it did not refer to the high life either. 
My criticism is not an exercise in nostalgia but an attempt to see the 
law’s problems in the wider context of a competitive, even cynical 
society. I will return to this wider context later in this paper.

  

  Before turning to the many positives in our 
profession, it is useful to consider in a little detail one of the problem 
areas which have drawn most attention from writers. I refer to the life 
of large firms. The phenomenon of ever larger firms is a long established 
one in Victoria and follows patterns set in the United States. It has 
been characterized by more and more mergers, by diminishing loyalty 
to firms by their associates and by often ruthless pursuit of skills 
in order to capture new business or retain existing business. More and 
more large firms have become a condominium of specialists, rather than 
firms with their own inherited culture and collegiate spirit. Weakening 
of ties has usually occurred but not the ties of self interest for these 
large firms have invariably generated increased incomes for their partners 
and their senior associates.

  

  It should be recognized that much of this development 
has been forced on firms by an ever demanding commercial world, globalization 
of business and the increasing complexity of the law which fuels the 
need for specialist practitioners. It needs to be pointed out however 
that most solicitors practice alone or in small firms. This is true 
in Victoria - as Kronman recognizes it to be true in the United States 
- but his justification for giving special attention to large firms 
is interesting. He writes:

  

  "First, these firms are elite institutions. 
They attract the best law school graduates, have the most powerful clients, 
and possess the greatest clout within the profession. They also make 
the most money. As a result, they exert a disproportionate influence 
on the practicing bar as a whole. Any basic change in the culture of 
the corporate firm, such as has occurred in the last twenty years, is 
therefore certain to have repercussions far beyond these firms themselves 
and to be felt in some measure by all those that stand below them in 
the hierarchy of power and prestige."

  

  [He goes on to refer to the nurturing of idealism 
embodied in his model of the lawyer statesman and writes:

  

  "… a large number of the country’s 
lawyer-statesmen have in this century been associated with such firms, 
whose internal culture has until quite recently assigned a high value 
to the virtues of practical wisdom and public service these figures 
represent. For a hundred years the large corporate firm has been the 
principal standard-bearer of the lawyer-statesman ideal in the sphere 
of private practice."]

  

  There is one aspect of the large firm which 
gives particular cause for concern, namely the pronounced disenchantment 
of the young with large firms. The pressure to meet budgets on fees 
raised is greatest on the most insecure. Job satisfaction surveys provide 
ample evidence of this disenchantment. If I may provide my own anecdotal 
confirmation, I know of one very able young lawyer with great people 
skills who spent the first four months of his articles at a large city 
firm anchored to a computer screen. You will not be surprised to hear 
that he has since left the law entirely. Some large firms are able to 
modify this disenchantment not so much by reducing economic pressures, 
stress and competitiveness but by increasing accessibility of partners 
and senior solicitors to young employees and by increasing the joint 
participation of all in social and cultural activities of the firm. 
All the more effective will this be if a senior solicitor is seen as 
a role model alive to issues of the public good, idealism and shared 
wisdom. 

  

  As already noted, most solicitors are in small 
firms or are sole practitioners. This clearly facilitates their involvement 
in local activities where their training and skills can be of great 
value. It is, however, increasingly difficult for such practitioners 
to afford the time to support this civic participation which characterised 
the traditional country or suburban solicitor in former times.

  

  Idealism and nobility in the law are not dead 
- they are not even remotely extremis though they are perceived as 
being muted and in decline. Let us remind ourselves that the practice 
of the law and idealism are still in so many areas inseparable. Our 
society has deep and abiding respect for the principle of the rule of 
law, a principle which depends critically on lawyers for its understanding 
and its defence. Our society accepts the heavy obligations on the State 
not to interfere with the liberty of any of its citizens without due 
process, however heavy the weight of suspicion and the heinousness of 
the crime alleged. Lawyers continue to wax lyrical about the golden 
threads in our law which respect the right to silence and which compel 
the Crown from first to last to carry the burden of proof and to satisfy 
this with proof beyond reasonable doubt. Alongside this is the taxi 
cab rule which ethically, if not morally, obliges lawyers to appear 
for a party no matter how unpopular the cause - unless there are well 
recognized reasons for not accepting a brief.

  

  There are many other signs that nobility and 
idealism are alive and well in the law. I refer to the dedication of 
those pioneers who pursued difficult litigation to establish native 
title rights and to those who have trail-blazed cases for gender equality. 
More recently there is the gratifying recognition by the profession 
of a whole series of new initiatives in pro bono work. This is not to 
suggest that the profession has not in the past been generous in its 
provision of free legal work - but there is a welcome recognition 
by firms, including big firms, that more honorary work needs to be provided 
in a systematic way. In this they set an example for other professions, 
not customarily described as noble or honourable, to be good citizens.

  

  There are also schemes across the profession 
for providing legal assistance. These are important schemes for, together 
with pro bono work in individual firms, they represent a direct and 
practical illustration of the noble aspirations of the profession of 
law. Without these, the disenchantment of young idealistic lawyers would 
inevitably be very great.

  

  Granted then that there is much that is noble 
and honourable and idealistic about the practice of the law, there needs 
to be caution in how we sometimes rally to the traditional banners of 
nobility. Let me look at three areas, namely the rights of accused persons, 
the rights of victims and judicial review in the immigrants and refugee 
area.

  

  Nobility in the practice of the law is seen 
at its shining best in the way in which lawyers have strongly defended 
the principles inherent in securing a fair trial for all accused persons. 
This has covered the maintenance of the sacredness of the principle 
that the accused person has no obligation to provide an answer or explanation 
when charged with any offence and that in particular, an accused person 
is not compelled to incriminate himself. This is coupled with the maintenance 
of the principle that the obligation to prove guilt of an accused in 
any trial rests from first to last on the Crown.

  

  Justifiably this has sometimes been described 
as the golden thread which runs through the common law and justice as 
developed by British systems of law. This tradition has been and no 
doubt will always remain as the great bulwark against an oppressive 
State. It requires that there be high principled teachers and practitioners 
vigilant to protect these principles.

  

  Sometimes these important principles are accompanied 
by an imagery of an all powerful prosecution, equipped with all the 
unlimited resources of the State ranged against a modest, solitary accused 
with few or no resources, with only a dedicated unpaid or poorly paid 
practitioner and a jury standing between him and the State - and the 
threat of imprisonment. On occasions this imagery is justified and here 
we find the living out of the nobility of the practice of the law. Sometimes, 
however, the reality is quite different.

  

  It is useful to take a part of the law where 
practitioners - and academics - have called in aid these important 
principles to defend a situation that was at best anomalous and at worst 
less than noble. I refer to the long standing right of accused persons 
to make unsworn statements, a right which was only abolished in this 
State in 1993.

  

  The right of an accused person to make an unsworn 
statement had existed at a time when the accused was not permitted to 
give sworn evidence. When this right to give evidence was granted by 
Statute at the end of the nineteenth century in England and Victoria 
and most parts of the British world, the right of the accused to make 
an unsworn statement was retained. On the face of it this was anomalous 
but its retention was justified on the grounds that accused persons 
were invariably unrepresented and, because of poor education, were at 
a severe disadvantage in giving evidence and in facing cross-examination.

  

  But as the 20  th  century moved on 
and even as almost all accused persons charged with indictable offences 
were represented and the standard of education and literacy improved, 
the anomaly remained. In Victoria, from the 1960’s on, there were 
regular attempts to abolish the unsworn statement but law reform committees 
and enquiries always recommended against abolition. This was in spite 
of evidence of increasing abuses associated with unsworn statements. 
Thus there was sometimes very long cross-examination of prosecution 
witnesses on all kinds of matters which were not really in issue but 
which might set the stage for the unworn statement. These statements 
were being used on occasions in long white collar crime cases where 
the accused, by no means uneducated or inarticulate, were represented 
by senior counsel and where the unsworn statement which was read by 
the accused was many pages in length and produced and updated for the 
accused with the aid of word processors. So one judge commented to one 
Law Reform body:

  

  "Counsel know that they can chase any 
hare, create or attempt to create any false issue, because their client 
will not be cross-examined. If an accused is to give evidence, or it 
is thought during the Crown case that he may well give evidence, it 
is my belief that counsel are far more selective in the matters they 
pursue."

  

  Another judge said:

  

  "… there have been many instances of 
accused persons who have abused the privilege of making an unsworn statement 
by introducing irrelevant and misleading material and making unfounded 
allegations which the Crown by reason of procedure has been unable to 
refute."

  

  There were rape cases where the complainants 
were grilled relentlessly in cross-examination on their accounts whilst 
the accused, sometimes a number of them, in their unsworn statements 
made disparaging attacks on these complainants with impunity.

  

  It is surprising to read the arguments commonly 
used to defend the unsworn statement. So for example, one report included 
the fact that the accused might be nervous or uneducated or have a language 
problem. But the obvious point was not made that the same might often 
be true of the prosecution’s witnesses. On every occasion, the Bar 
defended the unsworn statement. In all such cases it was not the Bar 
generally but the criminal Bar Association, largely composed of defence 
counsel, which was responsible for the Bar’s submission.

  

  In 1993 the right to make an unsworn statement 
was abolished in Victoria, nearly 30 years after New Zealand did so. 
It was the second last place in the English speaking world to cling 
to the Unsworn Statement. New South Wales was the last - in 1994. 
It is said that dock statements became an issue following a case where 
one accused made a fourteen day unsworn statement. In the United Kingdom, 
Mr Stonehouse, former British Cabinet Minister who made an unsworn statement 
lasting five days was succinct by comparison. There does not appear 
to have been any suggestion that any injustice has flowed to accused 
persons nor has there been any move to reinstate this right. A number 
of very experienced judges in criminal trials advise that the unsworn 
statement has not been missed.

  

  Now it may seem odd that it took so long for 
the anomaly of the unsworn statement to be removed, even after so much 
evidence of its unfairness.

  

  It might be that the noble defence of the rights 
of accused persons blinded practitioners to the unfairness created by 
such anomalies as the unsworn statement.

  

  It might even be that there was a measure of 
unconscious self interest on the part of those whose daily task was 
to defend accused persons.

  

  Whatever the reasons, the history of the long 
resistance to removal of this right, usually clothed in the language 
of nobility and never of self interest, provides some food for reflection 
on the caution necessary when using the noble aspirations of the law 
to defend some of its established practices.

  

  The second area where the noble aim of strongly 
defending the accused produced a less than noble result was the way 
in which female complainants were cross-examined in sexual offences. 
This unhappy and unfair state of affairs has now largely been addressed 
but this was driven more by public opinion than by practitioners in 
that area. This opens up a wider area, namely the rights of victims. 
Until relatively recent times, victims were not recognized as having 
any rights in the conduct of criminal proceedings involving them. They 
had no input into the sentencing process of the kind now incorporated 
into victim impact statements. Indeed at one time, it was the common 
practice of prosecutors never to cross-examine witnesses called on the 
issue of penalty and not to address the Court on punishment.

  

  Even now we are still a long way behind continental 
jurisdictions where the victim is often separately represented throughout 
the trial. It needs to be recognized however that our reliance on trial 
by jury limits our capacity to emulate continental practices in their 
entirety.

  

  A third area which merits brief mention is 
that of administrative review of judicial discretion, especially in 
the field of migration and refugee law. Here committed practitioners 
acting for those seeking permanent entry visas - or in a more humanitarian 
field - those seeking refugee status - pressed hard to examine in 
the courts the exercise of discretion by Ministers or officials. There 
was much idealism in this area, especially in early cases. But as this 
review process became more frequent and more successful, Government 
responded by narrowing the exercise of discretion by migration officials. 
This was a pity because the previous system of giving selection officers 
wide powers in selecting candidates after interview had served Australia 
well. A more rigid, more calibrated and less reviewable system followed. 
I point to this area because of years of serving on national advisory 
bodies on migration and refugee policy. I do not criticize the noble 
aims of those early practitioners who made the running, nor do I criticize 
the response of governments. I simply express regret at how things have 
eventuated and how perhaps a wider horizon is valuable when pursuing 
remedies for relief.

  

  If there are shortcomings and narrowness of 
vision, these will not respond to rules and codes of behaviour or regulation 
or even the mission statements much beloved of modern corporations and 
especially the new waves of consultants who have invaded settled professions 
and callings with instant solutions and negligible long term accountability. 
The answers lie mainly in leadership and education. In the profession 
itself, continuing education which is alert to the wider dimension of 
idealism and noble expectations - covering solicitors, barristers 
and judges - could make a difference.

  

  I am very proud of that portion of the Bar 
Readers Course which years ago pioneered the training in cross-cultural 
sensitivity for new barristers in their dealing with clients and the 
courts. Now we have happily progressed so far in our acceptance of diversity 
that cross cultural training is less critical but it was not always 
so.

  

  I have spoken on many occasions on the theme 
of cross-cultural sensitivity and the law and time prevents me from 
addressing that very wide topic beyond this one observation. The legal 
community has a good record in this area reflecting the enlightened 
attitudes of the wider community. It needs to be noted that the progress 
made arose from the good sense of the community responding to leadership 
in the profession. It was not the product of legislation or express 
administrative or political direction. 

  

  But inevitably continuing education courses 
will be much pre-occupied with direct and practical, often specialist 
agendas rather than the personal and philosophical foundations of our 
profession. The major role there will fall to the teaching lawyers in 
our law schools.

  

  Here again I return to the leading text of 
our time written by the Dean of the Yale Law School, Professor Kronman. 
In parenthesis I note too the valuable materials on professional conduct 
and ethics in the Australian publication "Lawyers" edited 
by Julian Disney and others. Professor Kronman raises the question as 
to whether the case method of teaching with its reliance on the adversary 
process and analysis of judicial decisions does not limit the promotion 
of civic mindedness. The steady diet of hard cases and fine distinctions, 
he says, breaks down early idealism. The case method which makes every 
position respectable undermines the students’ sense of integrity and 
personal self-worth. Some students describe this as the experience of 
losing one’s soul. But on balance Kronman defends the case method. 
Others are more critical.

  

  Professor Menkel-Meadow of UCLA School of Law 
writes:

  

  "If we examine our teaching rather than 
our more idealized scholarship, the real messages we convey about lawyering 
become more apparent - and less flattering. As others have noted, 
the traditional classroom fosters adversariness, argumentativeness, 
and zealotry, along with the view that lawyers are only the means through 
which clients accomplish their ends - what is ‘right’ is whatever 
works for this particular client or this particular case. We extol loyalty 
to the client above all and neglect the responsibility of the lawyer 
to counsel the client about moral and other concerns. Our case-by-case 
method, which focuses on identifying principles of doctrine rather than 
principles of behaviour, also encourages moral relativism. The values 
that we attend to in the classroom are apt to be individualism and autonomy, 
which we present as the basis for the adversary system, the Bill of 
Rights, and the standard of proof in criminal cases. We fail to teach 
our students that lawyering involves responsibility to and for others."

  

  Professor Menkel-Meadow challenges academics 
to study tapes of their lectures to see how warlike and belligerent 
teachers become. She poses questions that teachers should ask:

  

  "What are the ends or results accomplished 
by particular acts of lawyering? Are these ends morally justifiable?

  

  What responsibility does a lawyer have to discuss 
moral and ethical concerns with clients, and how should ethical disputes 
be resolved?

  

  h   Do the 
means used to accomplish a legal outcome serve the 

  

  ends, and are they morally justifiable themselves?

  

  h   How is 
my work contributing to a good life - for myself for those I serve 
(or teach), and for the larger society? Does my work further or hinder 
the achievement of fairness, justice, and equality?"

  

  These are valid questions. Some such as the 
questions on ethics are generally sought to be addressed in professional 
conduct courses and through the profession’s regulatory bodies. But 
the wider, even one might say more powerful, questions such as, are 
the ends morally justifiable and how does one’s work contribute to 
the good life - as opposed to the high life - are important.

  

  In the final analysis, nobility and idealism 
will not depend on texts or exhortations but on what are the role models 
and what imagery is engendered. In describing his lawyer statesman role 
model, Kronman stresses that the wisdom and ability to discern the public 
good is a quality of character and not simply an intellectual skill. 
Good judgment, whether on the part of an adviser or a barrister or a 
judge, is similarly a quality of character.

  

  At least one law school is responding to the 
challenge in an interesting and innovative way.

  

  In the University of Notre Dame in Western 
Australia, the law school of which is headed by Professor Greg Craven, 
the moral and ethical content - or more generally, the idealism issues 
- are addressed in a comprehensive way. Thus law students have a portion 
of their training devoted to hands-on community service and participation 
and the syllabus itself directly address the lawyer’s wider responsibilities 
in the community.

  

  All this tallies with Kronman’s view that 
"legal education must do more than impart information and technical 
skills. It must also inculcate character virtues of prudence and public 
spiritedness". But it goes further because it brings about practical 
participation in citizenship with direct personal involvement. It also 
uses the implicit values of a religious foundation as a public point 
of reference for students.

  

  Whether we adopt Kronman’s model of the lawyer 
statesman, or think in terms of a learned member of an honourable profession 
which understands and respects traditions built on personal example, 
we need heroes and even saints. For a start we need to say what is often 
unspoken namely that our great judges underpin the humanity of the common 
law. Lawyers in practice have a powerful heritage. When they consider 
the rules as to admissibility of confessions and interrogation of suspects, 
they have an advantage over, for example, non lawyers such as police 
who, no matter how carefully they learn the rules, approach them as 
rules rather than as the distilled wisdom of great judges whose judgments 
were the daily fare of law students in their law courses.

  

  At the same time, I would not wish to place 
too heavy a responsibility on our academics. As a one time lecturer 
in both Contract and Evidence, I know that heroes are sometimes hard 
to find, even if the case is a special one. For example the Carbolic 
Smoke Ball case is a landmark in the doctrine of offer and acceptance 
but the judge who decided it can scarcely be given hero status.

  

  If we are truly concerned about a decline in 
nobility and idealism, then we must look even beyond the threshold of 
the law course. We need to recognize a wider malaise and a wider challenge 
in schools, in households and in community. Institutions have been subjected 
to relentless criticism for several decades; out of this will hopefully 
come renewal and growth. But it has left a cynicism and worse - in 
the young - it has left a disinterest in, almost antipathy to, history. 
Religion has suffered especially as Justice Kirby notes in his review 
of the factors which explain what he labels our deeper malaise. So he 
says:

  

  "I refer to the void which is left in 
many lives by the absence of any spiritual construct and by the increasingly 
general rejection of any spiritual dimension to life. I mean a life 
in the law which involves no reflection on the amazing fact of existence 
and its brevity and about justice and its demands - a life in the 
law which is content with a n annual trip to the Law Service at the 
beginning of Law Term or which even misses that, as the declining congregations 
witness a rising generation with ‘better things to do’ on the first 
day of Term. Such a life may be devoid of clear signposts.

  

  …

  

  Until now, a spiritual dimension in societies 
such as Australia’s afforded a framework of common beliefs important 
to sustaining and reinforcing ethical principles. The Judeo-Christian-Islamic 
belief in the sacredness of each individual human life, bearing a divine 
spark, provided an ultimate foundation for self-control and for respect 
for others."

  

  Kronman makes an eloquent plea for character 
as the basis of the prudence wisdom and civic mindedness of his lawyer 
statesman. It is this getting of personal wisdom founded on personal 
values which is the most important challenge. I stress personal as opposed 
to public values because that is the truly difficult area. As Governor, 
I visit a great many schools and take every opportunity to talk to students. 
What I am finding is that students are well informed and conscientious 
about public values such as Parliamentary democracy, the rule of law, 
cross cultural tolerance, the environment and the rights embodied in 
United Nations Declarations and Charters. But they have much difficulty 
- and receive much less guidance - on personal values. Some hesitate 
even in volunteering what are non-negotiable personal values. There 
should not be much difficulty in binding oneself to tell the truth, 
to keep one’s word, to be loyal to one’s family and friends, and 
to show consideration for others. And yet without this core, we may 
be asking too much of them to act with nobility and honour in today’s 
practice of the law. Moreover, think how much the core values of telling 
the truth and keeping one’s word are tested in the hard, often impersonal 
daily practice of the law. My final reflection is to invite all those 
who have the long term welfare of a noble profession at heart to recognize 
that noble aspirations ultimately rest on simple values nurtured in 
our early upbringing.

  

  I wish to conclude by saying how honoured I 
am to have been asked to deliver this Sir Leo Cussen Memorial Lecture. 
His qualities of character were formidable and led him to a lifetime 
of noble and distinguished service both in the law and in the wider 
community.

  

  Cussen was a judge of such renown that Sir 
Owen Dixon once said of him that he was "the greatest of judges" 
and lamented the fact that he had not been appointed to the High Court. 
Without any expectation of reward, he twice consolidated the Victorian 
Acts and in a truly herculean effort brought the order and certainty 
of the Imperial Acts Application Act out of the complexity of hundreds 
of years of English statutes. He served the community outside the law 
as President of the Trustees of the State Library, as a Board Member 
of the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute and as President of the Melbourne 
Cricket Club.

  

  Sir Leo Cussen represents an obvious lawyer 
statesman or more literally one of our heroes. It has been a privilege 
to call in aid his record in my 

  

  address tonight, seeking as I do to provide 
inspiration for us in the difficult challenges which face our profession.

  

   

  

  b    b    b    b    b    b    b    b  

  

   

  

  BIBLIOGRAPHY

  

   

  

   

  

   

  

  "Salaries Jump", 
Law Institute Journal (October 2000).

  

  Final Report: Job Satisfaction 
Study, Victorian Law Foundation (1996).

  

  The Hon. Sir Daryl Dawson 
- The Legal Services Market - Journal of Judicial Administration, 
(1996, 147).

  

  The Hon. Justice Michael 
Kirby - Billable Hours in a Noble Calling?, Alternative Law Journal, 
(December 1996).

  

  Kornman, Anthony T. "The 
Lost Lawyer", Belknap Press (Harvard), (1993).

  

  Sells, Benjamin. "The 
Soul of the Law", Element (1998).

  

  "A Career in Law" 
- ed. J.F. Corkery, Hyde Press (1990).

  

  Law Reform Commission of 
Victoria: Unsworn Statements in Criminal Trials (September 1985).

  

  Report of the Statute Law 
Revision Committee on Right of an accused person to make an Unsworn 
Statement (1972).

  

  Law Reform Commission Victoria 
- Unsworn Statements in Criminal Trials (1981).

  

     
Dr Simon Longstaff - Ethics - St James Centre - Law Society Journal, 
(February 1994).

  

  Menkel-Meadow, Carrie J. 
"Can a Law Teacher Avoid Teaching Legal Ethics - Journal of Legal 
Education (March 1991, v.41).

  

  Jenkins, A.G. "Sir 
Leo Cussen" - unpublished paper.

  

  Disney, Julian et. at. 
"Lawyers", Sydney: Law Book Co. (1977).

  

  Practical Ethics Seminar, 
Law Institute of Victoria (April 2000)

  

   

  

   

  

