---
title: "Charity in chains: the detention of asylum seekers in Australia. Political Science Program Seminar, [Research School of Social Sciences, Australian National University, Canberra], 6 September 2000"
date: "2000-09-06"
creators:
  - "Crock, Mary"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "International law"
  - "Attitudes"
  - "Evaluation"
  - "Human rights"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "Convention on the Rights of the Child"
  - "Legislation"
  - "History"
  - "Research School of Social Sciences"
  - "Australian National University"
  - "Canberra"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211208700
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/M3F26%22
---

  _i -J’- 

  . I- 1 -iw L ____-__- - --- 

  (:HARITY IN CHAINS: THE DETEtNTION OF ASYLUM SEEKERS IN AUSTRAL1.A 

  Dr Mary Crock; 

  University of Sydney 

  Political Science Program seminar   4.00pm   Seminar r,oom ID   Wednesday 6 September 

  CHARITY IN CHAINS: THE DETENTION OF ASYLUM 

  SEEKERS IN AJJSTRALIA 

  Dr Maly Crock* 

  11 INTRODUCTION 

  Australians seem to have a love-hate relationship with refugees. Over the last SO   years, Australia has resettled almost 600,000 refugees and displaced persons.* Public   sympathy for fugitives from the conflict in Kosovo played an important role in the   Australian government’s decision to offer safe haven to 4,000 Kosovians in 1999.*   The plight of the East Timorese to our north continues to elicit extraordinary   responses in this country.3 While the first Kosovar refugees were given a grand,   prime ministerial welcome in May 1999, those who came to question the 

  arrangements for their accommodation did not receive such good press.4 The tears   and protests of the fugitives generally fell on deaf ears when the time came to return   to Kosovo.’ The close of the 20th century in Australia also saw the arrival of an   unprecedented number of asylum seekers who are proving to fit the United Nations   definition of “refugee”: between October 1999 and June 2000, 4,174 non-citizens   arrived without authority on 75 boats. These fugitives have been described by the   press almost exclusively as “illegal migrants”, “queue jumpers” or, worse, people who   were “stealing the places” of “genuine refugeesY6 Their arrival was treated as 

  something of a national emergency, with Minister Ruddock warning that “whole   villages” from the Middle East were on their way to Australia.7 No freedom of   movement or work rights for these fugitives, only the full force of mandatory 

  c 

  BA (Hons) LL.B @Ions), PhD (Melb), Senior Lecture in Law, University of Sydney; Chair,   Nationality and Residence Committee of the Labr Council of Australia; Board Member,   Refugee Council of Australia. I wish to acknowledge the research assistance of Mr Ben Saul   and Mr Daniel Miller who have been working with me on various projects this year My 

  thanks go also to Professor Ron McCallum for his wise comments on earlier drafts of this   paper.   See Department of Immigration and Multicul:ural Affairs (DIMA) Fact Sheet No 40, available   through the DIMA website, http://www.immi.gov.au.html.   See M Head “The Kosovar and Timorese Safe Haven Refuges: A Test Case for Australian   Democracy”, ( 1999) 24 

  Alt LJ 280. 

  See, for example. the concern shown at moves to repatriate the East Tlmoresc given 

  temporary safe haven in Australia: J MacDonald “Plea on Timor Refugees” T1lc /lgcl, 30 

  September 1999. For a general account of Australia’s relationship with East Timor and those   fleeing its oppressions, see P Mathew “Lest we forget. Australia’s Policy on East 7‘1morcsc   Asylum Seekers” (1999) 11   IJRL 7. 

  For an analysis of the media treatment of these people, see D Corlett “Politics, Symboll~m and   the Asylum Seekers Issue”, (2000), UNSWLJ (forthc:,mlng).   See Ibid; M Head, above n 2; and articles such as A Ilodge and M Saunders “Coaxing t‘a~ls ;L\   refugees refuse to go” The .Australian 13 Apr11 2OOG; Mlnlsterlal Press Release, “Koso\‘;\rs to   Return IIome this week” (April 3, 2000). Note that attempts to secure a legal reprle\‘c for the 

  Kosovars also failed: see R v Mi/llrter for lrmnlcqrt.rtwn mti Mrlltlcr(ltllrctl AffillI.\: lCs\ prr~tc 

  Felzulfnhu [2OOOj HCA 23, unreported, 10 A.pril 2000.   For an excellent account of the press coverage of the boat people from this pcrlod. ‘~c 11   Cortett , above n 4   See, for example, J MacDonald “Kefugec Cr ISIS W;lrnlng” The A

  Mlnlstcrtal Press lielease (h4PS) 103/99. 1 S Novcmt-el IO99. 

  detention and the creation of a new visa class designed to limit the entitlements of 

  those found to be refugees.” 

  This dissonance in responses is easy to camprehend at one level. As a sovereign   nation, Australia is far from unique in its assertion that it should be able to control   who enters and remains on its territory.” Refugees who come to the country under   orderly resettlement or “safe haven” programs represent no threat to the sovereignty   principle. Refugees who come as asylum seekers do so uninvited. Their admission is   neither planned nor predictable, yet Australia’s obligations under international law   mean that they car-mot be swept from the country without a consideration of their   protection claims? At a deeper level, the vehemence of the popular and legislative   reaction to mobile asylum seekers is not capable of such ready explanation. The   response is in itself a phenomenon, a manifestation of some kind of deep culture, or   profoundly rooted fear that speaks of challenges 1.0 Australia’s identity and place in   the world. 

  Australia’s ambivalent attitude towards refugees is most apparent in its policies and   laws governing the detention of unauthorised arrivals. Although concern with   immigration control is as old as the Australian Federation - and older” - the regime of   mandatory detention that is now in place is actually quite a recent phenomenon. It   will be my contention in this paper that the mandatory laws and policies began as a   knee-jerk reaction to Indo-Chinese boat arrivals in the 1980s. The laws have become   increasingly draconian as the result of a series of incremental responses to developing   circumstances. With each step justifiable through an internal logic and with the   external pressures of public opinion, there has been a curious lack of political   perspective on the cumtulative product of the chang(zs made. 

  With break outs from the immigration detention facilities in South Australia and   remote Western Australia; hunger strikes and most recently, full scale riots, the issue   of detention has once again become headline news. This paper seeks to examine the 

  operation of the present detention regime with a view to evaluating its worth and   considering ways in which it could be improved. It begins with a sketch of how   Australia’s detention laws have developed and of who is held in immigration custody.   I turn then to examine what It is like inside the detention centres, proffering some   explanations as to wh:y there should have been so much unrest of late. The paper   turns then to the rationales for the regime and to the constraints impose;1 by 

  See Border Protection Act 1999 (Cth) and related leglslatlon which introduced a raft of 

  changes that downgrade the entitlements of unauthorised arrivals who are determined to be   refugees. It wl,jhes to downgrade the protection we offer people recognlsed as refugees. While   asylum seeker:; who come as tourists and students gain permanent resldencc upon ha\‘~ng thclr   refugee claim:; accepted, unauthorlsed arI-l\/als now get no more than 3 year tcmpor,u j   permits. The cntlt ements of the second grou:, will be considerably less than those of the first.   Lvlth truncated \velfare payments, no family reunion rights, and no automatic right to Medicare   or to travel.   For an exposition and crttlque of the sovereignty pIInc]ple, see JAR Nafzlger, “The (;tncr:tl   Admlsslon of Allens Under InternatIonal La\d” (1983) 77 

  Atner-ican Jorrmnl of /tltcrtwzwrllrl 

  Law 804. 

  See, for example. I’ Mathew “Sovereignty and the Right to See Asylum: ‘I’he (‘asc of‘ the   Cambodian Asylum Seeka s in Australia” ( 1993) ! 5 r\11.\tr.c111r1t1 Yctlrhook of It11c’t tltrrlorlrtl 

  LA kt’ 3 s 

  See M WllIard Ff~\tnr-v of rllcj CVhrtc Au.\tt-(l’l(l Polr(~y (Melbourne: MIJP. 102.‘7), li (‘ronIn 

  C’olo~lrll C’clrrra~lrlr~\ C’hlr~c)st~ l/l E~~rlv I/lc~rorl~ (Melt)c)urne, MLJP, 1982). 

  .4ustralia’s signature 

  and ratification ol- various international human rights   rnstruments. It concludes with a reckoning of the advantages and disadvantages of the   present system and with an outline of some alternatives that could be considered. 

  2 DETENTION ‘-THEN AND NOW 

  .4ustralia has always sought to control the entry of “immigrants” or non-citizens and   ,at various times of crisis has instituted policies for detaining certain non-citizens.‘2   .However, it did not develop a broad scale policy of detaining unauthorised arrivals   until the late 197Os, when the first boats began to arrive bearing fugitives from the   conflict in Vietnam. I3 These first boat people, however, were not subjected to long   periods in detention. On the contrary, they were accepted sympathetically as part of a   regional phenomenon and resettled with a modicum of fuss. Before 1979, the 

  ,Vligration Act 1958 (Cth) provided for two types of immigration detention. Non-   citizens suspected of being illegal migrants lzould be arrested and detained, provided   1:hat they were brought before a magistrate within 48 hours and that any on-going   detention was reviewed by a 

  court every 7 days.14 The other class of detainee were 

  I.hose with respect of whom a deportation order had been made. The purpose of this   detention was to facilitate the non-citizen’s removal from the country! Changes to   he law in 1979 permitted the removal or “turn around” of non-citizens who came into   l;he country without a visa. I6 Such persons were deemed not to have “entered” the   country and so were not subject to the procedural protections of s 37 of the Act.17 

  lt was only when the “‘second” wave of boat people began to arrive some ten years   later that the policy of detaining unauthorised arrivals began to bite. The turn around   provisions in the Act came to be used as the basis for detaining these people. As has   been documented elsewhere, the non-citizens who came to Australia by boat in and   after 1989 met with complex political realities. Australia’s involvement in the Paris 

  Peace Plan had ramifications for those fleeing the chaos in Cambodia. The treatment   of boat people frorn other parts of Asia was coloured by the final throes of the so-   called Comprehensive Plan of Action; and by Australia’s nascent attempts at   developing alliances with Indonesia and China. The concurrence of politics and 

  litigation brought by advocates for the boat people produced legislative measures to 

  -____ 

  12 

  Ii 

  I4 

  See 

  M Crock Immigration ad Refldgee Luw in Australian (Sydney: The Federation Press, 

  1998), Ch 2. For an account of detention action taken during the Second World War, see Paul   R Bartrop, ‘The Dunera affair: a scandal for whorn?‘, Australian Jewish Historical Socletb   Journal, vol. 11, no. 1,1990, pp. 14-19; Cyril Pearl, 

  Tile Drmera Scatdal: Depot-ted /JJJ 

  Mutake. Angus R Robertson, Sydney, 1983, Benzicm Patkln, T11e Dmctu Intertlces, Cassell,   Sydney, 1979. 

  I5 

  I (1 

  See the Introduction of s 36~1 of the Migrrrtron i\ct 1958-89 (Cth) (the Act ot 1958-SO). 

  discussed In L Crll~:k “Australia’s New lmmlgratlon Laws”, ( 1980) 29 IT’LL) 773   See s 37 of the Act of 1958 - 89. For a discussion of these provisions. see M Cr-ock 

  Adrllltzl.stratl~,c, L41w cud lttlttligt-ntiotl Control in Al(strttlicc: Actions rltld Retlctcot1.c 

  Unpublished F’hD ‘I‘htxs, Melbourne Univer:,ity, 1904, 344 ff 

  See id, 347; ;tnd Put-k Oh H/o 1’ Mrnlstcr jlitt- lttwllgr-utrotl, Local GO~‘Ctw?li’tlt trt1tl Etlltllc 

  Affbrr.\( 1989) 167 637. 

  See s 36 and 36.4 of the Act. The provlsicns are dlscussed in M Crock “‘I’hc I?vc,lutlon of   Mandatory Dctenrlon” in h/1 Crock (ed) Protcctlotl ot- P~~nlsimetlt: The Detctltlotl of A.s\~ll~t,l   Scekc~..s in Au.~trollu (Sydney: The Federation Press, 1993). ch 5, and M Crock “l’he I)cI11 of   the Ijont People” 111 Ii S’clOv (cc/) Tomorrow’s La\v (Sydney: ‘The I+deratlon PI~‘c~. 1995). zh 

  (‘rock,   ‘1bOVC r1 I?. ;lt ?2!, ff 

  make explicit the policy of mandatory detention. I8 Without repeating a long and 

  tortuous narrative, the first (lawful) mandatory delention regime was created in a late   night sitting of federal Parliament to thwart a legal action that showed every promise   of securing liberty for the “second wave” boat people.‘” The laws were, quite   literally, a knee jerk reaction to a perceived judicial threat. 

  Today, in theory, every non-citizen present in Australia who does not possess a valid   visa is required by law to be both detained and removed from the country as soon as   practicable. Changes to the law in 1994 were supposed to deliver a system that is   universal and binomial in its operation - with the ubiquitous visa as the sluice gate to   shepherd the legal to freedom and the illegal into custody. However, the relevant   laws are not equal in their application. The true “mandatory” detention regime   continues to operate for non-citizens who have entered Australia unlawfully - on false   or flawed travel documents or with no passport at all.*’ Most unauthorised arrivals   are taken into custody and are not released until they either qualify for a visa or leave   the country. The dilemma for the government is that the unauthorised arrivals who are   most likely to spend a long time in detention are those who come to Australia and   seek our protection on the basis that they are .refugees. This is so, in spite of   exceptions being made for “eligible non-citizens”. These are defined as protection 

  visa applicants who are: children for whom release from detention is “in their best   interests”; persons over 75 years of age; the spouses of Australian parties; and former   victims of trauma or torture. In most cases. persons seeking release must show that   adequate arrangements have been made to care for them upon release and that they   will not abscond before the determination of their application. The problem in the   case of the children is that it is rarely in their best interests to be separated from 

  their 

  parents.*’ 

  The fact that the regime is based more on politics than on any other (economic,   practical or legal) consideration is immediately apparent when this cohort of detainees   is sited within the overall picture of immigration control in Australia. The statistical   data reveals that Australia detains a relatively small proportion of those who breach 

  its immigration laws. In March 2000 there were 3,622 people held in immigration   detention around the country?’ In contrast, enforcement operations in 1998-99   resulted in the arrest of 8,054 non-citizens in Australia who had overstayed or had   their visas cancelled, out of a resident “pool” of illegal migrants estimated 

  at around 

  53,000. Over the same period, 2,106 people were refused entry at Australian airports,   926 people arrived illegally on boats, and 61 people arrived on ships as stowaways. 

  The irony of detaining unauthorised arrivals who seek protection as rcfugccs is 

  twofold. If these people represent a threat to the sovereignty principle, the first irony   is that the “unvisaed” represent a minority of the total number of non-citizens who   seek asylum in   Australia after their arrival here. In 1998-99, 8,371 people applied for   refugee status in Australia under the on-shore 

  f 

  rogram, compared to 3,093 

  unauthorised arrivals, not all of whom sought asylum. ’ In other words, most refugee   claims are made by individuals who come to Australia on temporary visas: as tourists,   students or temporary workers. These claimants are permitted to remain at large and   receive Medicare and some income supp~rt.~~ The second irony is that detained   asylum seekers are much more likely to succeed in their claims than are asylum   seekers who came here legally: in other words they are less likely to be abusing   Australia’s refugee determination procedures. While the general success rate for   refugee claims has hovered at between 5 and 10% in Australia, the rate of recognition   for boat and plane arrivals has been close to 30%, with the nationals of some countries   achieving a recogmtion rate of close to 1OO%.25 T:his phenomenon is explained by the   nature of the refugee protection regime under international law. The definition of   refugee privileges claims made by people with a political 

  or social profile that has 

  mandated travel (escape) by any means available. People with the freedom to leave   their country and gain admission to Australia find it more difficult to demonstrate the   required foundation of feared persecution should they be returned. 

  What, then, is the rnake up of Australia’s immigra.iion detention population? Most of   those detained for any length of time are either in the refugee determination process or   in the screening process that precedes the making of a claim. In 1998-99, males   accounted for approximately 80% of detainees. More specifically, males aged 3 l-50   years made up appt-ox.lmately 40%, and males aged 10-30, approximately 35% of all   detainees. Children account for about 5% of the total population, but are not   distributed evenly. In July 2000 there were Ii28 children aged between 0 and 16 years   in a total population of just over 800 at the Cur-tin Immigration Reception and   Processing Centre (IRPC) near Broome in Western Australia? 

  (compare 11lhlA I-act sheets No 41 and No ,C 1.   Note that Sch I of the Mlgratlon I egislatlon (Parents and Other hleasures) I3111 2000 \+‘ot~lcl   seek to remocc tht entitlement of asylum seekers to Medicare.   The high success rate of retugee claims among the lcurrent cohort of lmmrglatlon det:t~~wc~ 15   reflcctlve of the nLitlonallty of the asylum st.ckcrs cietnlncd. ‘I’hose who ;trrl\,eti III late 1000   arc p~dominantl\ riLttion:tl 

  - 

  I\ of three Scountl let\’ Irac,. I1f$l;~nlstarl and Iran. Set* I )Ihl:‘\ I.,IL.I   Sheet No 03   Statlstlc suppl:etf 10 the ;tuthor t,v the I)IMf1 o!tlccr :)vc~sc~lrl~ the centre. h/lr (;IC~Y \1’,111,1~r~ 

  0 

  3 FACTORS LEADING TO VOLATILITY IN THE DETENTION 

  CENTRES 

  The most obvious question people are asking at the moment is why the detainees at   Woomera are rioting. In my opinion, the answers lie in a number of factors that have   combined to make the situation in the detention centres volatile. The major   complaints that I have heard coming from the detainees have related to the length of   time taken to process refugee claims; the lack of information given to them; and the   sharp dissonance between their treatment and what they expected before their arrival   in Australia. 

  Time delays and isolation 

  In 1998-99, 45% of all detainees in detention had been held for more than 3 months.   By the middle of this year, these figures had risen sharply, although the mass release   of several hundred detainees in June has taken some of the pressure off the centres. 

  The delays in processing the refugee claims of detainees are due in part to the   pressures of a sudden rise in the refugee caseload: 1999 saw a marked increase in the   number of unauthorised boat arrivals. The most obvious impediments to efficiency,   however, are in the location and amenities of the major holding and processing   centres. While detainees are privileged over many other refugee claimants in having 

  access to a form of legal aid in the reparation of their initial applications,   rarely able to choose their adviser.* R   27 they arc   Detainees at Woomera and Cur-tin initially had 

  limited means of communicating with the advisers allocated to them as there were no   phone lines installed for detainees to either receive or make calls. Put simply, the   major holding centres are remote and physically difficult to access for both advisers   and the government officials charged with interviewing and assessing claims.   Overlay the complexities of dealing with a population of applicants who have   typically obscured their identity to get into the country and the potential for   substantial delays is obvious if not inevitable. 

  Under the migration legislation, detainees have a right to obtain legal advice if they   request it, but they have little entitlement to 36: told anything beyond the fact that they 

  arc liable to mandatory detention. ” Cut off from the outside world, suspended from 

  27 

  :x 

  ‘0 

  For 3 discussion of the operation of the Imrnigratrcn Application Advice Assistance Schcmc   (IAAAS), see Senate Legal and Constitutional Kcferences Committee A Sauctlcar-v litltict   Revlc\t*. At1 E cmnr’twtiorl oj‘A~tstraLicr ‘s Refiqcc o/la’ Ilumat~itar-iarl Procc.~.re.s (C’anber ITI, Junta 

  7000), at 69 f t   Note that It IS posstble f’or detainees to retain their own adviser if’ they have the funds to do   this and the kno~.vledge of who to contact. LJntfer the IAAAS, however, detainees ;II~‘   allocated ad\‘lsers chosen from a panel of XI-VIW provideI-s who arc contracted to prov~dc   iissIst;ince Contr;lcts a-63 a\i:irded after a tencler process.   See s 194 of the M~grc~r~r~ ,i\cr 1953 (C(h) which requires that detalnccs be told of‘ the   consequences of their detentlon, Including t,Ie fact that they have a tn:txlmum of 7 ivorklng   days after beln g detained In which to lodge an appllzatlon for any VIM other than ‘I protcctlon 

  visa or a brldnlng Visa (see s 195). Under s 250, persons responslblc for the detention o!   detainees rnu:,t g11’e them appllcatlon forms and must permit them to make statutol~   cleclaratlons or ~0 seek advice v,Jlth respect o their detention trt tJlc rc’qlic~sf of 1/1(’ r/cjfrlr,lc,(,   Note. however. that the ~IO\‘I\IO~ dotes not rcqultc off‘lclals to Inf    these: rlyht< l‘hcw provisions have been :I source 01 major CO~CCI-II because of the 

  I)I-,IL.~ICC 01 

  every reality but their fear of being sent home, the isolationist aspect of immigration 

  detention is in my view a most significant stressor for detainees. It has been noted   ihat the current cohort of detainees is dominated by single men - or men travelling   alone. Many of these have been quite brutalised in their immediate past. They have   all come to Australia in the hope, if not. expectation, of finding sanctuary for   lhcnselves and for their families. Where the aspirations of such people are dashed, it   is not surprising that some might respond with violfEnce or disruptive behaviour. 

  Whatever their means of getting here, leaving aside the children, the entire cohort of   detainees 

  chose to come to Australia, many of them achieving their goal at great   personal risk. While the detainee’s understanding of Australian law and procedures is   typically weak or even non-existent, the concept of applying for refugee status is well   understood amongst the detainee population. as the vehicle for gaining protection.“”   What most detainees do not foresee is the length of time it takes to process a refugee   claim in Australia. The general expectation seems to be that once a person has told   her or his story, the decision making process will be swift and decisive. 

  Conditions in the detention centres 

  The sudden influx of boat people at the end of 1999 lead to the commissioning of a   new detention facility a.t Woomera in South Australia and to the recommissioning of   the facility near Derby in Western Australia. Although conditions at both centres   have improved dramatically, by all accounts the early days in the camps were dire.   Detainees at Curtin were housed in tents, wirh little or no running water. There were   no phones at either Woomera or Curtin; detainees were plagued by heat and insects 

  and by lack of virtually every creature comfort from clothing through to food. From   speaking to past and present detainees, it is plain that few if any expected their   reception to be as physically harsh as it was in the early days. Of greater concern to   me, however, is the consistency of the (untested) allegations I have heard of quite   brutal treatment of the detainees. In many respects the remoter detention facilities are   run like concentration camps. They are divided by wire fencing into compounds that   can be locked down at short notice, with double fencing surrounding the compound   housing new arrivals who have not been “screened in” to the refugee determination   process. Detainees are known by number rather than by name, a practice that rnany 

  find humiliating and de-humanising - especially after being held over periods   approximating a year or more. Health professionals interviewed by me in July spoke   of an “us” and “them” attitude in the centre guards, with little sensitivity shown for   the plight of the detainees. Former detainees complained of rough handling and   intemperate language in the guards; of being referred to as “Muslim motherfuckers”   and “terrorists”. ‘[ heard allegations of detainees being beaten and spat on; of 

  inappropriate use of solitary confinement 3:; a mlzans of controlling and punishing   detainees. 

  -- ______ 

  holding detalr,ees in incommunicado detentlon, where there is no way of kno\v~ng ~vhat   requests have been made.   This comment is made on the basrs of lnter\lews with detainees over a number- ot‘ yews. In   addition to the knoivledge passed on by world of mouth, it IS my experience that some of the 

  better educated as;;lum seekers from countrlcs like Iraq have quite ;t sophlstlcatcd kno\i,lecigc   of refugee procedures around the world. On more than one occaston, I dcta~nces ha\e   commented on the pr-actlces III other European countries, for example. 

  A formal tour of the Cut-tin detention centre as it now operates revealed no immediate 

  evidence of human rights abuse. Programs for juvenile and adult education have been   instituted. The physical amenities arc now quite adequate. It is my understanding that   such changes are., or were paralleled at Woomera. The improvements beg the   question as to why Woomera should have erupted as it did last week. One answer   might lie in the practice that appears to have developed of delivering decisions to the   detainees in batches. After the hunger strikes and protests in May, several hundred   detainees were granted refugee status and released quite suddenly into the community.   In more recent days, it has been the turn of those refused asylum to hear of their fate.   With little information given to the detainees about the process they have been   through, the grouping, of cases may be engendering the (false) impression that the   system is arbitrary; that protest action will lead to a changed or positive result. This   has been hinted at by the Minister in his rather bizarre allegation that refugee   advocates in general and the Refugee Council of Australia in particular are partly to   blame for the unrest at Woomera.3’ 

  4 THE DETENTION DEBATE 

  In evaluating Australia’s detention laws and seeking ways in which they could be   improved, it is useful to begin by asking why we lock up unauthorised arrivals.   Articulating the reasons for the policy, we can engage the process of analysing how   well the laws meet thellr presumptive aims and objectives. The next step is to examine   the constraints placed on Australia by international law. The section concludes by   examining the financial and human cost of the detention regime now in place. 

  4.1 Rationales for mandatory detention 

  The current regime is predicated on three basic assumptions: detention is necessary to   ensure the protection of the Australian comrr,,unity; it is convenient as an enforcement   measure; and it is useful as a deterrent to would be illegal migrants. The protective   function of detention is this: it ensures that unauthorised arrivals undergo health and   character checks and that they do not enter the community until their claims have 

  been properly assessed and found to -justify enl;ry. Detention also makes illegal   migrants easily available for removal from the country if their claims are not upheld.   The deterrent aspect of detention is founded on the assumption that non-citizens chose   their destinations on t.he basis of information known about fltvoured countries of 

  refuge. This assumption also underlies the moves made in later 1999 to reduce the   entitlements of unauthorised arrivals who gain recognition as refugees from   permanent residence tcl three year temporary permits.32 

  In the short term, fc\v l,vould question the wisdom of t&in g unauthorised arrivals into   custody for the purpose of deter-mining 2111 indiv:dual’s identity and he:tlth status. 

  Dctentlon can also he justifictd rvhcre :tn individual emerges ;IS ;I security risk 01‘   threatens to escape ancl evade the immigration control process. The problem with the 

  present regime is that no provision is made for such assessments to be made. 

  Exceptions are made on the basis of classif‘ication, rather than personal attributes?’   The “threat” posed by detainees does not figure in the equation except as a qualifier   where detainees might otherwise fit into the categories of “eligible non-citizen”. 

  The convenience of detention as an enforcement mechanism is patent. There can be   ,iittle doubt that the rernoval of non-citizens who do not meet the criteria for the grant   of any kind of visa is easiest where the non-citizen is being held in custody. What is   not so clear is whether detention for the whole duration of processing a visa   application is necessary to achieve this aim, particularly when the financial and   human cost of detention is taken into consideration.34 

  On the matter of deterrence the issues are different. On the one hand one might ask   whether detention works as a deterrent. A simple reading of the statistics would   suggest that it does not: the policy has now been in place for over 20 years, with no   correlation between policy and practice apparent in the ebb and flow of unauthorised   arrivals. Detention per se does not seem to have affected arrivals at all: the real   influences appear to ha,ve been the push factors generating the flows at source and the   availability of travel, facilitated most recently by the organised gangs of people   smugglers. On the other hand, one might ask whether Australia’s illegal migration   problem is of sufficient magnitude to warrant deterrent measures being put in place.   The number of unauthorised arrivals in Australia is small by any standard. As the 

  f’ollowing table shows, the absolute numbers coming to Australia certainly pale in   comparison to the flows to other comparable states. 

  Country 

  Australia   Britain   Germany   United States 

  Canada 

  Onshore Asylum Seekers Asylum Seekers Per   199%‘$9 Capita of Population 

  8,257 1 per 2,301 citizens 

  9 1,000 1 604 citizens per   98,644 1 per 760 citizens 

  79,800 1 per 3,172 citizens 

  24,937 1 882 citizens per 

  r1.2 Constraints imposed by International Law 

  The issue of using detention as a deterrent for unauthorised arrivals seeking asylum   f’rom persecution inevitably involves consideration of Australia’s obligations under   international law. The deterrence of asylum seekers is said to be contrary to the spirit   if not the letter of Australia’s international legal obligations to protect refugees.”   This does not mean. however, that International Law forbids states from ever   detaining non-citizens who come into their territory without authority. Although it   demands that some concessions be made for “refugees”, there is no absolute hlir to 

  States detaining asylum seekers or even people recognised as refugees. The   international lcg:il r-eglme is one that ~vould seek to balance the states’ legitimate 

  10 

  rights to integrity and self preservation with the interests of the most vulnerable: 

  persons who have lost the protection of their counl:ry of origin and who are in need of   a substitute protector. This notion of balancing interests and needs is what makes the   detention debate most difficult and politically challenging. 

  Having saiu this, the various international instruments, declarations, “hard” and “soft”   law relevant to the detention of unauthorised arrivals,36 centre around basic principles   that should not pose too many problems for a self respecting liberal democracy like   Australia. The first and most important of tb,ese is what I call the liberty presumption.   It operates to require states to use detention as a sanction only where there are sound   reasons for the measure. International human rights law also requires the protection   of the vulnerable, as is well illustrated by the special protective measures demanded   for children, the aged and the infirm. The final international legal qualifiers on the   right to detain are founded in the notion that all persons have basic rights to bodily   integrity and to be treated with dignity. 

  The liberty presumption is implicit in the prohibition in Article 9(l) of the 

  International Covenant of Civil and Political Rjlghts (ICCPR) against “arbitrary”   detention. In 

  Alpen v The Netherlands37 the UN Human Rights Committee stated that   “arbitrariness” is “not to be equated with against the law, but must be interpreted   more broadly to include elements of inappropriateness, injustice and lack of   proportionality”. It w;as on this basis that the same committee formed the view that   the mandatory detentron laws introduced in for the boat arrivals in 1992 were   arbitrary in their operation. It commented: 38 

  Remand in custody could be considered arbitrary if it is not necessary in all 

  the circumstances of the case, for example to prevent flight or interference   with evidence: the element of proportionality becomes relevant in this context.   The Committee concluded:   Detention should not continue beyond the period for which the State can 

  provide appropriate justification. For example, the fact of illegal entry may   indicate a need for investigation and there may be other factors particular to   the individual, such as the likelihood of absconding and lack of cooperation,   which may @stify detention for a period. Without such factors detention may   be consider-cd arbitrary, even if entry was illegal. In the instant case, the State   Party has not advanced any grounds) particular to the author’s case, which   would justify his continued detention . . . The Committee therefore concludes   that the author’s detention . . . was arbitrary within the meaning of’ Article 9,   paragraph 1. 

  The legislative regime governing the detention of unauthorised arrivals has changed   :;lnce the ruling of‘ the Committee in A v Ausralia, most notably with the inclusion 01   ,A mechanism for permitting the release of persons meeting the definition of‘ “eligible 

  Ilowcitizen”. The government relies on the amendments in answer to the criticisms 

  For a full d~sc~sslon of the relevant laws, see I-IREOC, above n 29, at Ch 3. 

  Communlcatlon I%.) ?05/1988, Human Right:, Comr,littee Report 1990, Volume II IJN 11~~   A/45/40, para 5.8.   See A v Australq Communlcatlon No 56W1993, 30 Apr11 1997. UN 11~~ 

  (1CPKIC/59’!D1560/1993. For a dwxwon of this case, see N Poynder, “Austr,tlla‘s Recent   Implementation of the Refugee Convention and the law of nccommodatlons ll1ldtZl 

  International trzatlcs. have we gone too far’!” ( 1995) I?( 1) Al~.~fr.cllrr~rl J01~lI1~11 of‘lfllt~l(ltl Kl,qilf\ 

  75 

  II 

  made by the Human Rights Committee in 1997.j’ The changes have not convinced 

  the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission that the current regime 1s any   less arbitrary than it was in 1992. It has expressed the view that the inability to release   detainees who plainly represent no threat of any kind constitutes a breach of Article 

  9( 1) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). 4o 

  HREOC has also cril.icised the current detention regime as it applies to children,   drawing attention to Australia’s undertaking as signatory to the UN Convention on the   Rights of the Child (CROC). Article 3 of the CROC states:   1. In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private or 

  social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or   legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary 

  consideration” 

  Article 37 provides:   “States Parties shall ensure that:   (b) No child shall be deprived of his or her liberty unlawfully or arbitrarily.   The arrest, detention or imprisonment of a child shall be in conformity 

  with the law and shall be used only as a measure of last resort and for the   shortest appropriate period of time.   This instrument also imposes a variety of other obligations on states, among them a   duty to ensure that children are not arbitrarily separated from their parents. With the   greatest respect, it is difficult to see how the regime now in operation comes close to 

  complying with these obligations. 

  The human rights of asylum seekers held in detention are recognised at International   Law in a number of international instruments. Most importantly, Article 7 of the   ICCPR provides that “No one shall be sub.jected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or   degrading treatment or punishment.” Article 10 reads: “All persons deprived of their 

  liberty shall be treated with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the   human person”. Finally, Principle 1, 

  Bod;j of Principles for the Protection of All 

  Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisorment: “All persons under any form 

  See Joint Statement by the Attorney General D Williams and Minister P Ruddock dated 17   December 1997 which reads in part:   “The Government shares the concerns of the United Nations Human Rights Committee that   prolonged or indefinite detention is undesirable. The Government has already sought to   minimise the length of time a person may spend in immigration detention. Applications for   refugee status from persons in detention are given top priority. Additionally, the processing   system has been streamlined to minimise delays. Further, there is a mechanism In the   Migration Act and Regulations to allow me to lzonsider the release of individuals from 

  immigration detention in special and extenuzting circumstances. For example, this mechanism   may be used In th: case of some Individuals who ale under 18 or over 75, or l+ho have hca;~lrh 

  concerns whit h c:lnnot be addressed adequately while in detention,” Mr Ruddock said.   The Attorney-General, Mr Williams, said, “The Government welcomes the CommIttee’:, view   that the system of detention is not necessarily in breach of international human rights Ia;v   However, after 

  glvlng serious and careful consideration to the other views expressed by the   Committee, the Government does not accept that the detention of Mr A was 111 contravention   of the Covenant. nor that the provision for revie1.v of the lawfulness of that detention hi 

  Australian courts was Inadequate. Consequently, the Government does not accept thr: VICLI’ (;f 

  the Committee th;lt compensation should be ,lald to Mr A.   “The Commiltee IS not a court, and dots not render bIndIng dcclslons or ludgment~ It 

  provides VICES and opinions, and It IS up to :ountrlt:s to cioclde whether they ag~-ee \\lth tho\c   views and how tht:\, w111 respond to them.” hlr- W~ll~arn~ s:~ld.   See IIREOC‘. abo:e n 29, at, 55-O 

  12 

  of detention or imprisonment shall be treated in a humane manner and with respect for 

  the inherent dignity of the human person”. These provisions have been used by   HREOC as the basis for its own Immigration Ljetention Centre Guidelines. Once   again, the Commission’s reviews of the centres in (operation suggest that Australia has   not always exhibited “international best practice” in its treatment of immigration   detainees.j’ 

  4.3 Costs of Detention and related compliance matters 

  One of the most interesting aspects of Australia’s immigration detention regime is the   apparent breadth of‘ community support for the measures taken and the lack of public   discussion about the worth of the scheme. The financial cost of detaining asylum   seekers has been estimated at $170 a day, per detainee. In the last budget, no less than   $130 million d o ars was allocated to the imrnigratjon portfolio to cover detention and 11   associated compliance costs. With a detention population barely exceeding 4,000 in a   given year, the financial cost of the detentior;l regime is exorbitant, whichever way the   figures are presented. By all accounts 

  the human cost of keeping anxious and 

  brutalised   psychosis4 !f   eople locked up for long periods is also great. The documented cases of   represent only the tip of the iceberg. If we are to release the detainees 

  into the community at the end of the refugee determination process, questions need to   be asked as to whether the infliction of such   damage is in the national interest. 

  4.4 Alternatives to Mandatory Detention 

  In 1993 - 1994, a number of non-government organisations around Australia met to   devise and then endorse a   Charter of Minimum Requirements for Legislation Relating   to eth Detention qf14sylum Seekers. This Charter became the basis for a model for the   detention of asylum seekers developed by the HF!EOC.43 In summary, this model   envisages: 

  0 Detention being, used as a last resort, to be used and permitted to continue only   where:   - the identity and expressed intention of a person have not been established to a   reasonable degree of certainty;   - the person poses a demonstrable threat to national security and public order;   - the person fails or refuses to undergo health screening;   - there is a demonstrable likelihood that the person will abscond; or   - a person who has been granted a bridgin, 0 Gsa breaches the conditions of the 

  release and f’alls to show good cause for such breach.; 

  - ---- 

  See IIREOC Ilurnan Rights Commlssloner’s Report No.10 Report of an Inquiry Into 

  Complaints of Acts or Prxtices Inconsistent With or Contrary to Human Rlghth 111 an 

  Immlgratlon Dercntlon Centre (29 June 2000; ; and IIREOC, 1998-99 Jiev~ew of Imm~gr~~tlon   Detention Cenlres The latter report details the flndl;lgs of the Human Rights (‘ommlssloner’s   inspections of four immlgrrition detention centrcs In 1998-99: Villawood in Sydney. 

  Maribyrnong in klelbourne, Port Iledland in WA and Perth WA. It evaluates condltlons   against the Irnmlg *ation Detention Gwdellnts and make\ ;I number of findings that f‘urthcr   Improvements should be implementd. It IS (1 follo\l~ up to the first report, IIREOC‘. ab~,\,e n   29.   For ;t discussion of this 1ssut3, see I> S~love a ICI R I3ecker 

  “‘The I’s~ct~do~lc‘d ;1nd 

  I’sychosocd Et‘t~i ts ot I’rolongzd Iktentlon”. III M (‘dock (cd), above n 15, :it ch 10   See the discussion Lit I If

  l Detained asylum seekers having unrestricted access to independent legal advice 

  and representation and free and independent and qualified interpreters to assist   with the provision of such advice; 

  l Regular review of the detention of an asylum seeker by an independent, impartial   and competent tribunal or court, with leave to apply where there has been a   relevant change in circumstances; and 

  l Centres used for the detention of asylum seekers should be located in or near   major metropolitan centres to ensure proper access for detainees to support   services and facilities. 

  The alternative detention model envisages the creation of centres to operate as short-   term holding centres, from which asylum seekers would be released into the   community on bridging visas either on their own recognisance or with the sponsorship   of a community organisation. The HREOC model favours a presumption in favour of   release for all persons detained for 90 days; required reconsideration of a person’s   detention every 30 days and an independent review at the end of 90 days. It also   envisages the creation of open detention centres, with hostel like accommodation   similar to that used throughout Europe for asylum seekers.44 

  5 THE POLITICS OF DETENTION -SOME CONCLUDING REMARKS 

  If Australians are beqginning to ask why the asylum seekers in detention are so   unhappy, there is still a remarkable reluctance in the public discourse to question the   present regime for the mandatory detention of asylum seekers. The policy costs a   fortune and does not appear to deter people from coming to Australia without a valid   visa for the purposes of seeking asylum. The regime may well constitute a breach of   Australia’s international legal obligations in both its form and in the operation of the 

  zentres. Yet both sides of politics are committed to the concept of mandatory   detention. For the Labor party, author of the scheme introduced in 1992, the blind   adherence may evince a reluctance to admit that any form of compulsory detention is   flawed. For the government, the policy is plainly popularist in its leanings, drawing 

  from a reservoir of fear and hostility towards migrants generally and illegal migrants   In particular. The official response to asylurn seekers also seems to be part of a more   Deneral move away from engagement with international law and with the institutions a   of the United Nations. Witness to this is the Prime Minister’s announcement in late 

  4ugust 2000 to downgrade Australia’s co-operation with the very UN Committees   I:hat have been voicing concerns about Australia’s laws and practices in areas   ,rtffecting Aboriginal Australians and asylum seekers.45 

  The frustrating aspect of the detention debate is the almost complete circuitry   Ixtween the discourse of fear and distrust and the rhetoric emanating from both the   :  source of the alarmist language: witness the furore generated in late 1999 with the   xrival of the Middle E&tern boat asylum seekers. When Minister Ruddock wxned   of “whole villages.’ uprooting and coming to Australia; and of the need to guard   ;rgainst terrorists in the cohort of asylum seekers, the media responded bvith txnner 

  ‘4   -5 

  __- 

  See id, at 253. 

  See Joint media f

  Multicultural At’falrs , 20 AlIgllSt 2000. FA97. 

  headlines and frantic sessions on talkback radio.46 

  A perusal of the Minister’s press 

  releases from this period reveals a liberal sprinkling of statements invoking the   opposition to co-operate with the government in an hour of national emergency. 47 

  Not only did the opposition support the measures introduced by the government, it 

  joined in the general rhetoric with florid and evocative language of its own.48 Of   course, Australia as we know it di.d not come to an end. We weren’t all “rooned” as   the Banjo Patterson’s .leremiah-like Hanrahe.n was wont to warn so many years ago:49 

  In fact, the policy of mandatory detention does ruin lives. Debate may be enjoined   about the adult asylum seekers, some of whom can be very complex and damaged   individuals. However detaining little children in a one-in, all-in concentration style   camp is to me totally indefensible - a blight on the national conscience. There is   another reality lost. in the insensible cacophony of the public discourse about these   people stealing the places of “genuine” refugees. This is the reality that some of the   lawyers and officials assigned to the Iraqi and Afghani asylum seekers have faced in   counselling sessions organised to help 

  them cope with the stories they have heard.50 

  What are the chances of moving any go\emme:nt to move to a regime of open   detention for asylum seekers? Almost non-existent, it would seem, without a   concentrated and sustained campaign to replace misinformation with a more balanced   view of the facts. One might ask how any campaign can succeed while those who   speak with most authority perpetuate myths., spouGng rhetoric calculated to generate   rather than allay fear. In the short term, it is my hope that the overweening costs of   the detention regime might encourage politicians to chip at the edges of the policy.   This can be done by reducing the numbers held in detention through speedier   processing - and by eliminating altogether the presence of either children or family   groups with children in the detention population. 

  ITor II dlscusslon of the media reporting of Mr Ruddock’s statements, see D C’orlett, above nj. 

  49 

  See the listing iit http://ww~v.Immi.mjnister.~c~v.au. 

  ‘0 

  See, for example, J Koutsoukls “C‘    November 199’1.   See B Patterson “Hanrahan’s Lament”.   ‘I‘hls information sas provided to the author by contract lawyers 

  Op~~tJJlg at botll LV()C)JII~J~~ 

  and CurtIn IRI’Cs. 

