---
title: "East Timor and its implications: an American view."
date: "2000-07-05"
creators:
  - "Paal, Douglas H."
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Timor"
  - "United States"
  - "Political violence"
  - "Annexation"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Intelligence services"
  - "Peacekeeping operations"
  - "Military preparedness assessment"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211200961
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DUT26%22
---

  East Tinzo~- and its implications: 

  an American view   D0zlgla.s H. Paal   Presideipzt, l4sia Paczjk Policy Center, Washington, D.C. 

  First, I would like to express appreciation to the New Zealand Institute and the   United States-New Zealand Council for their invitation and support in arranging   my participation in this conference. On a serious note, I would like to take a 

  moment in the context of this conference to remember my friend, Sander Thones,   a correspondent for The Financial Times, someone who loved Indonesia. He was   murdered by the Timorese militias in the days after the independence referendurn.   Today- I would like to touch on the history and background to the events in East 

  Timor, look at the consequences, and then examine the implications for the United   States, the region, and New Zealand.   First, a look at the context of the history of East Timor’s incorporation into   Indonesia. After the bloody events of 1965’s year of living dangerously in Indonesia,   the United States welcomed the stability introduced under the regime established   by former President Suharto. While resisting the expansion of Communism in   Southeast Asia, Washington was not inclined to stir troubles with Jakarta’s methods   of rule. When Suharto incorporated East Timor in 1976, again there was little   inclination to object. The United States was obsessed with new fears, 

  accompanying the fall of Phnom Penh and Saigon to Communism. Portugal was in   radical and uncertain hands, and its rule had left East Timor seemingly with little   wherewitlhal to govern itself. Finally, the Secretary of State was of a pessimistic and   conservative bent. 

  The policy of not challenging East Timor’s annexation continued for years.   Virtually only a small group in Congress, many with connections to Portuguese-   speaking ethnic centres and Catholics, took a continuing interest in East Timor’s   fate. The Dili massacre, coming as the Cold War was drawing to a close, raised the   .profile of East Timor in bilateral relations between Jakarta and Washington. This 

  corresponded with growing concerns about what we now call KKN, Indonesian   initials for corruption, cronyism, and nepotism. The trusted Defence Minister,   General Benny Moerdani, challenged Suharto on KKN, and was dispatched from   office for his affront, again alerting Americans to growing problems. The reliable   “mafia” of University of California-trained economists was also edged aside,   deepening the impending crisis. Relations between the United States and   Indonesian militaries grew troubled and unsustainable, despite continued efforts on   the 1cJS side to find ways of staying in touch with the ABRI commanders. 

  With the plunge of Indonesia into economic crisis in 1997-98, U.S. policy came   to be viewed through two prisms. Washington wanted action on economic reforms   by Jakarta, strongly supporting, if not inspiring, the International Monetary Fund’s   prescriptions. Second, the US sought a resolution of the status of East Timor. 

  76 

  East Timor and its implications: an American vim 

  Simultaneously, the context of America’s foreign policy vision was changing.   National thinking, if there is such a thing, changed on the matter of how to manage   the explosion of sub-national tensions in the .post-Cold War era. Early 

  humanitarian interventions in Haiti and Somalia were abject failures. Today Haiti   is much the sa.me as it was in 1895, with the addition of machine guns and satellite   TV Kosovo left no sense of clarity or satisfaction.   Recently the American scholar Walter Russell Mead offered a new insight into 

  this American discomfort. He described a tradition or bias in American foreign   policy, which he names Jacksonianism, after the populist general and president   Andrew Jackson. He contrasts this with Jeffersonianism, which tries to abjure   foreign activity, and Wilsonianism, which idealistically seeks to remake the world for . 

  democracy. Jacksonians anger slowly, but when riled, seek overwhelming victory.   They pay little attention to foreign affairs, until they have no choice. Then they   bring a high moralism to their mission. Americans prefer clear-cut adversaries and   total commitment to victory, rather than grey shades of success. 

  In my experience, no American or friendly government can afford to ignore this   insight. To lead the American people too often to the well of humanitarian   intervention is to invite a reluctance to engage at all. This phenomenon is reflected   in this year’s presidential election. Of the four majoir candidates in the two major   parties, none promised to sustain the pace of hurnanitarian interventions. All   promised restraint, and today’s leaders in the race ha.ve sought to return America’s   focus to better management of great power relations. 

  The E,ast Timor crisis, in this context, arrived on American TV screens as   somethin! ; relmote, appalling, and as one crisis too many. Ironically, the 

  preparedness for the vote in East Timor by working level policy officials in Australia   and the LJS had been detailed and effective. Australia was prepared to commit,   together with ‘New Zealand, the bulk of the ground forces required. The United   States, playing to its strengths, would provide transport, technical assistance, and   intelligence. _ Yet serious breaches in effective political level communication   occurred. Just as the Australians made their largest commitment of forces in   decades, the words from the lips of senior American officials - as opposed to the   deeds of the US armed forces - suggested Australia was on its own. In a sense this   reflects what the most engaged US Senator in foreign affairs once said to me: “Why,   I often go days without thinking about Indonesia.” The US, with about ten percent   of its forces deployed on humanitarian and peacekeeping missions, felt 

  overstretched and balked at helping Australia put a third of its forces in the field.   Prime Minister Howard, meanwhile, engaged in rhetoric that left him under   criticism at home. In the end, APEC leaders meeting in Auckland helped put things   right. Meeting with the region’s leaders, American officials gained perspective and   brought the Administration’s rhetoric in line with policy reality. So, what are the   consequences of this experience with the East Timor crisis and related crises? 

  The United States, under the Clinton Administration, will not restore the broad   range of relations with Indonesia until the fate of Timorese refugees and the past   abuses by the Indonesian military are resolved. Even those who fear that Indonesia 

  77 

  may drift further from American influence due to a lack of senior relations with the   military recognise this bedrock political reality. Strategically, the US is likely to   focus more on its allies and great power relations. Washington will expect its allies   and regional partners to take the lead in managing regional crises. What Australia 

  and Ne-w Zealand did in East Timor was what we had hoped the Europeans would   have done in the successive crises in the forrner Yugoslavia. It has raised 

  expectations, as noted here earlier, that Australia and New Zealand are the   responsible powers if interventions are required in the Solomons or Fiji.   This is not an abrogation of responsibility by the US. It reflects the practical   reality that the US cannot play the role of global policeman in every crisis, every   time. To do so would rapidly erode popular will to participate in resolving any crisis,   short of a direct threat to American vital interests. It also reflects the rnaterial reality 

  that the gap in capabilities and technology between the US and its allies is growing   rapidlc Increasingly it is becoming clear that a new division of labour is required.   That is, a recognition that the US will increasingly focus on its strengths in lift,   firepower, range, speed, lethalitv and intelligence. Each of these capabilities is 

  growing exponentially more exiensive and it is difficult for our allies to keep   abreast. America’s allies and security partners will necessarily need to restructure   themselves to take advantage of the revolution in m.ilitary affairs.   It will be unrealistic, however, for any to replicate the full range of developments   in all military spheres. Tough choices will have to be made. Recently, both Australia   and New Zealand have issued tentative policy papers that seem to reflect the East   Timor experience and to be preparing their publics for new requirements for 

  military spending. This is on the whole salutary, and in fact it is recognising reality.   I must say, however, that the Australian reevaluation appears on first reading to be   decidedly more serious than New Zealand’s. Both armed services are confronted   with block obsolescence of their most advanced systems. This is no time for mere 

  political :shadow play or symbolism, though the general atmosphere of detente in   the post-Cold War world encourages just that. To be realistic, if troops are to be   placed in the field, they need flak jackets and night vision goggles, which Australia   was forced to draw from American stocks. They need to be fed and watered, which   Australia and New Zealand could not do adequately. They require modern   communications equipment, and means of rapid mobility, both lagging. New   Zealand, whose forces arrived in East Timor personally well equipped and trained, 

  lacked the ve.hicles, communications equipment, and capacity for their own air   cover.   US intelligence performed an enormously under-appreciated role. A relative   handful of technical personnel with the right equipment were able to identify where   the trouble was and forces were required. Equally importantly, they could identify   where the trouble wasn’t, forestalling unnecessary deployments and the dispersal of   vital capabilities. 

  It is now widely acknowledged that the gap in capabilities, particularly in the   field of intelligence, is making New Zealand’s armed forces more a burden than a   boon to joint operations with Australia. Sustaining interoperability, with New   Zealand effectively out of its alliance with the United States, is increasingly a task 

  78 

  East Timor and its implications: an American view 

  Australia must manage on its own, in addition to its many other functions. The   departure of New Zealand from its intimate connections with US intelligence   imposes a strain on Australia, which prizes and must protect its reliable intelligence   relationship with Washington. New Zealand, to me, seems to take Australia’s   willingness to make up for its deficiencies too much for granted. ,4ustralia and New 

  Zealand’s, military professionals deserve credit for continuing to try to make   cooperation work under adverse political circumstances.   Now, should the efforts of Australia and New Zealand be put to persuading the   US itself to fill in the gaps in their capabilities ? The answer quite plainly is “no.”   The US faces a massive reconsideration of its own defences. The US next year will 

  confront the challenge of simultaneously crafting a nuclear strategy that will address   further st:rategic arms reductions and efforts to engage China, India and Pakistan in   new regimes. Important decisions are due on national missile defense (NMD) 

  and 

  the implications of those decisions deserve extended domestic and international   debate. The IJS historic stress on military readiness is likely to yield increasingly to   an emphasis on research and development and the revolution in military affairs   NW- 

  In this context, Australia and New Zealand will be expected to tend to their own   military requirements, providing increasingly their own “in theatre” air cover,   transportation and logistics. Where the US becomes involved, in lift into theatres,   in intelligence and communications, America will expect greater skill in 

  interoperability with its coalition partners, an area manifestly challenging New   Zealand and even straining Australia’s relatively small defence budget.   Finally, a word is required about the roles of allies and partners of the US in   maintaining strategic stability, not just the allocation of responsibilities to deal with   regional crises. As the US contemplates the four most important international   hotspots in world - Korea, Taiwan, South Asia, and the South China Sea - it is 

  realistic about what it can expect in the event of military confrontation. Washington   will expect pa.rticipation, but is prepared for contributions of only token elements.   This reflects another political reality, which is the expectation of the American   people that they will not have to sacrifice alone to deal with remote Asia’s problems   without the re:gion’s support. 

  It is often the fact that opinion develops in this region that the United States is   trying to duck ‘t 1 s regional responsibilities by focusing on antique strategic concerns   long after the (Cold War has ended. Accompanying this is a perception that strategic   stability is not so great a concern for today’s partners. Let me assert flatly that   American efforts to manage and ensure strategic stability, however inadequate they   may have been recently, are vital to the peace and prosperity US allies and friends 

  enjoy today. Would the internet explode still if governments hostile to each other   cut the links? Would global trade buoy even backward looking leftwing 

  governments if wartime fissures cut trade routes?   It seerns to me there is a need for governments to make their populations more   aware of the connection between preserving strategic stability and the peace and the   prosperity they enjoy. Governments have a responsibility to educate their publics 

  Douglns H. Pad 

  79 

  about the requirement to contribute to the maintenance of an overwhelming   intelligence and military capability that forestalls choices by potential adversaries to   upend the current situation.   Finally, we have focused on East Timor these two days. The conference 

  organisersI deserve credit for their efforts to plumb the lessons of the Timor crisis.   Let me conclude by reminding you that East Timor was only about one of a plague   of such crises in the past decade. The high tensions and high stability of the Cold   War, as both former Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger and The Economist   have long noted, have definitely yielded to the relatively low tensions among the big   powers and significantly reduced regional stability. 

  Australia and New Zealand did more right than wrong in East Timor. Their   sacrifices deserve praise and recollection. They compared well with their European   counterparts, who long stumbled in the former Yugos;lavia. But we must learn from   what went less well and redress shortcomings before the next regional crisis or next 

  international hotspot explodes.. 

