---
title: "Bi-partisan negative policies on refugees to blame for Tampa crisis."
date: "2001-08-29"
creators:
  - "Theophanous, Andrew"
source: "Office of THEOPHANOUS, DR ANDREW, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227805
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OFU46%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE

 BI-PARTISAN NEGATIVE POLICIES ON REFUGEES TO BLAME FOR TAMPA CRISIS

 “The negative policies towards refugees of the Coalition Government and Labor Opposition  have  created  the  circumstances  which  have  led  to  the  increasing stream of asylum-seekers to Australia and the Tampa Crisis”, Independent MP Dr Andrew Theophanous said today.

 “As  we  can  see  from  an  analysis  from  people  on  board  the  Tampa,  an  increasing proportion  of  asylum-seekers  are  the  relatives  of  refugees  already  accepted  by Australia’s  determination  system.  However,  the  Temporary  Protection  Visa  (TPV) policy, which I was the only MHR to argue against in 1999, specifically forbids the reunification  of  genuine  refugees  with  their  wives  and  children.  This  is  despite  the fact that our own Tribunal recognises that these refugees, and their relatives overseas, have been subjected to persecution and torture.

 “Furthermore, because it is now well-known that family reunion will not be allowed, entire families are risking the life-threatening journey to Australia - including young children.  This  policy  of  “deterrence”  has  actually  served  to  inspire  more  asylum-seekers to use such channels to either reunite with their family member in Australia, or to ensure that their whole family arrives together in the first instance.

 “The  Howard  Government  should  adopt  a  more  compassionate  and humanitarian policy. It should immediately change the provision in the TPV so that the wives and children of accepted refugees can be sponsored to reunite with them in Australia.

 “The  Government’s  incoherent  approach  to  the  Tampa  Crisis,  which  has  led  to overwhelming international criticism, could have easily been dealt with by focussing on our humanitarian obligations, rather than relying on loopholes in international law. Obviously  the  people  on  the  Tampa  should  not  be  allowed  to  suffer  any  longer. Morality  dictates  that  we  must  admit  and  process  them  as  soon  as  possible.  If  they pass our tough criteria for refugee status, we then have an obligation to accept them. If they do not, then the Government has other channels at its disposal.

 “Both the Howard Government and the Beazley Opposition are motivated purely by a desire to win the media war as to who can be toughest on refugees. It is a disgrace that it  must  be  left  to  minor  parties  and  Independents  to  echo  the  international  criticism and seek an humanitarian solution”, Dr Theophanous concluded.

 Media Inquiries: Josh Bihary 02 6277 4230.

 29 August 2001

