---
title: "Beazley finally admits his US style Coast Guard is a con."
date: "2001-08-30"
creators:
  - "Reith, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR DEFENCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227861
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QTH86%22
---

  30 August 2001 

  THE HON PETER RElTH MP 

  MINISTER FOR DEFENCE 

  Leader of the House of Representatives 

  MEDIA RELEASE 

  MIN 326/01 

  BEAZLEY FINALLY ADMITS HIS US STYLE COAST GUARD IS A CON 

  After months of insisting that the problem of illegal people smuggling would be solved by  swapping Australia’s Coastwatch for a US style Coast Guard, Kim Beazley has today  admitted that he and his shadow Ministers have been misleading the Australian people. 

  Under sustained questioning from reporters at a media conference in Canberra today Kim  Beazley admitted his proposal for a US style Coast Guard to replace Coastwatch is NOT the  solution to the illegal people smuggling problem. He said: 

  “A Coast Guard is not a resolution to this problem.”  Kim Beazley, Media Conference, Parliament House August 30, 2001 

  Kim Beazley must believe the Australian people have extremely short memories. 

  Less than a fortnight ago he said: 

  “When are they going to get real and put in a Coast Guard?“ .... “There are a lot of  people entering this country illegally who don’t get caught. What we need now is a  much better border protection effort.. . “  Kim Beazley, doorstop Parliament House August 19, 2001 

  The Shadow spokesman, Stephen Martin, has repeatedly made the same claims - his latest  just three days ago: 

  “The unprecedented number of boat people arriving at Christmas Island indicates the  absolute necessity for an Australian Coast guard to be implemented. ”  Stephen Martin - Media Release, August 27, 2001 

  I have repeatedly explained to the Labor Party that the facts just do not support their  misleading pronouncements on the ability of a US style Coast Guard to solve this problem. 

  The Australian Coastwatch service is a highly efficient and highly effective force. Its success  rate for detection of illegal arrivals to our shores is 98.6%. 

  It is gratifying that the Opposition has finally admitted that it has been deliberately misleading  the public. 

  I trust the Opposition Leader will also now admit the he costed a US style Coast Guard when  he was responsible Minister in 1984 and found at $2 billion (in 2001 dollars) it was not viable  and unnecessary. 

  For further information contact: Ross Hampton 04 79 484 095 

  Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600. Tel: (02) 6277 7800 Fax (02) 6273 41 18 

