---
title: "Papua: autonomy or independence: some strategic implications."
date: "2001-11-15"
creators:
  - "Maurice, Richard"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Regional administration"
  - "Papua"
  - "Independence"
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Overseas item"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232026
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/J4I66%22
---

  PAPUA: AUTONOMY OR INDEPENDENCE 

  SOME STRATEGIC IMPLICATIONS 

  RICHARD MAURICE 

  THE BASIS FOR PAPUAN   INDEPENDENCE DEMANDS 

  The root causes of Papuan demands for 

  independence derive from various interrelated   issues of injustice, oppression, human rights abuse   by Indonesian security forces and fear of being 

  marginalised by migrants in all facets of political,   economic, commercial, and social life. A 

  combination of government-sponsored   transmigration and voluntary migration from other   Indonesian islands has witnessed a demographic   transformation in the province such that Papuans   feel that they are headed towards becoming a 

  minority. Increased migrant inflow continues to 

  alter this demographic imbalance in favour of 

  migrants. A similar imbalance exists in economic   terms. Government assistance and development aid   has largely benefited the migrant community at the   expense of Papuans - 80 per cent of whom remain 

  below the poverty line. For most Papuans 

  disenchanted with their ‘second class’ status, 

  independence is the only solution. The injustice,   marginalisation and years of repression and human   rights abuse remain irreconcilable in the context   of an Indonesian territory. 

  PROSPECTS FOR INDEPENDENCE? 

  But the Papuan struggle for independence is 

  complicated by a number of factors. It lacks a 

  coherent and unified strategy. At least three key   independence organisations (The Papuan Presidium   Council, the Organisasi Papua Merdeka or OPM   and the West New Guinea National Congress) 

  disagree on how independence should be attained.   Not all F%puans support independence. Some see   the benefits of autonomy as a realistic alternative.   Internal division, factionalism and traditional tribal, 

  linguistic and cultural differences continue to 

  prevent the emergence of any effective coordinated   Papuan position. John Rumbiak, from the Institute 

  for Human Rights Study and Advocacy regards   ‘internal reconciliation among its 250 tribal groups’   as the greatest challenge facing Papuans.’ 

  Second, Papuans lack the influence and 

  international support necessary to pressure Jakarta   for a referendum. The armed wing of the OPM has   a limited military capability. Indonesia’s vastly 

  superior military and police will continue to contain   Papuans who resort to armed struggle. 

  Internationally, there is little encouragement for the   Papuan cause. The major powers, regional 

  governments in the ASEAN states, South Pacific   countries, Australia and New Zealand support   Indonesia’s territorial integrity and claim to 

  sovereignty over lrian Jaya. They regard the dispute   as an internal matter for Indonesia to resolve 

  peacefully. The doctrines of ‘state sovereignty’ and   ‘non-intervention’ prevail and continue to obstruct   Papuan aspirations for independence. 

  Most significantly, however, the Indonesian 

  government remains firmly opposed to 

  independence. It has pledged to uphold national   unity and will not contemplate Papuan secession.   President Megawati, a conservative nationalist, with   support of the military is predicted to take a hard 

  line with secessionists. The Indonesian military of   course, remains strongly opposed to Papuan 

  independence. For the military, lrian Jaya was won   at great cost and sacrifice, and in the Indonesian   national conscience its liberation was a significant   event in consolidating the Republic. 

  As Richard Chauvel maintains, amongst 

  Indonesians there is no nationalist rationale for a   lesser Indonesia - minus Aceh, West Papua, West   Timor or Ambon - at least on ethno-nationalist   grounds. Indonesia’s twelve-year struggle against 

  Dutch colonialism to ‘regain’ lrian Jaya ‘was as 

  much a passionate national campaign precisely   because West Papua was ethnically and culturally   different from most of the rest of Indonesia.” It was 

  51 

  a struggle as much to demonstrate that Indonesia 

  was not based on a concept of common cultural,   ethnic, religious or historical heritage. Along this   line of argument, there is no fallback position for 

  Indonesian nationalists. 

  Finally, the demographic transformation of lrian Jaya   during the last forty years remains a major 

  complicating factor. The ethnic mix of Rpuans and   migrant settlers is gradually approaching equal   proportions. In major urban centres and towns 

  migrants are in the majority. In the capital, Jayapura,   they comprise 70 per cent of the population. 

  Migrants dominate most commercial activity 

  throughout the province and matters of government   and administration. They exercise power and 

  control over most aspects of decision making in 

  the province’s affairs. In 2001, much of lrian Jaya   has become particularly ‘Indonesian’. This 

  complicates Pdpuan claims that their interests and   those of the province are one and the same. 

  CONSEQUENCES OF INDEPENDENCE 

  Any realistic proposition for independence must   therefore accommodate the political demands and   aspirations of both ethnic communities: Papuans   and migrant settlers. Support for an independent   state based on Papuan ethno-nationalist demands   can no longer be sustained given the changed 

  demographics. This transformation of lrian Jaya   presents Jakarta with a grave dilemma. If it 

  accommodates Papuan nationalist demands for   independence, it will marginaiise the significant   migrant population. Papuan leaders face the same   dilemma of alienating much of the migrant 

  community in their pursuit of independence. 

  Any short-term transition to independence that   accommodates bpuan nationalist aspirations but   not those of ihe migrant community is likely to be 

  violent and bloody. Any process that threatens   migrant interests - such as a referendum - will 

  fiercely contested. If forced to choose between   autonomy and independence, many can be 

  expected to choose the former. Deep resentment,   racial tensions and hatred could lead to 

  considerable communal violence verging on civil   war. Acts of genocide, lawlessness, and destruction   of urban infrastructure cannot be discounted. A 

  serious humanitarian crisis of refugees and 

  displaced persons could also develop. 

  The structure of resistance to independence is in   place across lrian Jaya. It includes constitutionally   formed ‘National reserves’ -within the framework   of the 1982 Law of national Defence -and other 

  paramilitary groups and militia forces. Pro- 

  integration militias from the immigrant community   have been consolidating their position since events   in East Timor. The migrant community can be 

  expected to put up some resistance, although it is   unlikely to be as effective or organised as militias   in East Timor. 

  Any international efforts to promote or force a short-   term transition to independence could meet strong   ‘local’ resistance. This resistance is likely to take   on a ‘national’ dimension as support from 

  Indonesian military, security forces and the wider   community widens. Only a long-term transition   modelled on the lines of the Matignon Accord 

  might prove less violent and destructive.3 

  International intervention could stir nationalist,   even xenophobic, reaction across the archipelago   to a much greater extent than it did in East Timor.   In a confrontation with the international 

  community, Indonesia’s sovereignty and national   pride will be at stake. Foreign intervention to 

  rearrange the politics of one of its provinces is likely   to be viewed as an attack on Indonesia.lhe political   implications are serious. 

  International humanitarian intervention‘along the   lines of East Timor would need to be carefully 

  considered. The operation would need to be at a 

  scale necessary to support numerous tasks such as:   the maintenance of law and order, establishment   of stable conditions for a referendum, technical   assistance to the referendum process, disarming   and disbandment of militia forces, and 

  humanitarian support to refugees or displaced   persons. The vastness of lrian Jaya, its considerable   physical obstacles, lack of communications and 

  infrastructure, and harsh terrain present additional   challenges. International intervention could also   fuel and intensify the conflict as some analysts 

  suggest it did in East Timor.’ Perceptions of United   Nations (UN) partiality could also exacerbate   existing tensions between pro-integration and pro-   independencegroups. UN personnel and facilities 

  52 

  could also become targetsof pro-integration action. 

  Against the backdrop of Indonesian nationalist   reaction, the ability of a humanitarian mission to 

  fulfil its mandate cannot be predicted with certainty.   In these circumstances, a cost-benefit analysis of   humanitarian intervention would need to be 

  carefully calculated. 

  Expressions of support for a zero-sum, ‘quick fix’   outcome to the conflict in lrian Jaya should be 

  carefully considered. The consequences could be   disastrous for the region, both in terms of bilateral   relations with Indonesia and in terms of the scale   and success of international intervention. Prudent   strategic planners would do well to be aware of 

  their implications. 

  CONSEQUENCES OF SPECIAL AUTONOMY 

  In contrast, special autonomy avoids the ‘zero-sum’   political outcome of a short-term transition to 

  independence. In demanding a compromise of 

  Papuan political aspirations, the implementation   process is likely to be less violent and destructive.   By not threatening the interests of migrants, it will   reduce the likelihood of ethnic conflict and may 

  lead to a more peaceful resolution. Special 

  autonomy also has the potential to redress many   grievances at the heart of Papuan independence   demands. 

  The Special Autonomy Bill passed on 22 October   2001 could substantially improve conditions for   Papuans. Even though the Papuan Presidium   Council and other more radical nationalist groups   have rejected it, the Bill makes considerable 

  concessions by returning a greater share of the 

  revenue to the province, and establishing a new   Upper House giving Papuans a greater political   voice. Approval to fly the Papuan flag and Jakarta’s   recognition of the name ‘Papua’ (in addition to lrian   Jaya) are other concessions that may dampen 

  secessionist demands. 

  Yet the Bill fails to address the issue of atrocities   and human rights violations by Indonesian security   forces. It does not hold the TNI or police 

  accountable for past atrocities and killings. More   than 30 per cent of lrian Jaya’s Pdpuan population   is said to have perished in pursuit of independence 

  since 1963. For Indonesia’s countless acts of 

  atrocity, the autonomy package suggests no sense   of guilt, remorse or apology. This remains a 

  fundamental limitation of the Bill. 

  Consequently, there is little incentive to change the   methods of Indonesian security practice. Since   passage of the Bill, hundreds of Papuans remain in   custody without being charged. In the week 

  following its announcement, five F$puans died in   custody in Manokwari prison. Other Papuans in 

  the prison - shot in May 2001- still needed 

  medical attention for their wounds, five months 

  later. Little seems to have changed in the approach   and attitude of security forces. Implementation of   special autonomy could fall into disarray if the 

  military and police are not kept in check. The 

  benefits of special autonomy might be welcomed,   but they will not temper separatist demands unless   TNI and police brutality, killings and human rights   abuse are stopped. 

  Whether special autonomy leads to a ‘burnout’ of   l%puan nationalism -time will tell. Passage of the   autonomy law is an important first development,   but much will depend on Jakarta’s commitment to 

  implement it. A demonstration of this commitment   will only be evident in the detail of the 

  implementation legislation to follow. Commencing   in January 2002, implementation of special 

  autonomy will need to be critically monitored. 

  Nevertheless, support for special autonomy should   be a key objective for countries in the region. Some   are already supporting the implementation of 

  Indonesia’s program of regional autonomy. 

  Singapore has offered a management training   course for Indonesia’s thirty governors and 500 

  mayors at the Singapore Institute of Commerce   (SIC).6 Likewise, regional countries could support   similar activities in lrian Jaya. Training in conflict   resolution, environmental management, and local   government and public service management 

  techniques will be critical during the 

  implementation stage of special autonomy. 

  Management of the substantially increased revenue   to the province will pose a significant challenge   for lrian Jaya’s administrators. Regional neighbours   could facilitate the province’s smooth transition to   autonomy in many of these areas. 

  53 

  ~TRATECIC ,,PDAlf 2001 

  Direct promotion of trade and commercial activities 

  between lrian Jaya and neighbouring countries 

  could be exploited in the context of ‘special’ 

  autonomy. The climate of democratic reform and   decentralisation in Indonesia presents an 

  opportunity to do so. Under special autonomy, lrian   Jaya could become more active in the conduct of   its own ‘foreign’ affairs within the region.This could   pave the way for various multi-track initiatives 

  between the provincial government and national,   state and territorial governments of neighbouring   countries. This could be extended to bilateral 

  initiatives between cities and towns in lrian Jaya 

  NOTES 

  John Rumbiak, ‘Update on Human Rights and   Politics in Rpua’, Friday, 14 September, Special   Indonesia Study Group Seminar at the Australian   National University. 

  Richard Chauvel, ‘December   1 Merdeka? 

  Prospects for West Pdpuan Independence or   autonomy in Wahid’s Indonesia’, West Papua: 

  fast Present Future, ACFOA Development Issues   Rper No 8, February 2000, op cit., p. 6. 

  The Matignon Accord between France and New 

  Caledonia stipulated a 1 O-year transition with a   referendum at the end of that term to decide 

  whether the people of New Caledonia would 

  choose to stay within France or become 

  independent. 

  Humanitarian intervention is defined as the use 

  of military force to stop or affect the course of a 

  and those in regional countries; between business 

  and community associations, clubs and institutions;   and through individual people-to-people 

  exchanges. 

  For Papuans, such initiatives could rectify the 

  imbalance in many areas of administration and 

  governance, developmental aid, provision of 

  community services, education, and health care.   In the interest of F%puans and the region more 

  broadly, special autonomy should be given every   chance to succeed. 

  violent dispute in which significant numbers of 

  civilians are being victimised. It necessarily 

  excludes interventions in which military resources   are used in the aftermath of natural disasters. The   editor of The National Interest, Adam Carfinkle,   offers this definition. See Adam Garfinkle, 

  ‘Humanitarian Intervention Strategy and 

  Preventive Diplomacy’ in Orbis: A journal of 

  World AfLairs, 

  Vol. 45 Number 4, Fall 2001, p. 

  503. 

  From an Indonesian perspective,   UNAMET’s (The 

  United Nations Mission in East Timor) apparent   partiality towards pro-independence groups was   one cause of increased tension on the ground. 

  At an estimated cost of S$SOO,OOO, it is 

  considered a good investment.Yeoh En-Lai, ‘530   Indonesian Officials to Undergo Training in 

  Singapore’, Straits Times, 10 September 2001. 

  . 

  54 

