---
title: "UN system important for indigenous peoples."
date: "2001-03-21"
creators:
  - "ATSIC"
source: "ATSIC"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211222008
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2JX36%22
---

 Return to Media - Return to Media Releases List   

 Media

 Media Release

 UN system important for Indigenous peoples

  

 21 March 2001

  

 Withdrawal from United Nations human rights treaties would deprive Australian individuals and groups whose treaty rights were violated of the opportunity to communicate with the UN, an ATSIC Commissioner warned today.

 ATSIC Commissioner Christine Williams, who oversees ATSIC’s family policy, told federal Parliament’s Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade that the idea that the UN can impose values on Australia is wrong because treaties and protocols must be endorsed by the Australian people.

 In November 1999, the Minister for Foreign Affairs asked the Joint Committee to inquire into and report on Australia’s relationship with the United Nations in the post-Cold War environment. The Terms of Reference include the implications of increasing intervention in internal disputes for national sovereignty, the capacity of the UN to protect human rights and proposals for reform of the structure of the UN.

 “Today is the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,” Commissioner Williams told the Committee at today’s hearings in Canberra.

 “Australia has always had constructive involvement in UN activities. Australia has played a leading role in promoting universal human rights principles.

 “As a signatory to the international human rights treaties, Australia has a responsibility to adopt a constructive domestic stance on the principles of tolerance, democracy and respect for equal rights for men and women. Not only are these principles central to the human rights treaties, they also reflect the values of the Australian community.

 “I want to dispute concerns that exists in some quarters in Australia that the UN is ‘interfering’ and ‘imposing alien values’ on Australians. I want to make the point that the UN is a body that is created, supported and given power by the Australian population through our elected Government.

 “General principles or specific agreements made by the UN and other international bodies only take effect in Australia when the Australian government decides if, and when, and in what precise manner it should implement such principles and agreements.

 “The UN recognises that different societies and countries have their own cultures and legal systems, its own special conditions and needs. Therefore, individual states like Australia, have ample scope to design and define their own solutions within internationally agreed norms.

 “It is because we are seen as a country favoured with so many economic, social and political advantages that we must not only meet, but also set the highest possible standards.

 “As a woman, and as ATSIC’s representative for women, I am deeply disappointed that the Australian Government did not sign or ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.

 “Complaint mechanisms are very important as Indigenous women suffer from both discrimination as women as well as racism because we are members of the Indigenous community.

 “Another concern is that, in the future, there may be a suggestion by the Australian Government to withdraw from the international human rights treaties, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of Punishment and the 1st Optional Protocol of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

 “Any withdrawal from these treaties would deprive individuals and groups to lodge a communication with the relevant UN Committee if they believe their treaty rights have been violated.

 “Complaint mechanisms are important. For example, since 1991, only 48 cases against Australia have been brought before the above three complaint mechanisms. To date, violations have been found in only 3 of the 27 cases that have been finalised.

 “There has also been communication before the Human Rights Committee regarding mandatory sentencing laws in the Northern Territory. This is the first time an Indigenous-related issue from Australia has been lodged under any of the compliant mechanisms. This issue was important because Australia’s acquiescence to the 1st Optional Protocol of ICCPR was signed through the Government’s response to the report of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody.

 “The UN system has been an important forum for Indigenous peoples. Over the past decade, the situation of Indigenous peoples has gained in visibility, particularly at the international level. This is due in to the growing advocacy by Indigenous peoples who have been able to achieve the establishment of procedures and forums for international cooperation.

 “However, it is still the case that Indigenous peoples in their own countries and regions are among the most marginalised and excluded groups.”

 Media contact: Martin Freckmann 02 6121 4962

 _______________________________

 Briefing on Inquiry into Australia’s Relations with the United Nations in the post-Cold War Environment, Parliament House, Wednesday 21 March 2001.

 On 15 November 1999, the Minister for Foreign Affairs asked the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade to inquire into and report on Australia’s relationship with the United Nations in the post Cold War environment. The Terms of Reference focus particularly on issues regarding peacekeeping operations and humanitarian relief and support for refugees; the viability of the International Criminal Court; the implications of increasing intervention in internal disputes for national sovereignty, as defined under Article 2 of the Charter for the UN; the capacity of the UN to protect human rights as a basic requirement of the Charter and to prevent war crimes and crimes of genocide and, the proposals for reform of the structure of the UN.

 In the Joint Standing Committee’s Issues Paper, its states that the Australian Government and Parliament have a significant interest in the effectiveness of the UN. Australia has played an important role in the establishment of the UN, has supported the work of the UN and has contributed to its peacekeeping activities. Through the Joint Standing Committee, Parliament has sought to examine the future of the UN into the new millennium.

 There are two major areas that ATSIC could contribute to in regards to the issues set out in the Terms of Reference. They are: · The implications of increasing intervention in internal disputes for national sovereignty, as defined under Article 2 of the Charter of the UN. · The capacity of the UN to protect human rights.

 ATSIC can respond to these two issues by: 1. Australia enjoys a rare international reputation for its commitment to the UN ideals. Australia commands respect for its views and as a responsible member of the international community. In keeping with its history of constructive involvement in UN activities, Australia has played a leading role in promoting universal human rights principles. This respect also includes Australia’s commitment to the principles embodied in the UN Charter and the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and international human rights treaties which aim to benefit all Australians. As a signatory to the international human rights treaties, Australia has a responsibility to adopt a constructive domestic stance on the principles of tolerance, democracy and respect for equal rights of men and women in Australia. These principles are central to the human rights treaties and they also reflect the values of the Australian community.

 2. ATSIC supports the Australian Government’s measures to improve the effectiveness of the UN Treaty bodies particularly in regards to improving the coordination between the committees and also in addressing the current inadequate secretariat resources for research analysis to support the committees’ work.

 3. ATSIC congratulates the Australian Government for supporting the establishment of a Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues within the Commission on Human Rights. This Forum will provide another

 avenue for the UN to respond to the concerns of Indigenous peoples.

 4. ATSIC has concerns that the Australian Government continues to express the view that treaty monitoring bodies place greater weight upon the evidence provided by NGOs over that of the Government. ATSIC is concerned that the Government will submit a proposal to restrict or regulate the access of NGOs to the treaty monitoring bodies. Such a proposal would set a precedent to other nations who may wish to minimise scrutiny of their human rights records by the UN mechanisms.

 5. ATSIC expresses great disappointment at the Australian Government’s decision not to sign or ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). The Optional Protocol establishes a mechanism whereby individual women and groups of women who have exhausted domestic remedies, may lodge a complaint with the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women alleging that their rights under CEDAW have been violated by State Party to the Convention. ATSIC is extremely concerned that all Australian women are being deprived of an avenue to a complaint mechanism in the event that all other domestic avenues have been exhausted.

 6. While we acknowledge that the Australian Government is not intending to withdraw from the international human rights treaties, ATSIC must emphasis that we would be would be extremely concerned if, in the future, the Australian Government proposed to recommend a withdrawal from the individual complaints mechanisms particularly under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD), the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of Punishment (CAT) and the 1st Optional Protocol of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). These mechanisms allow individuals and groups to lodge a communication with the relevant UN Committee if they believe their treaty rights have been violated. A complete or partial withdrawal from the UN treaty system would undermine human rights protection in Australia. In addition it would set a dangerous precedent an damage Australia’s international reputation by placing Australia alongside Jamaica, Trinidad and Guyana as the only states to withdraw from the complaints mechanisms.

 Introductory comments for Commissioner Christine Williams for the Inquiry into Australia’s Relations with the United Nations in the post-Cold War Environment, Parliament House, Wednesday 21 March 2001.

 I want to introduce the ATSIC people assembled here today. My name is Commissioner Christine Williams and I am the representative for Indigenous women and Portfolio Commissioner for Family Policy and Broadcasting and Media .

 Also here today is Jackie Oakley who is the Manager of ATSIC’s Rights and Cultural Development Section within the National Policy Office and, Policy Adviser Sonia Smallacombe.

 Firstly, I want to provide some background about the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission (ATSIC).

 ATSIC is the peak body representing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in Australia. ATSIC is an independent statutory authority established by the Commonwealth government under the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission Act 1989, commonly known as the ATSIC Act.

 ATSIC is designed to embody the principle of ‘self-determination’ for Indigenous Australians and to devolve decision-making activities in Indigenous affairs to regional and community level.

 Through ATSIC’s representative arm, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people participate in the processes of Government. Elective representatives are able to make decisions about projects, programs and policies that affect our communities.

 At the national and international level, ATSIC’s elected Commissioners (like myself) represent the views of Indigenous communities from all parts of Australia.

 In regards to this Inquiry, I wish to provide the following comments:

 As part of its history, Australia has always had constructive involvement in UN activities. Australia has played a leading role in promoting universal human rights principles.

 As a signatory to the international human rights treaties, Australia has a responsibility to adopt a constructive domestic stance on the principles of tolerance, democracy and respect for equal rights for men and women. Not only are these principles central to the human rights treaties, they also reflect the values of the Australian community.

 I want to dispute concerns that exists in some quarters in Australia that the UN is ‘interfering’ and ‘imposing alien values’ on Australians. I want to make the point that the UN is a body that is created, supported and given power by the Australian population through our elected Government.

 General principles or specific agreements made by the UN and other international bodies only take effect in Australia when the Australian government decides if, and when, and in what precise manner it should implement such principles and agreements.

 Furthermore, Article 7 of the UN Charter states that it explicitly rejects interference in the domestic affairs of member states. The UN recognises that different societies and countries have their own cultures and legal systems, its own special conditions and needs. Therefore, individual states like Australia, have ample scope to design and define their own solutions within internationally agreed norms.

 Just because Australia is seen as a country that enjoys high living standards, open systems of parliamentary democracy and general tolerance of people of various ethnic, political and religious backgrounds, it does not mean that we do not have to worry about our own fulfilment of high standards and global ideals. The reverse is actually the case, it is because we are seen as a country favoured with so many economic, social and political advantages that we must not only meet, but also set the highest possible standards.

 I must also point out that as a woman, and as ATSIC’s representative for women, I am deeply disappointed that the Australian Government did not sign or ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (commonly known as CEDAW).

 My understanding is that the Optional Protocol provides a way for individual women and groups of women to lodge complaints with the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women if their rights under CEDAW have been violated by a State Party to the Convention.

 At the moment all Australian women do not have a complaints mechanism open to them at the international level.

 I need to say that complaint mechanisms are very important as Indigenous women suffer from both discrimination as women as well as racism because we are members of the Indigenous community.

 Another concern I have is that, in the future, there may be a suggestion by the Australian Government to withdraw from the international human rights treaties, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD), the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of Punishment (CAT) and the 1st Optional Protocol of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR).

 Any withdrawal from these treaties would deprive individuals and groups to lodge a communication with the relevant UN Committee if they believe their treaty rights have been violated.

 Complaint mechanisms are important. For example, since 1991, only 48 cases against Australia have been brought before the above three complaint mechanisms. To date, violations have been found in only 3 of the 27 cases that have been finalised.

 There has also been communication before the Human Rights Committee regarding mandatory sentencing laws in the Northern Territory. This is the first time an Indigenous related issue from Australia has been lodged under any of the compliant mechanisms. This issue was important because Australia’s acquisition to the 1st Optional Protocol of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was signed through the Government’s response to the report of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody.

 The UN system has been an important forum for Indigenous peoples. Over the past decade, the situation of Indigenous peoples has gained in visibility, particularly at the international level. This is due in to the growing advocacy by Indigenous peoples who have been able to achieve the establishment of procedures and forums for international cooperation.

 Therefore, as Indigenous peoples we have had increasing success in accessing and utilising various international mechanisms, such as the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the International Labour Organisation. However, it is still the case that Indigenous peoples in their own countries and regions are among the most marginalised and excluded groups. Today is the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. I would like to tell this committee what Indigenous people in this country are doing to address the issue of racism. In February this year, ATSIC hosted a Regional Meeting of Indigenous peoples of Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Hawaii and the United States, in Sydney. The purpose of the Sydney Meeting was to examine in detail the issues of racism against Indigenous

 peoples, with a particular focus on Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Hawaii and the United States of America.

 The outcomes from the Regional Meeting included an overview of discrimination against Indigenous peoples in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Hawaii and the USA; a forum where participants could foster greater input into international debates on racism against Indigenous Peoples and the advancement of partnerships between Indigenous Peoples and the wider community to implement strategies for overcoming racism.

 A formal Report of the Sydney meeting has been submitted to the May 2001 Preparatory Committee meeting, for inclusion with the conference papers for the World Conference in South Africa which will take place from 31 August - 7 September 2001.

 In closing, I would like to request that the Australian Parliament support NGO input into the UN mechanism as these mechanisms provide an opportunity for NGOs, such as Indigenous NGOs to voice our aspirations and concerns in the promotion of universal human rights principles.

  

 Return to Top of the Page

   Return to Media - Return to Media Releases List

