---
title: "East Timor: strategic developments: the creation of an East Timor Defence Force within the context of the new nation of Timor Lorosa'e."
date: "2001-11-15"
creators:
  - "Fox, James J."
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Armed forces"
  - "East Timor"
  - "Overseas item"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232031
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/54I66%22
---

  EAST TIMOR: STRATEGIC DEVELOPMENTS 

  The Creation of an East Timor Defence Force within the   Context of the New Nation of Timor Lorosa’e 

  JAMES 1. FOX 

  Prior to the vote on autonomy in September 1999,   the Conselho National da Resistencia Timorense   (CNRT) proposed, as official policy, that an 

  independent East lTmor would have no armed force,   but only a gendarmerie. After the destructive events   of September, however, the CNRT reconsidered its   position and insisted that East Timor must have its   own defence force. This reformulation of policy   by the East Timor leadership posed a serious 

  dilemma initially for INTERFET and later UNTAET   since the UN had made no provisions for such a 

  defence force. 

  As the armed wing of the CNRT (and, previously   from 1975 to 1986, as the armed wing of Fretilin),   the Forcas Armadas da Libertacao National de 

  Timor Leste (Falintil) refused to lay down arms and   demobilise. Instead they shifted from the four 

  cantonment areas they occupied prior to the 

  referendum and established a new cantonment area   in and around the town of Aileu, in the mountains   approximately 42 kilometres from Dili, in 

  expectation of some sort of recognition and formal 

  incorporation as a defence force. 

  Falintil’s capacity to support a large number of his   members was limited. Residence in Aileu was 

  therefore fluid with many men, including 

  commanders, often taking leave for varying periods   of time. Although Falintil reported its numbers at 

  1500 men, there were less than 850 men actually   in residence in Aileu by the middle of 2000. 

  In July/August 2000, an Independent Study Team   organised by King’s College, London was invited   by UNTAET to assess security force options for East   Timor and to assist in providing proposals for a 

  possible transitional strategy for a new defence   force. The team also became involved in brokering   optional strategies with Falintil. 

  The principal recommendations of this team were   accepted and, as a result, the EastIimorTransitional 

  Cabinet approved the establishment of an East 

  Timor Defence Force (ETDF) in September 2000.   This new Defence Force was to consist of a light 

  infantry force of 1,500 regulars - to be recruited   and trained over a three-year period - with 1,500   reservists. Ex-Falintil soldiers were to represent the   core of the first battalion in the ETDF. The goal was   - and continues to be - to have ready one 

  battalion equipped and trained by the time of East   Timor’s independence. 

  On 3 1 January 2001, UNTAET issued the regulation   ‘On the Establishment of a Defence Force for East   Timor’. This regulation places the ETDF under 

  civilian authority and defines its two main missions:   (1) to defend East Timor, its people and its territory   and (2) to provide assistance to the civilian 

  community, at the request of civilian authorities,   during natural disasters and other emergencies.   Following the promulgation of this regulation,   Falintil was officially disbanded on 1 February 

  2001. 

  The former principal Commander of Falintil, Taur   Matan Ruak, was appointed as Chief of the ETDF   Defence force with the rank of Brigadier General.   Other former Falintil commanders were also 

  appointed to key command positions, at Colonel   level, in the new force. 

  Approximately 1300 ex-Falintil were offered the   possibility of inclusion in an International 

  Organization for Migration (IOM) program of 

  demobilisation and reintegration into civil society   designated as the Falintil Reinsertion Assistance   Programme (FRAP). 

  This initial recruitment to the first battalion of the 

  new defence force was concluded on 28 January   just prior to the dissolution of Falintil. This 

  recruitment was based on an initial intake of 650   individuals and was drawn, as planned, from the   ranks of the core of Falintil. Because this core 

  27 

  STRATEGIC UP~TE 2001 

  consisted of a far larger number of individuals from 

  the eastern districts of East Timor (groups 

  collectively referred to as firaku) who had 

  maintained the armed struggle against Indonesian   forces, this selective imbalance is now reflected in   the composition of the first battalion. Battalion I is   preponderantly a Firaku force and has been quietly 

  noted as such by East Timorese in western districts   (collectively referred to as Kaladi.) 

  This is the first time in United Nations history that   it is involved in the development of a nation’s 

  defence force. Australia and Portugual, working in   partnership, have taken responsibility for the 

  training of the ETDF, with eleven other nations 

  providing assistance. 

  Australia has agreed to provide assistance of $26   million over a five-year period for the development   of the ETDF. This assistance included the 

  construction of a permanent training facility at 

  Metinaro, twenty-five kilometers east of Dili, which   was officially opened on 7 July. On 23 July, the 

  first cohort of 247 cadets, most of whose basic 

  training was in Aileu, graduated at a ceremony at   Metinaro. 

  As training proceeds for the first battalion, the 

  process has begun to select recruits for a second   battalion. Whether recruitment for this second   battalion succeeds in being a more open process   remains to be seen. In addition to the provision of   basic soldier and infantry training, Portugal has 

  committed itself to conduct the recruitment process. 

  The Report of the King’s College independent Study   Team cautioned against excessive ambitions for any   substantial development of an armed force for East   Timor, stressing in particular the costs of such 

  ambitions. Some Timorese leaders, however, still   continue to support such ambitions. In his first 

  speech as the elected Head of Government in East   Trmor, Mari Alkatiri reaffirmed his ‘full commitment   to the naval component’ of a defence force and 

  thanked Portuguese government for its promise of   two Albatross patrol craft that will form the basis 

  for an East Timorese navy. 

  Planning for the development of an East Trmor 

  police service (ETPS) was initially predicated on   the assumption that East Timor would not have a   separate defence force but only a gendarmerie. As 

  a result, recruitment plans were set for a force of 

  3000 police officers and a Police College was 

  established early in 2000 to provide rapid three-   month training to cohorts (initially 50 at a time). 

  Thus the first 50 police officers graduated in June   2000 and were send to all districts for a further 

  three months of field training. Although the training   process continues to produce more police officers,   the projected number of police will not be met by 

  the time of Independence and many question 

  whether 3000 police is an appropriate and 

  affordable number. Fewer but better-trained police   officers might be a better option. 

  Recruitment was based on local selection of 

  appropriate candidates from all districts; former   members of the Indonesian police force were 

  subjected to a similar selection process and many   were accepted into the new ETPS. A former police   officer since 1977, Paul0 Fatima Martins, was 

  appointed as Commissioner of the EastTrmor Police   Service. 

  Plans are in place for an armed police force with 

  its own rapid response unit. After independence,   Eastl’imor will face a formidable array of economic   problems with limited possibilities for development.   These problems will include high urban 

  unemployment and a host of ongoing land disputes   in the countryside. The task of policing under such   circumstances, especially by a newly-trained police   service with limited experience, will almost 

  certainly require the continuing involvement of 

  some component of the UN-supported civilian   police (Civpol) force. 

  Already UNTAET civilian personnel are being 

  reduced. The target is a 75 per cent reduction by 

  the beginning of 2002. There will also be a 

  reduction in the peace-keeping forces (PKF) from   8000 to 5000 military personnel. This reduction is   likely to be greater at the eastern end of the island   than in the west, especially along the border. 

  Many issues of security importance remain unclear.   Some militia leaders, together with their followers,   have returned to EastT’rmor. How the reconciliation 

  and social reintegration process develops in East   Timor will affect the return flow of other refugees   and the commitment and internal cohesion of other   militia groups. 

  28 

  MILITARY REFORM 

  Since September 1999, living conditions and social 

  stability in many parts of West Timor have 

  deteriorated significantly. By virtually all economic   indicators, West Timor (and indeed the whole of 

  the province of NusaTenggaraXmur) is the poorest   area of Indonesia. The current national economic 

  malaise since 1997 has left this province with 

  diminished central government support.The future   of the enclave of Oecussi, located as it is in West 

  Timor, is intimately bound up with developments   in both East and West Timor. 

  29 

