---
title: "Law, human life and ethical dilemmas. Third Gerard Brennan Lecture, Bond University, Gold Coast, Queensland, 3 March 2001"
date: "2001-03-03"
creators:
  - "Kirby, Michael"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Jurisdiction"
  - "Conjoined twins"
  - "Bioethics"
  - "Economic value of life"
  - "Judgments"
  - "Catholic Church"
  - "Cases (Law)"
  - "BRENNAN, Gerard"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
  - "Surgery"
  - "Great Britain"
  - "Infants"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211221462
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/U6L36%22
---

  BOND UNIVERSITY 

  

  THIRD GERARD BRENNAN LECTURE 

  

  GOLD COAST, QUEENSLAND 

  

  SATURDAY 3 MARCH 2001 

  

    

  

  LAW, HUMAN LIFE AND ETHICAL DILEMMAS 

  

    

  

  The Hon Justice Michael Kirby AC CMG  *  

  

    

  

    

  

  BRENNAN AS COLLEAGUE

  

    

  

            
I can remember, as if it were yesterday, my first meeting with F G 
Brennan.  In February 1975, at the age of 35, I had just been appointed 
the first Chairman of the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC).  
It was felt wise, most especially in the Attorney-General's Department, 
to balance my obvious youth and enthusiasm with the gravitas and experience 
of an experienced Queen's Counsel.  Mr Brennan called on me 
for mutual inspection.

  

    

  

            
We discovered a link through what had then been called the National 
Union of Australian University Students.  Like me, and like Gareth 
Evans (another founding member of the ALRC) he had, in university days, 
indulged himself in student politics.  We were both honorary life 
members of the national student body.  Each of us was to become, 
in a sense, part of the legal establishment.  Yet, I believe, neither 
of us was ever wholly of its ranks.  Perhaps our common ethnicity 
in Ireland (albeit, in my case, largely in the northern part) encouraged 
us sometimes to look critically at the Australian law, substantially 
inherited from England.  Neither of us ever lost the edge of prudent 
radicalism, although it sometimes took us in different directions.

  

    

  

            
I welcomed Mr Brennan's appointment to the Commission.  It 
followed.  It proved a brilliant move.  It added weight and 
depth to the Commission's early reports.  This was so in all areas 
of the law in which we laboured together.  But it was especially 
so in two fields of law to which Gerard Brennan brought particular contributions.  
They are relevant to these remarks. 

  

    

  

            
One of them was the criminal law.  Criminal cases had formed an 
important part of his legal practice.  They had led to his close 
involvement in an endeavour to produce a national criminal code that 
could be adopted for all Australian jurisdictions.  He quickly 
became a sheet anchor for the earliest reports of the Commission on 
subjects relevant to criminal law  [1]  .

  

    

  

            
The other subject on which he, like Sir Zelman Cowen later appointed, 
brought particular insights concerned the first project of the Commission 
in the field of bioethics.  That project led to the highly successful 
report on   Human Tissue Transplants  [2]  .  By the time that 
undertaking was afoot, Gerard Brennan had been appointed to the federal 
judiciary.  The Commission had to report on new problems concerned 
with the implantation of human tissue taken from one human being for 
use in another.  In connection with this task, the Commission had 
to provide a definition of death by reference to the cessation of brain 
function.  This had become necessary because the introduction of 
mechanical respirators and ventilators had made the diagnosis of death 
difficult in some cases.  They had also presented a potential ethical 
conflict, in that human beings kept "alive" by these machines 
presented ideal sources of "donor" organs, suffused with blood, 
suitable for speedy transplantation after "death" was pronounced  [3]  .

  

    

  

            
Sir Zelman Cowen has often referred to the intense debates which we 
had over the many controversies presented by our obligation to prepare 
new laws to govern all aspects of this topic.  Justice Brennan's 
contributions to those debates were always based on a search for concordancy 
with the traditional approaches of the common law to respect for human 
life and human dignity and consistency with common moral principles 
shared by most members of the Australian community.  Although he 
approached the latter from a viewpoint respectful of the secular nature 
of the Australian Commonwealth and the diversity of opinion of its people, 
it was inevitable that his viewpoint was influenced by the religious 
tradition in which he lived.  This is the Christian tradition of 
the Roman Catholic Church, of which he was, and is, a leading lay member.  
The Church's tradition lays emphasis upon the sacred and inviolable 
quality of human life.  Because its approach is generally common 
to all people of the Book, and because it profoundly influenced the 
common law of England in its origins and development, no disharmony 
appeared from the introduction of such basic ideas into the work on 
which the ALRC was engaged.  Fortunate were we to have had at our 
table so informed and articulate a participant in the sensitive tasks 
of law reform handed to us by the Government.

  

    

  

            
Soon the tables of our relationship were turned.  In 1976 Justice 
Brennan was appointed the first President of the Administrative Appeals 
Tribunal.    Ex officio  , he chaired the Administrative Review Council.  I sat under 
his presidency of that body to witness the great skill with which he 
presided over the introduction into Australian federal law of some of 
the most important legislative reforms that our country has ever witnessed  [4]  .  In 1981 he took 
his seat on the High Court of Australia.  In 1995 he was appointed 
Chief Justice of Australia.  In 1996 our paths crossed again when 
I was appointed to the High Court  [5]  .

  

    

  

            
As in the Law Reform Commission, so in the High Court, occasionally 
we differed, for reasons that we expressed as required.  [6]    But in most important cases, we reached the same conclusions, 
sometimes in common agreement  [7]  , sometimes in common dissent  [8]  .  It is a privilege for me to be invited to participate in this 
lecture series in Sir Gerard Brennan's honour.  His portrait as 
Chief Justice hangs in the High Court in Canberra.  He is presented 
in the portrait holding a single volume of the   Commonwealth Law Reports  .  Close inspection reveals that it is Volume 175.  It is 
in that volume that his leading decision in   Mabo v Queensland [No 2]   appears  [9]  .  When all else is forgotten of the law in Australia at the 
dawn of the twenty-first century,   Mabo   will be remembered.  Through Gerard Brennan's careful legal analysis 
shines the light of a personal commitment to fundamental and universal 
human rights  [10]  .  Those rights sustain a belief in the essential equality and 
personal dignity of every human being.

  

    

  

  TWINS IN THE NEWS

  

    

  

            
I recently attended the sixtieth birthday celebration of my brother, 
Donald.  He was born in 1941, a twin.  His twin brother died 
of pneumonia at eighteen months of age in 1943.  It was war-time.  
There were no antibiotics or other drugs that now would have saved him.  
He was the second born, and weaker, of the twins.  With their perfect 
white skin and golden hair they were the joy of my parents lives.  
The death of one of them was a terrible blow.  Upon the birth of 
another son, Donald cleaved to him as a surrogate twin.  Twins 
are like that.  I could never intrude.  Like many others before 
and since, Donald could only take me in small doses.

  

    

  

            
Our family's sad experience with twins naturally made us alert to issues 
involving twins which others might not notice.  In recent months, 
news reports have recorded a number of stories concerning twins. 

  

    

  

            
In January 2001 one such story told of how the natural mother of twin 
girls, Kimberley and Belinda, offered them for sale on the Internet.  
It was an offer quickly snapped up by a childless couple, the Allens 
of California.  Then a Welsh couple, the Kilshaws, offered more 
money.  The natural mother handed the six months old babies to 
them.  An adoption broker was the intermediary.  Eventually 
the courts intervened to protect the best interests of the twins.

  

    

  

            
The Internet sale of the twins was described by the British Prime Minister, 
Mr Tony Blair, as "deplorable", an opinion most people 
would probably share  [11]  .  Years ago, on the report on   Human Tissue Transplants  , Justice Brennan and I agreed to the unanimous recommendation of 
the ALRC that "the law should forbid payment of any kind to any 
person for any dead body or part thereof; or for human tissue removed 
from any living person or from any dead body"  [12]  .  It is not apparent why a different legal principle would be 
adopted in relation to a living person.  Slaves, in earlier times, 
were bought and sold as chattels.  But slavery is incompatible 
with the common law  [13]  .  It is forbidden by international law  [14]  .  Paying for human lives (as distinct from affording reimbursement 
for expenses incurred in adoption and transport) seems incompatible 
with basic notions of human dignity.  Such notions are certainly 
attracted once a child is born.  In law, the child then has an 
identity separate from its parents which the law will protect  [15]  .

  

    

  

            
A second case involving twins arose in Australia in October 2000.  
It concerned two conjoint, or Siamese, twins, Tay-Lah and Monique Armstrong 
who were joined at the head.  In a twelve hour operation conducted 
by a surgical team of twenty-five professionals at the Royal Children's 
Hospital in Brisbane, the twins were separated.  There were great 
risks in the operation.  In the past sixty years some thirty separation 
operations have been performed on such twins.  In about a third, 
both survived; in a third, both died.  In a third, one survived.  
Fortunately, in the Armstrong case, both survived.  The surgical 
team was aided by the most modern magnetic resonance imaging scans.  
The case was rightly reported as a triumph of Australian neurosurgery  [16]  .

  

    

  

  JODIE AND MARY 

  

    

  

            
The Brisbane case coincided with world-wide attention to another instance 
of conjoined twins in Britain.  Although the names of the twins 
in the British case were not originally revealed, they were described 
throughout the litigation by the pseudonyms "Jodie" and "Mary"  [17]  .  Later reports in 
the international media revealed that the parents of these twins were 
Michaelangelo Attard, 44 and his wife Rina.  They live on the Maltese 
island of Gozo  [18]  .

  

    

  

            
The Attard twins were joined at the pelvic bones.  They shared 
a single bladder, anus and vagina.  On the recommendation of doctors 
in Malta the parents travelled to Britain so that they could get expert 
advice on what could be done, if anything, to separate the twins.  
Although each of the daughters had a separate brain, heart, limbs and 
most vital organs, it was immediately apparent that there was no possibility 
of performing the kind of surgical miracle that later proved possible 
in Brisbane.  The dependence of Mary on the efficiency of Jodie's 
heart placed dangerous strains on the pair which could not continue 
indefinitely.  On the other hand, if the twins were surgically 
separated, the unanimous medical opinion was that Mary would inevitably 
die but Jodie would enjoy an extremely  high chance of survival  [19]  .

  

    

  

            
Mr and Mrs Attard were devout members of the Roman Catholic Church.  
It was their view that it was "God's will for (the mother) to carry 
twins and it is God's will that those twins have been born alive"  [20]  .  But equally they 
concluded, having secured the best medical advice, no surgical treatment 
should be attempted:

  

    

  

  "We 
certainly do not want the separation surgery to go ahead as we know 
and have been told very clearly that it will result in the death of 
our daughter, Mary.  We cannot possibly agree to any surgery being 
undertaken that will kill one of our daughters.  We have faith 
in God and are quite happy for God's will to decide what happens to 
our two young daughters"  [21]  .

  

    

  

            
Some hospitals would doubtless have allowed the parents' views to prevail.  
Had the parents remained in Malta, it seems almost certain that this 
is what would have occurred.  However, a summons was quickly filed 
in the High Court of Justice in England by the hospital in which the 
twins were being cared for.  The summons sought a declaration, 
in circumstances where the twins could not give valid consent and where 
the parents withheld their consent, that it was lawful, in effect, to 
carry out specified operative procedures.  These included an elective 
separation involving both of them.  The consideration that made 
the provision of such relief controversial was the common acceptance 
that one of the twins, Mary, would certainly die if the application 
were upheld and the operation performed  [22]  .

  

    

  

            
It was this invocation of the jurisdiction and powers of the English 
courts that presented the primary judge (Mr Justice Johnson) with an 
urgent problem.  He concluded, in what is described as "effectively 
an ex tempore judgment"  [23]  , that the "withdrawal of Mary's blood supply" by separation 
from Jodie would be lawful.  He so decided on the basis that the 
operation was certainly in the best interests of Jodie; that it was 
Jodie's only chance of a virtually normal life; and that Mary's state 
was "pitiable" and unviable once separation was performed.  
In such circumstances Mr Justice Johnson concluded that it would be 
in the best interests of Mary, as well as of Jodie, to carry out the 
operation.  He drew an analogy between the interruption, or withdrawal, 
of the supply of blood in the case of a mechanical ventilating machine, 
condoned in certain circumstances by a decision of the House of Lords  [24]  , and withdrawal of the 
blood supply from Mary by the surgery separating her from Jodie  [25]  .  On this basis, 
the judge held, the elective operation could proceed.  Immediately, 
the parents appealed from this decision to the English Court of Appeal.

  

    

  

            
The Court of Appeal comprised Lords Justices Ward, Brooke and Robert 
Walker.  The appeal hearing took place under the glare of world-wide 
media attention.  The Court heard arguments and with commensurate 
speed, on 22 September 2000, delivered its judgment. 

  

    

  

            
The parents and the hospital were represented at the appeal hearing.  
Separate legal representation was provided in respect of Mary and Jodie.  
"Exceptionally"  [26]   the Court "allowed the [Roman Catholic] Archbishop of Westminster 
and the Pro-Life Alliance to make written submissions".  It 
expressed gratitude for the submissions of these interveners.  
All judges referred to those submissions.  In the end, however, 
for reasons given separately, the Lords Justices dismissed the appeal.  
The parents' wishes were accorded respect.  But they were not given 
effect.  The Court allowed the elective separation of the twins 
to proceed.  No appeal was taken to the House of Lords.  The 
parties elected to take the litigious fight no further.  The surgeons 
began to prepare for their task. 

  

    

  

            
Before the operation, the father took steps to have Mary confirmed into 
the Roman Catholic Church.  The parents kissed and held her for 
the last time.  One of the surgeons, Mr Adrian Bianchi is 
himself a devout Roman Catholic.  He and the other principal surgeon, 
Mr Dickson (who described himself as an Evangelical Christian) 
both prayed with their team before the surgery was undertaken  [27]  .  Bianchi and Dickson 
had worked together for twelve years.  They had shared many difficult 
moments.  They enjoyed the protection of the Court ruling.  
Yet inescapably, as they knew, Mary, a living baby, would die in their 
procedure.  Mr Dickson described the "... very intense 
moment.  We looked at each other because we knew what we were doing 
at the time"  [28]  .

  

    

  

            
In consequence of the surgical intervention, Mary quickly died.  
Jodie survived.

  

    

  

            
Reports early in January 2001 indicated that Jodie's recovery had amazed 
the surgeons.  They predicted that she would be allowed to return 
to Malta from Britain by the middle of 2001.  Her parents had been 
able to push her around the hospital in a pram  [29]  .  A later report told of the burial of the remains of Mary in 
Xaghra, Malta.  By her real name Rosie, she was honoured by the 
Bishop of Gozo in the presence of a crowd which packed the church and 
lined the town's main street  [30]  .  The parents had been loyal to their faith and the instruction 
of their Church.  The surgeons had performed the operation considered 
essential by the hospital if the catastrophic loss of   both   lives 
was to be avoided.  The common law had condoned the operation.  
In the manner of modern times, a British television network paid around 
£150,000 to the parents for cooperating in a programme reflecting on 
their ordeal.  This money has been paid into a trust fund for Jodie  [31]  .

  

    

  

            
Many, possibly most, observers who expressed an opinion approved the 
resolution of the dilemma by the primary judge and by the English Court 
of Appeal.  But a spokeswoman for the Pro-Life Alliance in Britain, 
which had campaigned against the operation calling for both children 
to be allowed a natural death, reportedly said "It may have been 
lawful, but it doesn't make it right"  [32]  .

  

    

  

  IT IS LAWFUL

  

    

  

            
People of the civil law tradition tend to feel intensely uncomfortable 
without the benefit of positive law to cover the precise controversy 
they have before them.  I discovered this when I served for the 
United Nations in Cambodia.  Non-governmental organisations felt 
very vulnerable without an enacted statute permitting and regulating 
their activities.  This revealed a different attitude to law:  
a deep feeling that without positive law, civil conduct was unstable 
and dangerous. 

  

    

  

            
In Australia, we have inherited from England a completely different 
attitude.  Unless the law forbids conduct, it may ordinarily take 
place.  Moreover, for us there is never, ultimately, a gap in the 
law.  If the Constitution is silent on a problem and there is no 
valid law made by Parliament or under its authority and if the judges 
of the past have never declared a rule of the common law to cover the 
case, there is no ultimate legal vacuum.  A new law may be "declared" 
by the judges, acting within their powers.  They will derive the 
new rule by analogy from past decisions and by the application of logic 
and reason.  This is, indeed, the genius of the common law system.

  

    

  

            
When the case of the Attard twins came before the courts of England, 
following the summons issued by the hospital, those courts had no particular 
statute to which they could resort to provide the norms which they had 
to apply.  True, they had the   Children Act   1989 (UK) and certain other statutory expressions of the duty to uphold 
the "best interests of the child".  This is also a principle 
expressed in international law  [33]  .  But the Parliament in the United Kingdom had not enacted a 
statute laying down the procedures to be followed and rules to be observed 
in the case of conjoined twins where the parents demanded that separation 
surgery should not take place, although it was essential to save the 
life of one of the twins.

  

    

  

            
Some commentators, not knowing the national origin of the Attard family, 
had suggested that they were "Kosovan refugees unjustifiably draining 
our resources"  [34]  , medical and legal.  Refugees are often the target of irrational 
hatreds.  It sometimes seems that we have learned nothing from 
the plight of the refugees from Nazi Europe.  Other critics asserted 
that lawyers had no special expertise in matters as complex and sensitive 
as this.  Those who were legally literate invoked Justice Scalia's 
observation in   Cruzan v Director, Missouri Department of Health  [35]  :

  

    

  

  "The 
point at which life becomes 'worthless' and the point at which the means 
necessary to preserve it become 'extraordinary' or 'inappropriate', 
are neither set forth in the Constitution nor known to the nine Justices 
of this Court any better than they are known to nine people picked at 
random from the Kansas City Telephone Directory".

  

    

  

            
Because virtually everyone who heard about the Attard twin case formed 
an opinion as to what should be done, the judges had to face certain 
criticism whatever they decided.  Sometimes, one suspects, criticisms 
of judicial "interference" simply represented another way 
of urging the paramountcy of the wishes of the parents.  Lord Justice 
Ward met such critics with answers which, in his own words "stress[ed] 
the obvious"  [36]  :

  

    

  

  "This 
Court is a court of law, not of morals, and our task has been to find, 
and our duty is then to apply, the relevant principles of law to the 
situation before us - a situation which is quite unique"  [37]  .

  

    

  

            
A feature of the reasons of all three members of the Court of Appeal 
was the extent to which they each took pains to respond to the concerns 
of the public, the wishes of the parents, the submissions of interested 
groups and of the parties.  To the public, Lord Justice Ward said 
this  [38]  :

  

    

  

  "There 
has been some public concern as to why the court is involved at all.  
We do not ask for work but have a duty to decide what parties with a 
proper interest ask us to decide.  Here, sincere professionals 
could not allay a collective medical conscience and see children in 
their care die when they know one was capable of being saved.  
They could not proceed in the absence of parental consent.  The 
only arbiter of that sincerely held difference of opinion is the court.  
Deciding disputed matters of life and death is surely and pre-eminently 
a matter for a court of law to judge".

  

    

  

            
Repeatedly, the appellate judges expressed their understanding of, and 
sympathy for, the predicament of the parents:

  

    

  

  "We 
wish ... to emphasise to the parents how we sympathise with their predicament, 
with the agony of their decision - for it has now become ours - 
and how we admire the fortitude and dignity they have displayed throughout 
these difficult days"  [39]  .

  

    

  

            
Lord Justice Ward confessed that it was not until he actually saw the 
photographs of the children that the predicament that he faced struck 
him with its full power. 

  

    

  

            
Each of the judges responded to the submission received from the Roman 
Catholic Archbishop.  Lord Justice Ward noted that the Archbishop 
had defined human life in terms that it is sacred "that it is inviolable 
so that one should never aim to cause an innocent person's death by 
act or omission."  As to whether, in the circumstances that 
Mary's dependence on Jodie was imposing a dangerous and ultimately fatal 
demand on Jodie's organs, it meant that she was not "innocent" 
within the   moral   meaning of that word, Lord Justice Ward declared he was "not 
qualified to answer that moral question":

  

    

  

  "I 
for my part would defer any opinion as to a child's innocence to the 
Archbishop for that is his territory"  [40]  .

  

    

  

            
But Lord Justice Ward insisted that the   legal   classification of the case was the territory of the court.  It 
was the duty of a court, whose jurisdiction and powers has been invoked, 
to express what the law permitted or required.

  

    

  

            
For many years, partly in consequence of advances in technology, the 
invention of mechanical ventilators and the development of surgical 
techniques previously unknown, courts in England and elsewhere have 
had to decide cases about the withdrawal of life support  [41]   and cases involving positive 
intervention with major surgery  [42]   where the subject of the procedure is either a child of tender years 
or a person who is not mentally competent.  In the case of children, 
the courts have acknowledged that the "first and paramount consideration" 
is the welfare of the child  [43]  .  The judges have insisted that they may not "hide behind" 
the wishes of the parents.  They must accept the responsibility, 
where their jurisdiction and powers are properly invoked, to express 
their own opinions.  Some commentators have tellingly asked how 
it can ever be in the "best interest of a child" to terminate 
that child's life?  Yet if that life were bound to be short, full 
of pain and otherwise intolerable, heroic surgery would not be obligatory.  
In such a case the parents' refusal would be respected  [44]  .  Nature would be allowed to take its course.

  

    

  

            
It is, perhaps, a symbol of the acute dilemmas that were presented by 
the predicament of the Attard twins that the English judges were seriously 
divided in the reasons which they gave for permitting the operation 
to go ahead.  The primary judge faced up to the acute legal problem 
presented in this respect.  This was not whether, in law, the court 
would have the last say.  It was not even whether the law could 
override the wishes of the parents.  It was not whether the law 
could decline to follow religious opinions, including those of the family 
concerned.  It was not even whether a view would be taken that 
consent to the operation should be given because it was "in the 
best interests of" not only Jodie but also Mary.  All of the 
foregoing questions could clearly be answered in the affirmative.  
On those answers so far as the law was concerned, there would be no 
significant contest. 

  

    

  

            
However, the acute question remained.  It was whether, notwithstanding 
such answers, the criminal law intervened to forbid the operation because, 
to perform it, would involve the commission of a positive act that had 
the necessary and foreseeable consequence of terminating a human life 
in being, namely Mary's.  If this were the legal classification 
of the acts, inherent in the proposed surgery, those acts would amount 
to unlawful homicide.  No court had authority to give consent to 
criminal conduct of that character.

  

    

  

            
The primary judge resolved this hard question by basing his opinion 
on the view that what was proposed by the operation "and what will 
cause Mary's death will be the interruption or withdrawal of supply 
of blood which she receives from Jodie".  He stated that:  
"Here the analogy [is] with the situation in which the court authorises 
the withholding of food and hydration.  That, the cases make clear, 
is not a positive act and is lawful"  [45]  .

  

    

  

            
None of the appeal judges agreed with Mr Justice Johnson's opinion in 
this respect.  But neither did they agree with each other as to 
the alternative explanations for reaching the same conclusion that the 
termination of Mary's life would not amount to deliberate homicide rendering 
the surgeons liable to prosecution.

  

    

  

            
In England, murder is constituted, as at common law, by three elements.  
The act in question must be unlawful.  It must involve the killing 
of a person.  And it must be performed with intent to kill or to 
cause grievous bodily harm  [46]  .  Lord Justice Ward considered that the proposed actions of 
the surgeon would fall outside this definition.  They would do 
so not because they did not comprise the killing of Mary with the requisite 
intent.  Instead, his Lordship considered that the answer was to 
be found in the first requirement of the definition.  The actions 
would not be an   unlawful   homicide.

  

    

  

            
In Lord Justice Ward's opinion this was so because the killing of Mary 
was to be seen as justified, and not unlawful, because it amounted to 
a form of "legitimate self-defence [by] the doctors coming to Jodie's 
defence and removing the threat of fatal harm to her presented by Mary's 
draining her life-blood"  [47]  .  In accordance with that opinion "the availability of 
such a plea of quasi self defence, modified to meet the quite exceptional 
circumstances nature has inflicted on the twins, makes intervention 
of the doctors lawful"  [48]  .

  

    

  

            
Lord Justice Brooke took a different view.  In his opinion, the 
case was to be classified as an "emergency".  It fell 
within the very narrow "doctrine of necessity".  This 
doctrine, he held, provided an exception to what would otherwise have 
been the unlawfulness of the positive acts taken to kill Mary.  
According to Lord Justice Brooke, there were three requirements for 
the application of the doctrine of necessity:

  

    

  

  "(i) 
The act is needed to avoid inevitable and irreparable evil;

  

  (ii) 
No more should be done than is reasonably necessary for the purpose 
to be achieved; and

  

  (iii) 
The evil inflicted must not be disproportionate to the evil avoided"  [49]  .

  

    

  

            
To reach this conclusion, Lord Justice Brooke had to overcome a decision 
of the House of Lords in the well known case of   The Queen v Dudley and Stephens  [50]  .  Every law student learns that case and remembers it for its 
gruesome details.  It involved four survivors of a vessel which 
sunk in 1884.  When rescued, three shipmates acknowledged that 
a fourth member of the crew, a cabinboy, had been killed and eaten by 
them on their twentieth day on the open sea without water or food.  
In a special verdict, an English jury found the facts proved.  
The case was then argued before a court of five judges to determine 
whether, and if so how, a defence of "necessity" could be 
raised in defence of the charge of homicide of the cabin boy.  
The defence was rejected.  The crewmen were convicted.  They 
were sentenced to death.  Subsequently their sentence was commuted 
to six months imprisonment.  A hundred years later, the decision 
was endorsed by the House of Lords  [51]  .  In consequence, it was generally believed that the doctrine 
of necessity was unavailing in the case of homicide.

  

    

  

            
Lord Justice Brooke, however, did not accept that necessity was totally 
excluded as a defence.  He rejected the notion that accepting necessity 
as a defence to homicide would impose on judges an intolerable burden 
of deciding the comparative value of human lives or place them on the 
slippery slope of moral relativism over human life.  He said  [52]  :

  

    

  

  "Mary 
is, sadly, self-designated for a very early death.  Nothing can 
extend her life beyond a very short span.  Because her heart, brain 
and lungs are for all practical purposes useless, nobody would have 
even tried to extend her life artificially if she had not, fortuitously, 
been deriving oxygenated blood from her sister's bloodstream.

  

  It 
is true that there are those who believe most sincerely - and the 
Archbishop of Westminster is amongst them - that it would be an 
immoral act to save Jodie, if by saving Jodie one must end Mary's life 
before its brief allotted span is complete.  ... But there are 
also those who believe with equal sincerity that it would be immoral 
not to assist Jodie if there is a good prospect that she might live 
a happy and fulfilled life if this operation is performed.  The 
Court is not equipped to choose between these competing philosophies.  
All that the Court can say is that it is not at all obvious that this 
is the sort of clear-cut case, marking an absolute divorce from law 
and morality, which was of such great concern to [the judges in   The Queen v Dudley v 
Stephens  ]".

  

    

  

            
For these reasons, Lord Justice Brooke accepted the existence of a defence 
of necessity.  It was no less a defence because of the absence 
of an immediate emergency.  He considered that the three requirements 
stated above were applicable.  In his last words he said:

  

    

  

  "Finally, 
the doctrine of the sanctity of life respects the integrity of the human 
body.  The proposed operations would give these children's bodies 
the integrity which nature denied them"  [53]  .

  

    

  

            
Lord Justice Robert Walker, the third member of the Court of Appeal, 
found yet a third path to the same conclusion.  He acknowledged 
that Mary had a right to life both under the common law of England and 
under the European Convention on Human Rights.  He accepted that 
it would be unlawful to kill her intentionally. However, he accepted 
that Jodie also had a right to life and that this carried with it rights 
of bodily integrity and autonomy, specifically the right to have her 
own body whole and intact.  He went on:

  

    

  

  "By 
a rare and tragic mischance, Mary and Jodie have both been deprived 
of the bodily integrity and autonomy which is their natural right.  
There is a strong presumption that an operation to separate them would 
be in the best interests of each of them.  ... In this case the 
purpose of the operation would be to separate the twins and so give 
Jodie a reasonably good prospect of a long and reasonably normal life.  
Mary's death would not be the purpose of the operation, although it 
would be its inevitable consequence.  The operation would give 
her, even in death, bodily integrity as a human being.  She would 
die, not because she was intentionally killed but because her own body 
cannot sustain her life.  Continued life whether long or short 
would hold nothing for Mary except possible pain and discomfort, if 
indeed she can feel anything at all.  The proposed operation would 
therefore be in the best interests of each of the twins.  The decision 
does not require the Court to value one life above another"  [54]  .

  

    

  

            
At the end of his reasons, Lord Justice Robert Walker summarised his 
opinion:  [55]

  

    

  

  "The 
proposed operation would not be unlawful.  It would involve the 
positive active invasive surgery and Mary's death would be foreseen 
as an inevitable consequence of an operation which is intended, and 
is necessary, to save Jodie's life.  But Mary's death would not 
be the purpose or intention of the surgery, and she would die because 
tragically her body, on its own, is not and never has been viable".

  

    

  

  IS IT RIGHT  ?

  

    

  

            
The differing opinions of the judges who considered the Attard twins' 
case reflect the complex of legal and moral dilemmas that had to be 
resolved.  Lord Justice Ward, addressing the truly difficult legal 
problem of the impermissibility of active homicide, did not feel able 
to solve that problem by reference to the doctrine of necessity.  
In this, he conformed to what was generally understood, as a century 
of legal doctrine:  necessity did not apply to homicide.  
Instead, Lord Justice Ward invoked the well established defence of self 
defence.  It is a defence that is certainly available in the case 
of homicide.  Indeed, he explained his view in a dramatic passage 
in his reasons "by giving Jodie a voice"  [56]  .

  

    

  

            
Having described the way in which Mary was using Jodie's heart and lungs, 
and how this would "cause Jodie's heart to fail and cause death 
just as surely as a slow drip of poison", Lord Justice Ward asked 
"Can it be just that Jodie should be required to tolerate that 
state of affairs"  [57]  ?  Then, suddenly, Jodie is speaking to us for herself:

  

    

  

  "If 
Jodie could speak, she would surely protest "stop it, Mary, you're 
killing me'  [58]  ".

  

    

  

            
Lord Justice Ward draws an analogy between a school child with a gun 
threatening others of the school inviting the intervention of teachers 
and the intervention of the medical team springing to Jodie's defence 
to remove the threat of fatal harm to her life caused by Mary.  
But is this truly self defence?  Properly analysed, this is the 
defence by others of a third party who is young, too incompetent or 
too disabled to defend herself. 

  

    

  

            
The common law has, in exceptional cases, extended self defence to cases 
where force is used by third parties to defend others from harm  [59]  .  Criminal codes 
sometimes so provide  [60]  .  But, until now, at common law the defence has normally been 
confined to particular categories of relationship (master and servant, 
parent and child, husband and wife).  It has only arisen in emergency, 
not planned, circumstances.  It has been kept in tight rein.  
Early comments on the case have found Lord Justice Ward's invocation 
of self-defence persuasive  [61]  .  But in the opinion of others, the surgery proposed would not 
be a response reasonable in the circumstances, in that it necessarily 
and deliberately involved the planned killing of an innocent life  [62]  .

  

    

  

            
Lord Justice Brooke's solution, invoking necessity, presents several 
difficulties which he himself acknowledged.  Since   The Queen v Dudley and 
Stephens   it has generally been thought that the defence of necessity was not 
available at common law in answer to a charge of homicide.  In 
Australia, where the defence is available at common law, there has, 
as well, ordinarily been a requirement that the threat or danger should 
be of such a nature as to exert immense pressure on the person concerned 
because of its imminence, suddenness or gravity  [63]  .  In one Australian case, where a driver was observed by police 
driving his vehicle on a public road far in excess of the speed limit, 
it was held that the defence of necessity was available when the driver 
proved that he was only acting in this way to get his gravely ill son 
to hospital.  He proved that there was a real danger and real possibility 
of the son's death if he had not done so  [64]  .  The judge took into account that the speeding was not so gross 
as to constitute a greater danger.  He invoked Lord Denning MR's 
statement in another case:  "Such a man should not be prosecuted.  
He should be congratulated"  [65]  . 

  

    

  

            
Nevertheless, in most cases in which it has been invoked both in Australia 
and elsewhere, the defence of necessity has failed.  Its application 
in the case of the Attard twins sits somewhat uncomfortably with the 
House of Lords' recent confirmation of the rule of public policy that 
the defence is unavailable to a charge of murder  [66]  .

  

    

  

            
Lord Justice Robert Walker's solution was that the "purpose" 
or "intention" of the surgery proposed was to be classified 
as something other than the killing of Mary.  However, this seems 
somewhat inconsistent with the undoubted facts, proved in the evidence, 
that the surgery represented a positive and deliberate intervention 
whose only natural and probable consequence  [67]   was the termination of the life of Mary.  Moreover, inherent 
in the operative procedures was the performance of heroic reconstructive 
surgery designed to create a full and viable human being in the case 
of Jodie by harvesting (if that is not too offensive a word) parts of 
the body of Mary (namely the shared organs of bladder, vulva and anus) 
so that Jodie should enjoy a full, separate and viable human existence, 
in effect at the expense of taking part of Mary's shared organs. 

  

    

  

            
On the subject of differentiated intention, Lord Justice Robert Walker 
took the Archbishop's submission, received by the Court, to task for 
being over-simplistic.  He declared that the points made were entitled 
to "profound respect".  They were reflected to some extent 
in English law and also in the attitudes expressed by the parents.  
However, Lord Justice Robert Walker went on  [68]  :

  

    

  

  "But 
they do not explain or even touch on what Roman Catholic moral theology 
teaches about the doctrine of double effect, despite its importance 
in the Thomism tradition (there is some evidence that the doctrine was 
considered by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Philadelphia in the 
[United States] case in 1977...) The term 'casuistry' has come to have 
bad connotations but the truth is that in law as in ethics it is often 
necessary to consider the facts of the particular case, including relevant 
intentions, in order to form a sound judgment.  I do not by that 
imply any criticism of the Archbishop's moderate and thoughtful submissions, 
which the Court has anxiously considered.  But ultimately, the 
Court has to decide this appeal by reference to legal principle, so 
far as it can be discerned, and not by reference to religious teaching 
or individual conscience".

  

    

  

            
It is usually a dangerous thing for a lawyer to engage with theologians 
on their own ground.  Lord Justice Walker chanced his arm.  
But I, like the angels, fear to tread.

  

    

  

            
Dr Bernadette Tobin, in an ethical perspective of the Attard twins' 
case asked whether there was "a distinctly Catholic view of the 
case"  [69]  .  She noted that the BBC seemed to think that there was because, 
on its website, it described the case as one of "religion versus  
medicine".  In Dr Tobin's view, however, there was no distinctive 
Church position.  Its viewpoint, as expressed by the Archbishop 
of Westminster, would, she asserted, have been equally "at home 
in secular ethics"  [70]  .  Secular ethics support the sanctity and special value of human 
life.  It is unique.  It is precious to the possessor and 
to that person's family and loved ones.  The horrors of the twentieth 
century and the terrors of genocide have left a deep and understandable 
fear of what happens when sanctity is not accorded to human life.  
If in doubt, go to Auschwitz.  Or go to the horror camps of Cambodia.  
This is why international human rights principles, which were invoked 
in the form of the European Convention, loomed so large in the debates 
before the English judges.

  

    

  

            
The decision and reasons of the English Court of Appeal in this case 
have their supporters and their critics.  The critics understand 
(as the parents avowedly did) the high motives and pure objectives of 
the medical team that wanted to save Jodie.  They respect the anxious 
deliberations of the judges who concluded that the surgeons could operate 
as they wished.  I myself have sympathy with the outcome favoured 
by the English judges.  Once it appeared inevitable that the   two   babies would die unless there was careful and urgent surgical intervention, 
authorising intervention to save   one   life 
seems, upon a practical view of human ethics, to be morally justifiable.   
After all, it advances and protects human life (namely Jodie's), the 
only human life that was viable and could be saved by intervention.  
To stand by when intervention could save one, simply because it could 
not save two, seems unduly rigid.  Clearly, that was the view that 
the surgeons took and the judges condoned.

  

    

  

            
However, I acknowledge the force of the criticisms both of this view 
of ethics and of the legal reasoning that, in different ways, brought 
four distinguished, able and sensitive judges of England to their respective 
conclusions.  None of the reasons leave me wholly satisfied.  
Perhaps the judges who wrote them felt the same - as judges do from 
time to time.  The closest to offer a convincing principle, in 
my view, was Lord Justice Brooke.  Yet the defence of necessity 
which he propounded raises as many problems as it solves.  And 
it departs from the long held view that human life is so precious, so 
sacred if you like, that no "necessity" can justify its termination, 
at least without the explicit authority of statute.

  

    

  

            
The ethical critics are unconcerned with the legal reasoning.  
But they are anxious as to where the decision about the Attard twin 
case leads.  Dr Tobin puts her concerns this way  [71]  :

  

    

  

  "So, 
the Lords Justices went looking to find considerations that would justify 
the doctors in killing Mary.  But, in so doing, they seemed not 
to notice that their reasoning threatens the very principle of the sanctity 
of life which they are meant to uphold as a cornerstone of the law:  
that is, the idea that human beings are entitled to protection from 
unjust attack.  The pity is that there are ways of finding someone 
who causes death out of an irresponsible disregard for human life guilty 
of murder without collapsing the distinction between the intended effects 
of someone's action and the foreseen but unintended effects.  After 
reading this judgment I shall find it harder to claim that by and large 
the law reflects common sense, let alone common morality".

  

    

  

  CONCLUSIONS

  

    

  

            
I cannot say how the Attard twins case would have been resolved in the 
Australian courts.  I cannot guess how Sir Gerard Brennan and I 
would have resolved it, had such a problem come before us in the High 
Court of Australia.  This much is clear.  The issues of bioethics 
proliferate.  But there is never a gap in our law.  Theologians 
may dispute.  Philosophers may debate.  Popular television 
can entertain.  Hypotheticals can speculate.  But in the end, 
judges, whose jurisdiction and powers are properly invoked, must decide.  
If, as is usual in such cases, the Constitution and the statute law 
are silent, the judges must reason by analogy from basic principles.  
They must offer public reasons.  Their conclusions will be open 
to criticism and to praise.  Today in such cases, judges must perform 
their duties under the public and media spotlight.  Whatever they 
decide will be criticised by some.

  

    

  

            
In a recent public address to celebrate the centenary of our Constitution, 
Sir Gerard Brennan reminded us of the origins of the Constitution and 
of the debt we owe to Britain whose legal traditions we inherited and 
adapted for ourselves  [72]  .  He called on Australians to celebrate the diversity of their 
pluralistic, multicultural society and to champion its tolerance  [73]  .  He declared that 
the virtues of the founders of our Commonwealth lay in their "vision 
and courage, compromise and determination"  [74]  .  These are qualities to which, in his own professional life, 
Sir Gerard Brennan always aspired.  To the listed catalogue I would 
add an abiding interest in ethical puzzles.  And  strong inclination 
to resolve them drawing upon the wisdom of the centuries, often illuminated 
by the Church of his tradition.

  

    

  

            
The puzzle of the conjoint twins is one of many that now engage the 
law, society and the religions in a world of exploding scientific information 
and rapid technological advances.  Many more dilemmas of this character 
await resolution   [75]  .  Sometimes the choices are painful.  Sometimes the debates 
are acrimonious.  Often they are extremely urgent.  Sometimes, 
as the case of Mary and Jodie from the island of Gozo, the crisis is 
dramatic and the resolution heart-rending.

  

    

  

            
Was the operation a success?  Was the legal process a success?  
To answer these legitimate questions demands the most serious moral 
and legal reflection. 

  

  

    *      Justice of 
the High Court of Australia.  Member of the International Bioethics 
Committee of UNESCO.  Member of the Ethics Committee of the Human 
Genome Organisation.

  

    [1]        
See Australian Law Reform Commission,   Complaints Against Police   (ALRC 1, 1975);   Criminal Investigation   (ALRC 2, 1975);   Alcohol, Drugs and Driving   (ALRC 4, 1976).

  

    [2]        
ALRC 7, 1977.

  

    [3]        
ALRC 7, 1977, Ch 10, paras 114-115.

  

    [4]      Especially   Administrative Decisions 
(Judicial Review) Act   1977 (Cth) and the commencement of the   Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act   1976 (Cth)..  

  

    [5]        
eg   Wik 
Peoples v Queensland   (1996) 187 CLR 1 and   Green v The Queen   (1998) 191 CLR 334.

  

    [6]        
See, eg,   Levy v Victoria   (1997) 189 CLR 579;   Green v The Queen   (1998) 191 CLR 334;   I W v City of Perth   (1998) 191 CLR 1.

  

    [7]        
eg   Ha 
v New South Wales   (1997) 189 CLR 465;   Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation   (1997) 189 CLR 520 and   Patrick Stevedores Operations No 2 Pty Ltd v Maritime Union of Australia   (1998) 195 CLR 1.

  

    [8]        
eg   Applicant 
A v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs   (1997) 190 CLR 225.

  

    [9]        
(1992) 175 CLR 1.

  

    [10]       (1992) 
175 CLR 1 at 42.

  

    [11]       See 
"Internet Twins Need Love, Not Litigation",   Weekend Australian   20 January 2001, 16.

  

    [12]       ALRC 
7, p 87 (para 178).

  

    [13]        Somersett v Stewart   (1772), Lofft, 1, 1 at 
19; 98 ER 499 at 510 per Lord Mansfield.

  

    [14]        International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights,   Art 8,   International Convention to Suppress the Slave Trade and Slavery   1926;   Universal Declaration on Human Rights,   1948, Art 4.

  

    [15]       cf   Chen Shi Hai v Minister 
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs   (2000) 74 ALJR 775 at 785-790 [75]-[81].

  

    [16]       G Roberts, 
"12 Hour Operation to Separate Twins a World First",   Sydney Morning Herald,   27 October 2000, 5.

  

    [17]       Noted 
"Jodie and Mary:  Siamese Twins?" (2000) 7   Healthcare:  Policy, 
Ethics and Law   (India) 157.

  

    [18]         The Times   (London) 8 December 2000.

  

    [19]         Re A (Children) (conjoined 
twins: surgical separation)   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 980.  Estimates of mortality of Jodie 
in elective surgery ranged from 6% to 1-2%.  The risks were appreciably 
greater if emergency surgery was required.  In that event, mortality 
estimates rose to 60%.

  

    [20]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 971.

  

    [21]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 986.

  

    [22]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 987.

  

    [23]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 989.

  

    [24]        Airedale NHS Trust v Bland   [1993] AC 789 at 865 per 
Lord Goff of Chieveley.

  

    [25]      Judgment 
of Johnson J as cited in   Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 1061 per Robert Walker LJ.

  

    [26]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 969 per Ward LJ.

  

    [27]       I Cobain, 
"Our heartache, by surgeons who separated twins",   The Times   (London), 8 December 2000, 3.

  

    [28]      Interview 
"Tonight with Trevor McDonald" ITV (Britain) 7 December 2000 
cited in Cobain, above n 25.

  

    [29]        Sydney Morning Herald,   8 January 2001, 6.

  

    [30]       "Twins 
laid to rest", noted   Bangkok Post,   21 January 2001, p 6.

  

    [31]         The Times   (London) 8 December 2001, 1.

  

    [32]       J Quintavalle 
quoted   ibid  .

  

    [33]       The 
"paramountcy principle" is discussed in   De L v Director General, NSW Department of Community Services   (1996) 187 CLR 640 and 
in   CDJ v 
VAJ   (1999) 
197 CLR 172 and   Northern Territory v GPAO   (1999) 196 CLR 553.  It is reflected in a number of international 
instruments including the United Nations   Convention on the Rights of the Child  , Art 9.

  

    [34]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 970 per Ward LJ.

  

    [35]       110 
SCt 2841 at 2859 (1990); 497 US 261 at 994 cited by Ward LJ in   Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 969.

  

    [36]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 969.

  

    [37]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 969.

  

    [38]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 987.

  

    [39]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 987.

  

    [40]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 1017.

  

    [41]        Airedale NHS Trust v Bland   [1993] AC 789 at 865 per 
Lord Goff of Chieveley.  

  

    [42]         In re B (A Minor)   (Wardship:  Medical 
Treatment) [1981] 1 WLR 1424.

  

    [43]         Ibid   at 1424 per Dunn LJ.

  

    [44]         Re R (A Minor) (Warship:  
Consent to Treatment  ) [1992] Fam LR 11 per Lord Donaldson of Lymington MR at 22.

  

    [45]      Johnson J 
cited in   Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 1061 per Robert Walker LJ.

  

    [46]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 1012.

  

    [47]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 1017.

  

    [48]         Ibid  .

  

    [49]       Sir 
James Stephen cited   Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 1052 per Brooke LJ.

  

    [50]         R v Dudley and Stephens   (1884) 14 QBD 273.

  

    [51]         R v Howe   [1987] 1 AC 417 at 429.

  

    [52]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 1051 per Brooke LJ.

  

    [53]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 1052 per Brooke LJ.

  

    [54]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 1070 per Robert Walker LJ.

  

    [55]         Ibid  .

  

    [56]       K Savvell, 
"The Case of the Conjoined Twins - A Legal Perspective", 
unpublished paper for Health Law Seminar series, 2000, Uni of Sydney 
("Savvell"), p 33.

  

    [57]       Cited 
Savvell, p 33.

  

    [58]         Ibid,   pp 38-39.

  

    [59]         R v Duffy   [1967] 1 QB 63 at 67; S Bronitt and B McSherry   Principles of Criminal Law   (2001) 295.

  

    [60]        Criminal Code   (Q), s 273;   Criminal Code   (WA), s 250.

  

    [61]       cf   Zedevic v Director of Public 
Prosecutions (Vic)   (1987) 182 CLR 645.

  

    [62]       cf   Palmer v The Queen   [1971] AC 814;   R v Howe   (1958) 100 CLR 448; and   Zedevic v Director 
of Public Prosecutions (Vic)   (1987) 182 CLR 645.

  

    [63]         R v Loughnan   [1981] VR 443.

  

    [64]         R v White   (1987) 9 NSWLR 427.

  

    [65]        Buckoke v Greater London 
Council   [1971] Ch 655 at 668.  

  

    [66]         R v Howe   [1987] 1 AC 417.

  

    [67]         R v Wallin   [1999] 1 AC 82 at 90-93.  
The House of Lords in that case ruled that where appropriate a jury 
considering a charge of murder "should be directed that they are 
not entitled to find the necessary intention, unless they feel sure 
that the death or serious bodily harm was a virtual certainty [barring 
some unforeseen intervention] as a result of the defendant's action 
and that the defendant appreciated that such was the case.  Where 
a man realises that it is for all practical purposes inevitable that 
his actions will result in death or serious harm, the inference may 
be irresistible that he   intended   that result, however little he may have   desired   or wished it to happen" (emphasis added).

  

    [68]         Re A   [2000] 4 All ER 961 at 1068-1069 per Robert Walker LJ.

  

    [69]       B Tobin, 
"An Ethical Perspective on the British Conjoined Twins Case", 
Health Law Seminar Series 2000, University of Sydney, 15 November 2000, 
unpublished p 9 ("Tobin")

  

    [70]         Ibid,   10.

  

    [71]       Tobin, 
9.

  

    [72]      Brennan, 
"Centenary of the Enactment of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution 
Act" (2001) 75 ALJ 31.

  

    [73]         Ibid,   35.

  

    [74]         Loc cit  .

  

   [75]      Including the controversial subject of the use of stem 
cells derived from embryonic tissue for the purpose of taking advantage 
of their pluripotency in replacing injured or diseased tissue in the 
treatment of myocardial infarction, Alzheimer's Disease, insulin deficiency 
etc.

  

