---
title: "Building sustainable international defences against terrorism. Presentation to Conflict Prevention Project Distinguished Speaker Series, 14 November 2001"
date: "2001-11-14"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "International defence relations"
  - "International Crisis Group"
  - "Terrorism"
  - "Asia, Central"
  - "Iraq"
  - "Regional security"
  - "Overseas item"
  - "Afghanistan"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232009
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ETD66%22
---

  

  BUILDING SUSTAINABLE INTERNATIONAL DEFENCES AGAINST TERRORISM

  

   

  

  Presentation by Gareth Evans, President of the International Crisis 
Group, to Conflict Prevention Project Distinguished Speaker Series, 
Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington DC, 14 
November 2001.

  

  ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

  

   

  

   

  

  When events are moving as fast as they have been 
in the last few days, the hardest task for decision makers - and I 
know because I have been in the eye of a few storms in my time - is 
to keep your eye on the main game, and in particular make sure that 
your long term objectives are not subverted by your short term objectives, 
and in particular the constant need in democracies to be seen to be 
doing something.

  

   

  

  The international policy challenge that the US 
has been set by 911 is fantastically difficult and complex, and so far 
- with only a few minor glitches along the way - it has been handled 
extremely well indeed. Like most of that legion of sceptics who were 
profoundly troubled by many aspects of Bush Mark I foreign policy (the 
one that applied from January to September 10) I have been very pleasantly 
surprised indeed by the way in which State, the Pentagon and the White 
House have got their act together, articulated sound and measured objectives, 
and effectively advanced them.

  

   

  

  But every day is a new day, and with things in 
Afghanistan at least partially falling into place, backburner issues 
like what to do about Iraq will very quickly come to the frontburner, 
and the potential for policy missteps remains very high.

  

   

  

  ICG’s Role  

  

   

  

  It has never been more important in these circumstances 
for all those with some capacity to intelligently and practically influence 
the policy process to pull out all stops to do just that. That’s the 
role, whether presumptuously or not, that the ICG has set itself, and 
we are rapidly putting in place the infrastructure that will enable 
us to be credible and serious policy players across the whole spectrum 
of issues involved in the global war on terrorism.

  

   

  

  Since Senior Vice President Mark Schneider spoke 
to this group on 28 June, we have - with support from $1 million in 
new foundation grants - moved to significantly extend our operations 
in two main ways, both of which will be up and running by early next 
month:

  

   

  

  q       we are opening a new field office 
in Islamabad - to work through the Pakistan/Afghanistan dimensions 
of the issue, in close interaction with our existing Central Asia program 
based in Kyrgyzstan;

  

  q       we are opening a major new Middle 
East regional office in Amman, with a team of analysts covering the 
whole range of issues involving Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia and the Gulf 
States, Israel-Palestine-Syria-Lebanon-Jordan, and Egypt - linking 
in to work we are already doing in Algeria and Sudan; with a new Middle 
East Program Director, Rob Malley, working out of Washington.

  

   

  

  In addition ICG has an existing capacity to analyse 
and report on Islam-related issues, as they bear on terrorism, in the 
Balkans and Indonesia ( where we have already put out reports analysing 
the extent of the threat as we presently see it - not in fact as great 
as some breathless international reporting and local political opportunism 
would have it). And we have the capacity to address terrorism issues 
in other areas of our activity around the world, including in particular 
Colombia.

  

   

  

  The basic analytical and policy approach that 
we are adopting so far as Islamist-based terrorism is concerned, that 
we will be urging upon the US and other relevant governments - and 
that will be the broad framework for our reports, briefings and advocacy 
in the future - is that the international response to the terrorist 
threat must have four clearly delineated objectives, and that it is 
absolutely crucial that they work in harmony. Those four objectives, 
and the most important specific issues that arise with each of them, 
can be summarised as follows.   
  


  1.    Punishing 
the Perpetrators of Past Attacks  

  

   

  

  q       how to take enforcement action against the perpetrators 
of terror and those harbouring them without generating new grievances 
feeding extremism;

  

   

  

  q       to achieve and maintain stability in areas of 
great continuing tension made even more volatile by the prospect of 
strong measures being taken against terrorists or those harbouring them.

  

   

  

  2.     Building 
Cooperative Defences Against Future Acts of Terrorism

  

   

  

  q       how to build the capacity and will in individual 
countries to fight terror originating from within their own borders, 
in effect to eliminate safe havens;

  

  q       how to build better international cooperation 
in intelligence and enforcement;

  

  q       how to achieve these objectives without destabilising 
already fragile countries, and the region around them;

  

  q       how to achieve these objectives without propping 
up unsavoury, unresponsive or inept regimes (and thus storing up more 
problems for the future).

  

   

  

  3.       Addressing the Political and Security Issues 
that Feed Grievance (and Affect the Capacity and Will of States to Cooperate)

  

   

  

  q       identifying and weighting the issues that have 
most salience or resonance in feeding extremist sentiment;

  

   

  

  q       identifying the policy approaches by the international 
community that are likely to most productive in reducing that salience 

  

   

  

  -        
in particular here talking about the Israel-Palestine issue, but not 
only that

  

  -       
a crucial further issue here, for example, is how to achieve democratisation 
of the non-democracies and anti-democracies of the Arab world in an 
environment where extremist or near-extremist Islamist forces could 
emerge as those with the strongest popular following.

  

   

  

  4.     
Addressing the Economic, Social and Cultural Issues that Feed Grievance, 
(and Affect the Capacity and Will of States to Cooperate)

  

   

  

  q       identifying and weighting the issues (including 
absolute and relative economic deprivation, lack of educational opportunity, 
role of extremist Muslim clerics and the misuse of Islam for political 
purposes) that have most salience or resonance in feeding extremist 
sentiment;

  

   

  

  q       identifying strategies for addressing them by 
governments, intergovernmental organisations and key non-governmental 
organisations.

  

   

  

  Managing Current Tensions

  

   

  

  I am not in a position today 
to give more than an outline sketch of the approach that ICG has in 
mind on some of these issues - that will emerge out of the field-based 
analysis and policy thinking that we will be doing in the months ahead 
- but let me offer at least some reaction to the most immediate issues 
now facing policy makers.

  

   

  

  Immediate Challenges in Afghanistan

  

   

  

  With the war in the north 
effectively won, the immediate challenges are:

  

   

  

  q       to restrain the Northern Alliance forces some 
repeating the outrages they perpetrated on both their opponents and 
the civilian population in Kabul and elsewhere when last in power there 
in the early 90s: apart from the moral and humanitarian issue, this 
would be desperately counterproductive in terms of holding together 
any kind of coalition in the Muslim world. The US special forces will 
have to assume a particular responsibility in this respect, until the 
second challenge is met:

  

   

  

  q       to put in place as soon as humanly possible a 
UN authorised multinational security force to hold the ring while a 
new political authority gets established and some semblance of effective 
administrative normality is put in place: the obvious candidates are 
non-neighbouring Muslim countries like Turkey, Morocco, Bangladesh and 
Indonesia, one or two of whom have already indicated a readiness to 
play this role;

  

   

  

  q       to put in place a government that can keep the 
peace in the longer term - and satisfy Pakistan. Both elements of 
this equation are going to be hard to satisfy (with Musharaff’s political 
comfort, and perhaps personal survival, depending on getting a significant 
Pushtun component into that government), but everyone is acutely conscious 
of the problem, and probably nothing much more can be done than is already 
feverishly under way with the Brahimi UN process;

  

   

  

  q       to extend the humanitarian relief effort throughout 
the country, in all those areas where it is possible to operate, and 
begin planning for a smooth transition from emergency support to longer-term 
redevelopment aid;

  

   

  

  q       to put in place a UN sponsored transitional administrative 
support structure capable of beginning the task of recreating functioning 
government until Afghani institutions can be developed: having seen 
the Cambodian operation at close quarters and watched others at a distance 
over the years, I am not especially confident about the UN system’s 
capacity to handle this kind of operation, but if we don’t try there 
will be a serious vacuum.;

  

   

  

  q       to complete the process of crushing al-Qaeda, 
the Arab Afghans and Osama bin Laden: although this is of course the 
immediate rationale for the whole Afghanistan enterprise, it can probably 
be pursued by more measured steps than continuing a massive airborne 
and other military assault of the rapidly dispersing Taliban forces, 
with the continuing risk of further civilian casualties. In particular 
a bombing pause for Ramadan, which made no military sense before the 
collapse of the north, should now be seriously contemplated as a gesture 
to the Islamic world whose support is still going to be crucially necessary 
for the rest of the campaign against terror ahead. The argument here 
would be

  

   

  

  -       
there is much less prospect of the Taliban, and in particular the Arab 
Afghans, being able to regroup and fight again as guerillas, now that 
they are so widely despised;

  

  -       
there is a much better chance now of the necessary human intelligence 
to track down Oslama bin Laden and the key Taliban leadership being 
forthcoming

  

  -       
the saturation surveillance capacity the US will now have, together 
with the greater effectiveness of infra-red heat sensors, means that 
the onset of winter is a much bigger problem for the bad guys holed 
up in the mountains than it is for those chasing them.

  

   

  

  q        to find a method for trying bin Laden if 
he is caught alive, that won’t risk getting egg all over the collective 
Western face, given the likely state of precise, useable evidence against 
him. Thus the scramble to reinvent special military tribunals and the 
like, all of which have serious credibility problems. The US hope will 
obviously be that he dies resisting - and no doubt will be able to 
bear with fortitude the prospect of his martyrdom in some quarters…

  

   

  

  The Challenge of Iraq

  

   

  

  With Afghanistan on the way 
to resolution, pressure will obviously build for action against Iraq. 
There have already been a few misspeaks from Paul Wolfowitz and others 
on this subject, and if ICG Board member Ken Adelman’s views, as recently 
reported in the   New Yorker   have any currency, we are in for an interesting 
time.

  

   

  

  There is no question that 
Iraq poses a huge problem, above all in its undoubted WMD capacity and 
its demonstrated willingness in the past to use it. It may or may not 
have had a hand in 911, and the later anthrax attacks, but as yet there 
is no compelling evidence.

  

   

  

  Some action is going to be 
necessary on the WMD front - with the need to establish a new inspection 
regime there being absolutely compelling - but the question is what 
and when, and whether the military option makes any sense. On this front 
there are some obvious caveats:

  

   

  

  q       However much Iraq is detested by its Arab neighbours 
and Iran - it still has an extraordinary capacity to win support if 
it can paint itself as oppressed, as we have seen in the playing out 
of the sanctions issue.

  

   

  

  q       The evidence of responsibility for past attacks 
or planned future attacks would need to be very strong.

  

   

  

  q       It cannot be assumed that any military victory 
would be easily won, result in the collapse of the Saddam regime and 
anyone likely to be as bad, and be sustainable: there will be a repeat 
of the dilemma of 1991 - what does the dog do when it catches the 
car?

  

   

  

  q       The views of Turkey - which has suffered grievously 
(to the est tune of some $30 billion dollars economically since the 
Gulf War, with its subsequent trade embargoes) - would have to be 
taken closely into account.  In particular the often favoured military/political 
approach of a three way split of Iraq into Shiite south/ Sunni middle 
and Kurdish north is seen by Turkey as a nightmare scenario - reviving 
all its worst anxieties about separatist Kurdistan sentiment within 
its own territory.

  

   

  

  The challenge of stabilising 
Central Asia

  

   

  

  Afghanistan is not an isolated 
conflict but part of a regional web of problems. The conflict has gone 
on since the 1970s with the actors often changing. The one thing that 
has remained constant is a steady flow of inputs to the conflict - 
arms and money. The country is already flooded with weapons so it is 
better to tackle money which means cutting back on drug trafficking 
and smuggling of consumer goods to Pakistan. Tackling drugs requires 
a comprehensive program of crop substitution, poverty reduction, interdiction 
efforts and demand reduction in the region. Tackling smuggling to Pakistan 
means reducing Pakistani tariffs - as tariffs have been lowered smuggling 
has already declined. This means significant budgetary support and a 
total reworking of the Pakistani fiscal system (a nightmare but possible).

  

   

  

  To get the neighbouring countries 
to be cooperative in the fight against terrorism and to encourage them 
in the rebuilding of Afghanistan it is necessary to alleviate their 
concerns about the country. For Iran this means drugs, refugees and 
the treatment of Afghanistan’s Shia minority. For Pakistan it means 
not having a hostile government in Kabul (Pakistan has had hostile relationships 
with the government in Kabul for all but about five of the past 50 years 
- the only friendly government was the Taliban. Afghanistan even voted 
against Pakistan’s membership in the UN). For India it means closing 
Pakistani training camps and ensuring that Arab-Afghans and others don’t 
end up fighting in Kashmir (and more diplomatic attention to implementing 
new confidence building measures enabling a fresh start on addressing 
the Kashmir problem). For Uzbekistan, it means closing down IMU activities. 
The other Central Asia states are mostly concerned about drugs, refugees 
and spill-over of conflict. 

  

   

  

  Terrorism provides the main 
rationale for military and economic intervention at the moment but it 
is in the interests of the West to be significantly involved beyond 
getting rid of bin Laden. The region provides 80 per cent of opiates 
reaching Europe and a rising amount of those reaching the U.S.. 29,000 
Afghan asylum seekers arrived in Europe in 2000. More importantly than 
all these reasons - this area has multiple causes of instability (drugs, 
border disputes, religious and ethnic tensions, unresponsive authoritarian 
regimes, mafia economies), a very real potential for economic and environmental 
collapse and is surrounded by four nuclear-armed powers. There are no 
guarantees that massive western intervention will work but it can almost 
be guaranteed that the region will go on causing major problems to all 
western nations if nothing is done. 

  

   

  

  Conclusion

  

   

  

  There are many more issues 
on the agenda here which I haven’t begun to touch - not least the 
kinds of strategies necessary to address a number of the root cause 
political and economic issues in the wider region that are so important 
in creating the climate in which extremism and terrorism flourishes, 
and in inhibiting the capacity and will of regional governments to act 
effectively. 

  

   

  

  But hopefully I have said 
enough to indicate that ICG has its work cut out for it in the months, 
and maybe years, ahead, and that there will be no shortage of issues 
for us to be able to bounce around with the community of scholars here, 
which I am delighted to have the opportunity of doing today.

  

   

  

   

  

