---
title: "Deterring and defeating coups in the Asia Pacific: address."
date: "2001-05-11"
creators:
  - "Jeffery, Michael"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Eminent Persons Group (EPG)MoralePapua New Guinea Defence Force (PNGDF)"
  - "Armed forces"
  - "Papua New Guinea"
  - "Vocational education and training"
  - "Coups"
  - "Mismanagement"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211223668
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HUQ96%22
---

  Page 1 of 4 

  Deterring and Defeating Coups in the Asia Pacific 

  I 1  May 2001 

  Teistra Theatre, Australian War Memorial, Canberra 

  An address by 

  Major General Michael Jeffery AC CVO MC KStJ Cit WA 

  Backaround 

  Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to have been asked to participate in this  conference, particularly in light of recent events in Papua New Guinea, a country where I had the pleasure of  serving as a company commander from 1966-1969 and then as the last Australian commanding officer of a  Pacific Islands Regiment Battalion until Independence in 1975. At Independence Australia left a small PNG  defence force of two infantry battalions of about 700 men each, with small maritime and air wings in support.  The force which I will now refer to as the PNGDF was well trained, well disciplined and had good morale. Its  roles of border patrolling, nation building and assisting the police in times of civil emergency were well 

  understood by all ranks. 

  Today, for many reasons, the situation of the PNGDF is nowhere near so good, and recently as a member of  a four man Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group, tasked by the Secretary General at the request of the  PNG prime minister, Sir Meeker Morouta, I took part in writing a report designed to restore capability, pride,  professionalism and sustained affordability back to the force. 

  Whilst being briefed on the task in November last year, prior to joining the EPG, I was somewhat perturbed to  hear at the highest levels of government and the bureaucracy in both Australia and PNG, that the PNGDF  was considered a likely agent for a coups detach against the elected government. 

  I want to say from the outset, that after visiting every unit and headquarters in the PNGDF, and holding free  and open discussions with all ranks, not once did we hear any mention of overthrowing the government by  any means, let alone coups d' etat. 

  There was however considerable criticism of successive PNG governments (and indeed our own), the  bureaucracy and the PNG higher defence organisation, for their collective mishandling of the Bougainville  situation, where some 275 soldiers and an estimated 12-20000 civilians lost their lives; for appalling  mismanagement of the PNGDF in almost every area of military endeavour, including inadequate training,  equipment shortages, poor maintenance and critical supply shortages of all types, including food and 

  uniforms. Adding to these problems was an unfair and abused promotion system, based on santonisrn or  political patronage, rather than on professional merit and proven leadership qualities. 

  In broad terms the EPG found an ageing army of 4500 men, exhausted from the Bougainville civil war, whose  total budget was being spent on salaries. As a result no aircraft were flying, only one parol boat of four was  operational, there had been no patrolling of the PNG border for 10 years and virtually all vehicles, engineer  plant and unit radios were unserviceable. Many officers and NCO's were not qualified for the rank they were  holding, and the soldiers barracks and married accommodation were in a terrible state of repair. Add the  suspicion of corruption at senior levels of government administration and you can gauge very readily why the 

  PNGDF was, and remains, a very discontented force. 

  Yet we should note with some sense of relief, that in the various PNGDF disturbances over the years, the  basic causes have generally been of perceived injustices involving pay and conditions, with the desired  outcome to fix the injustice, rather than replace or overthrow a democratically elected government. Other  causes have been due to police/ PNGDF friction, or ill-founded rumours being fed to the soldiery, of which the 

  recent fracas in March this year is a good example. In this case, as a result of a deliberate and premature leak 

  Page 2 of 4 

  to the media of part of the EPG report, soldiers believed that some 2000 of them were to be arbitrarily  discharged from the PNGDF, without understanding that this was to be a voluntary release scheme with  generous and guaranteed redundancy payments. 

  This is not to say that a coup could never take place in PNG. It possibly could under the right conditions,  which leads nicely into our topic on how to prevent such an event from happening in the AsiaIPacific, but with  particular emphasis on PNG and its defence force. 

  The Basis of a Good Army 

  In addressing coups prevention, it is important to understand what are the basic ingredients of a good, loyal  army. 

  Every good army possesses an indefinable quality called " spirit". Armies that possess it have an obvious  confidence in themselves, pride in being soldiers in the service of their country and in the unit to which they  belong and an abiding respect for the enduring qualities inherent in every good soldier - courage, loyalty,  discipline and professionalism. 

  Spirit (or morale) is fostered through a sense of purpose, tradition and honourable achievement; by the  unselfish example and leadership of its officer corps; through a sense of close identity with the civil community  and an ongoing respect for the political authority, which is its lawful master. 

  Any weakness in the fostering agencies just mentioned will impact severely on the spirit of any army. I would  put it to you that in recent years the PNGDF has suffered through serious weaknesses in all of them. 

  Selection, Training and Promotion Criteria 

  I would now like to explain how the spirit of an army is developed through the careful selection, training and  promotion of its core elements; the soldier, the Non Commissioned Officer (NCO) and the officer. 

  Good soldiers in the main are not born, but made. This starts with the recruiting or selection process. In PNG  until recent times recruiting was evenly done across all provinces to ensure that no particular tribal group held  sway. Such a selection process was also beneficial in showing the rest of the country that various tribal  groups could indeed work harmoniously together. This was demonstrated each year with company groups 

  patrolling throughout the country, showing the flag, carrying out minor construction works, conducting first aid  clinics, performing ceremonial functions and so on. The Army of PNG was on regular display throughout the  country and was respected. 

  The selection process must also pay due regard to a would-be recruit's basic health, his intelligence and  education levels to absorb skills training, and his motivation to serve in a demanding, and at times, dangerous  profession. 

  In PNG, recruit training lasted about six months. During training, a young man from an essentially tribal/ rural  background had to be taught almost everything - pidgin English, personal hygiene, barrack and bush living,  weapon handling, navigation, drill, first aid, military law, the army system, discipline, obedience to the chain of  command and the history of the PNGDF. He had to be taught field skills; living in the jungle, ambushing,  attacking, defending, patrolling, building helicopter landing zones, constructing bridges, purifying water and  working with the police. Above all he had to be a competent member of a 10-man infantry section by the time 

  recruit training was finished. He was then deemed qualified for posting to a unit where he then trained and  operated as part of a platoon of 30, in a company of 1 I O ,  and a battalion of 700. The battalion became his  new home and his new family. 

  A good soldier, after several years of service and passing the relevant qualifying courses, could then aspire to  promotion as a non commissioned officer, the essential link between officer and soldier. As a senior private  soldier, he would have shown superior levels of military skill and the leadership potential to command a  section of 10 men, or after further service and promotion courses, advance higher in the NCO promotion  stream as the second- in- command or sergeant of a platoon, then as a warrant officer of a company and  finally to the pinnacle of NCO rank, as the regimental sergeant major of an infantry battalion. 

  To attain NCO rank requires not only on-the-job experience, but attendance at a variety of critically important  promotion and technical skill courses, some of several weeks or even months duration. In the PNGDF in  recent years much of this training has simply not been done because of the demands of Bougainville and a 

  Page 3 of 4 

  shortage of qualified instructors and training resources. The impact on the effectiveness of the PNGDF,  including its basic training levels, discipline and effectiveness has been severe. In short, the proper selection  and training of an army's NCOs is of paramount importance. 

  The officer corps leads, directs, commands and administers the army and their proper selection and training is  of vital importance to the effective functioning of any army in any country. Academically, the majority of officer  candidates should come from the top 3% of the population; be well balanced psychologically and emotionally;  be physically fit; be highly motivated towards a service career; show natural leadership qualities and be of  good character and of high personal integrity. 

  Once selected for officer training at an officer college, it is normal for a cadet these days to complete a degree  as well as learn the fundamentals of being a leader of, for example, a 30-man platoon. Such training can take  from 18 months to four or five years and of course is very expensive. One of the problems of training PNG  officer cadets at the Royal Military College Duntroon is the unrealistic expectations graduates have when they 

  return to units in the PNGDF that have poorer quality equipment, much less of it and of different types. A  second difficulty is that some of the training is not really suited to PNG conditions and requirements. For these  reasons I am of the view that PNG should again be assisted in running its own officer training for the majority  of cadets, with a small, select minority doing overseas training; preferably three years of degree study at the  Australian Defence Force Academy followed by 12 months commissioning training at Duntroon. 

  Post Graduate Training on initial Employment 

  The first three years of a young officer's life in his first unit are vital in setting the proper foundations for his  future performance. To do well he needs the support and guidance of a top rate, experienced platoon  sergeant, along with a wise, firm and capable boss: normally a company commander in the rank of major in a  traditional infantry battalion. 

  If the sergeant, like the young officer, is inexperienced, or indeed incapable, the platoon commander is in  trouble. If the company commander has poor leadership qualities and does not take the time and effort to  guide, to assess performance, to correct or counsel where necessary and to lead by example, the young  officer is even further disadvantaged. 

  This has been a problem in the PNGDF, where officers of major and above may not have had the appropriate  guidance when they were junior officers and have in many cases not completed the essential qualifying  courses for their rank. In other words an officer might hold the rank of lieutenant colonel, but only be qualified  for captain. 

  Appointment Criteria for Commanders and Senior Staff 

  At the highest levels of command and staff (brigadier and colonel in the PNGDF), effective leadership and the  higher direction of the force can be, and has been, severely degraded when these officers are appointed by  direct political patronage; that is on the personal preference of a prime minister or a minister, rather than on  the basis of course qualification, professional competence and proven performance. It is essential that the  promotion system for senior officers and in particular the commander is seen as transparent, fair and based  entirely on measured performance. In the PNGDF what is needed at the senior levels of appointment is an  independent appointments commission, which can carefully, skilfully and honestly assess the qualities,  qualifications and performance of each officer considered a contender for senior rank. A suitable commission  might consist of the prime minister, the leader of the opposition, the ombudsman and a respected, recently  retired senior military officer. For reasons of force stability and integrity the appointment of the commander  should be for a fixed term, and he should be removable by the commission only on the basis of proven  incompetence, ill health, corruption or moral issues. 

  Selection Criteria Captain to Lieutenant Colonel 

  For promotion from captain to lieutenant colonel, an honest, transparent appraisal system is also needed.  This should be based on a standardised annual written report by the officer's commanding officer, which is  then reviewed by the next higher authority in the command chain, scored accordingly to provide an order of  merit and then considered annually by a specially convened promotions and appointments committee. An  officer should sign his report in the presence of the reporting officer and be counselled on any performance  weaknesses. Half way through the reporting year, an interim report should be raised to indicate how the 

  officer is progressing and to give him the opportunity to correct any problem areas before the annual report is  written and scored. From long personal experience I can assure you that such a system of appraisal provides 

  Page 4 of 4 

  a wonderfully accurate assessment of an officers true worth, particularly when viewed over several years. 

  I have spent some time on officer selection, appraisal and promotion, because it is so fundamentally important  to the command and management of a well trained, disciplined and loyal defence force. 

  The impact of lnstitutionalised Corruption 

  But a defence force cannot conduct itself with honour, professionalism and loyalty for any length of time,  unless the institutions that legally direct it are of similar mould. Corrupt and incompetent leadership in the  political and administrative institutions make it virtually impossible to have an effective defence force. In PNG  there has been a history of corruption and mismanagement in the political and administrative processes and  this has permeated the higher echelons of the defence organisation. 

  Respect of the Civil Community 

  Finally, all good defence forces have to earn the trust and respect of the civil community whom they serve. If a  force is seen as incompetent, badly disciplined or corrupt, it will quickly lose public goodwill and esteem, and  once lost it is a long, hard process to restore. Regrettably the PNGDF has lost much of the public respect it  enjoyed in earlier years. 

  Converting a Defence Force to a Police Field Force 

  I would like to conclude my address with a few words on a notion held by some that for small countries such 

  as PNG, their defence forces could be replaced with a police field force. I can only say in relation to PNG that  such a proposal would not be desirable or workable. The role of the police is to preserve life, whilst that of the  defence force is to take it legally when required. The training, the equipment, the ethos and the legal  processes are totally different for each force and sensibly so. For example in PNG, the business of dealing  with a potential military problem on the PNG/lrian Jaya border, or dealing with a heavily armed and tactically  adept Bougainville Republican Army, is essentially a military function requiring specialist military skills, tactics,  weaponry and logistics. On the other hand the role of arresting criminals and maintaining the peace is a 

  specialised police function. At times both must work together when keeping the peace is beyond the capacity  of the police, a situation that is fast becoming reality in particular areas of PNG, including Port Moresby, Lea,  the highlands and potentially, on the PNG border where large movements of refugees could occur at short  notice because of political instability in IrianNaya. 

  Summary 

  In summarising this presentation, I have outlined what I consider to be the essential selection, training and  promotion criteria for all components of an effective and loyal army, with special emphasis on the PNGDF. 1  have suggested that any good army in any country relies on spirit or morale for effective, loyal and sustained  performance. Within an army, the development of spirit relies heavily on the selection, training and promotion  criteria for its soldiers, NCOs and officers. But this by itself is not enough. In the end, if the parliamentary and  bureaucratic institutions that direct and support the services are seen as corrupt or incompetent or both, it is  highly unlikely an army will remain untainted for too long. In the meantime elements of it may misguidedly  contemplate coups d' etat in an attempt to rectify the situation. Institution building therefore, along with earned  public respect becomes essential criteria in developing anti coups philosophies in PNG and the Asia/Pacific  region. 

  Thankyou for your attention; it has been a pleasure to address you this morning 

