---
title: "Race weekend blow from Federal Minister."
date: "2001-10-05"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211229714
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5Y256%22
---

 Peter Andren MP - Independent Member for Calare

 M e d i

 a

 R e l e a

 s e

 5th October 2001

 Race Weekend Blow From Federal Minister

 Federal Tourism Minister Jackie Kelly has rejected any major Commonwealth contribution to the upgrade of Mt Panorama racing circuit, according to Federal Member for Calare Peter Andren.

 “On the eve of the great race the Minister has told me the development of Mt Panorama and its surrounds are essentially the responsibility of the state and local governments,” Mr Andren said.

 “In the same breath the Minister recognises Mt Panorama as not only a world renowned touring car racing venue, but a very significant regional tourism attraction in Australia.

 “I am extremely disappointed at the Minister’s response.

 “If the Minister can say Mt Panorama is a ‘world renowned’ circuit and a significant sport and tourism attraction, what better projects are there for a Federal support?” he asked.

 “It is OK for the Federal Government to waste $150 million on 2 boatloads of asylum seekers and spend countless millions on political advertising but it can’t find a lousy $10 million for a major regional development project like Mt Panorama.

 “The Minister correctly criticises the State Government for its failure to support the $20 million upgrading, but two wrongs don’t make a right and the Federal and State Governments’ regional development commitment is empty rhetoric.

 “I urge race fans to get behind the campaign by Bathurst City Council to try and make both governments realise Mt Panorama is a national and state icon and deserves strong government support, not buck passing.

 “With the support of fans, drivers and the local community we must let the Federal Minister and State Premier know that we won’t go away,” Mr Andren said.

 For More Information : Peter Andren 026332 6229 or 0419 61 2891

