---
title: "Minister delays Bartyzal decision."
date: "2001-02-08"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211220731
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/M7M36%22
---

  M 

  e 

  d 

  l 

  1 

  a 

  .R 

  e 

  1 

  e 

  a 

  S 

  e 

  8th February 2001 

  Minister Delays Bartyzal Decision 

  The Minister for Immigration Philip Ruddock has agreed to defer any decision on   deporting a Czech family in Orange who have applied for refugee protection   status. 

  The decision, affecting Mr Pave1 Bartyzal his wife and three children, came after   a meeting with member for Calare Peter Andren in Canberra this morning. 

  “The minister has decided to defer any decision until after he has received a full   report on the character and background of the family in their home province of the   Czech Republic,” Mr Andren said. 

  “This will take about 6 months and will involve Australian embassy and consular   staff in Belgrade and Prague conducting a full inquiry into the claims Mr Bartyzal   has made about the persecution of him and his family. 

  “I think this is a very fair outcome, and hopefully the minister will be in a position   to make a final decision in about 6 months. 

  “In the meantime the Immigration Department has issued Mr Bartyzal with an   application for an extended bridging visa that will allow him to work to support   his family. 

  “The Minister made it clear to me that any decision he makes on refugee and   protection visas must ensure they go to people in genuine need of protection. 

  “While the refugee Tribunal has rejected the Bartyzal’s claim on the evidence   presented the minister has agreed to carry out an investigation in the Czech   Republic to further establish the bona fides of the family’s claims for protection   status. 

  ” No-one should at this stage raise their hopes too much. The Minister has said he   does not intend making a decision until the relevant criteria including health and   character have been assessed,” Mr Andren concluded. 

