---
title: "27th National Conference of the Australian Association of Social Workers: speaking notes."
date: "2001-09-23"
creators:
  - "Hollingworth, Peter"
source: "GOVERNOR-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211229087
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Y8G56%22
---

 SPEAKING NOTES FOR HIS EXCELLENCY THE RIGHT REVEREND DR PETER HOLLINGWORTH, AC, OBE,

 GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA

 FOR THE 27TH NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE AUSTRALIAN ASSOCIATION OF SOCIAL WORKERS

 SATURDAY, 23 SEPTEMBER 2001

 Thanks to Peta and to the Australian Association of Social Workers for inviting me to open this 27th National Conference.

 I, too, extend my thanks to the Yarramunua people for the traditional welcome they gave us and to acknowledge the traditional people of this land.

 Welcome too, to members of the Association, and to professionals from different fields and disciplines related to the broad context of social work.

 The conference theme: Think/Act Local/Global: Social Work in the 21st Century, could not have been more appropriate, nor more timely, given events of recent weeks, and their likely consequence in the weeks and months to come.

 In this context, your theme will apply in far more than theoretical terms. Much of your deliberations will now, by necessity, have become urgently practical.

 How can we prepare ourselves and those we serve for what is to come? How can we provide support and comfort in a period of unparalleled international uncertainty? How can we act as agents of reconciliation?

 And, for the longer term, how might we work with others for global peace?

 Your colleagues in the United States, already, and social workers in general around the world will inevitably be in the frontline dealing with the unimaginable human consequences of that conflict.

 Your empathy with colleagues in the United States was expressed immediately in the hours following the attacks on New York and Washington through a letter of sympathy and support sent by your National President Jo Gaha, to her American counterpart Ruth Mayden.

 At the same time, the International Federation of Social Workers released a statement condemning terrorism but cautioning against a vengeful response.

 "Above all," the IFSW statement declared, "we appeal to individuals, groups and governments, not to exercise any judgement on any particular nation, ethnic group or culture".

 It goes on to say: "Terrorism and wars are the products of individuals and groupings with a distorted view of power and its use. Their behaviour cannot and must not be attributed to entire communities who share a common background".

 In Australia, in our local communities and around the world, we must resist the temptation to take out justifiable anger on those who simply share some characteristic of faith or background with those who have perpetrated this horror.

 As someone who trained in social work back in the 1960s, I would also like to make the point, that we will not find answers in this hugely difficult international clash of culture and ideology unless and until we can better understand the psyche of those we presently identify as our enemies.

 It's a modern day journey from Paolo Friere's pedogogy of the oppressed, to the alarming development, to understand people, driven not by the proper pursuit of peace and justice, but through sinister ideology cloaked in religious rhetoric with the slogans of liberation.

 So this conference in 2001 is a landmark, in that it explores a redefinition of social work and the role of social workers in a global world.

 Since a new definition was agreed on in June by your international peak bodies, social work practitioners and educators are now charged, in theory, with responsibilities over and above those they are accustomed to fulfilling in their local context.

 Today's social workers have the added definitional responsibility to promote, and I quote:

 "Social change and the liberation of people to enhance well being".

 In my years working as a social worker, beside other social workers, I have often sympathised with those broad, ever shifting goals and responsibilities. Broad, open-ended and non-specific as they may appear to some.

 The focus of this conference is similarly challenging, layering a hard-headed exploration of local concerns with a broader analysis of the big questions faced by social workers across the globe.

 About justice, equality, humanity and spirituality.

 This juxtaposition of the micro and the macro, the theoretical and the practical, the hard-headed and the more idealistic, is appropriate and necessary for a profession such as social work.

 Over the next four days, a range of eminent speakers, local and international, will explore the profession's shifting international focus.

 And they will demonstrate the role that Australian social workers are playing in this healthy questioning of the profession, and in its ensuing reform and development.

 A major feature of the conference will be the wide range of chaired discussions, exploring social work responses to issues that are high on the national agenda: refugee issues, Indigenous disadvantage and family violence, funding problems in public hospitals and the urban/rural divide, to name but a few.

 These subjects are of profound and practical significance at this time in our nation's history, though they are apt to polarise public opinion.

 For you who are working in the multifarious fields of social work, these issues can also be confronting to you, both personally and professionally, I know that well.

 And they can take their toll emotionally, especially when one's natural sense of idealism is discouraged and that can sometimes lead to burn out.

 These matters require the profession to provide ongoing education and counselling for practitioners.

 I understand that conference delegates will pause today to mourn for victims in the United States. This is right and proper, and has happened all over the world and in many parts of Australia.

 The ceremony, which you will hear more about during the morning, will provide an opportunity for you to stop and reflect. To consider others, but also to consider yourselves ó your own responses and your own needs.

 Before embarking on this varied, stimulating and thought-provoking program of activities.

 It is my honour and my pleasure now to officially open this 27th National Conference of the Australian Association of Social Workers.

 And to wish you well for what is set to be an enormously significant and memorable few days, which I hope will strengthen your resolve, deepen your understanding and heighten your sense of vocation as social workers.

