---
title: "The Order of Australia."
date: "2001-09-07"
creators:
  - "Hollingworth, Peter"
source: "GOVERNOR-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228492
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1DX46%22
---

 ARRIVAL TIME:  9.55 AM

 THE ORDER OF AUSTRALIA

 Appointed a Companion in the General Division:

 Charles Goode For service to business, particularly through major achievements in the area of  finance,  for  guidance  in  his  position  on  the  Boards  of  charitable  and health-related  organisations,  and  for  outstanding  direction  of  philanthropic policy in the community.

 Professor James May For  service  to  the  advancement  of  vascular  surgery throughout  the  world, particularly through pioneering the introduction of endoluminal methods for the treatment of diseased arteries, placing Australia in the forefront internationally in this field.

 James O'Sullivan For service to law enforcement and commitment to excellence in reshaping and introducing wide-ranging reforms in the Queensland Police Service.

 Professor Hugh Taylor For  service  to  medicine  in  the  field  of  ophthalmology,  particularly  through renowned  work  in  the  prevention  of  river  blindness  in  the  third  world,  to academia through research and education related to the prevention of eye disease,  and  to  the  development  of  policy  on  eye  health  in  indigenous communities.

 Appointed an Officer in the General Division:

 Lionel Davies For service to the community, particularly through Lions International and St John  Ambulance,  to  international  relations  through  the  provision  of technical expertise, training and specialist advice in Indonesia and Tuvalu, and  to  the  medical profession  as  a  designer and  developer of  specialised precision medical instruments.

 Hazel Hawke For  service  to  the  community,  particularly  through  the  promotion  of  the reconciliation process, support for continued improvement in the quality of children's television, as a contributor to the preservation of  heritage items, and involvement with environmental and wildlife preservation groups.

 1

 Appointed a Member in the General Division:

 Max Atkins For  service  to  local  government,  particularly  as  Mayor  of  the  City  of Shoalhaven, and to the community.

 Professor Bruce Chapman For service to the development of Australian economic, labour market and social policy.

 Anne Murray For  service  to  the  community,  particularly  children,  through  Kidsafe Australia and raising public awareness of safety issues affecting children.

 Appointed a Member in the Military Division:

 Commodore Mervyn Davis For exceptional service to the Royal Australian Navy in the fields of project management and capability management.

 Colonel Greg Baker For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force as the Commander Australian  Contingent,  United  Nations  Transitional  Administration  East Timor.

 Colonel Craig Evans For  exceptional  service  to  the  Australian  Army  as  the  Staff  Officer  Grade One  Operations,  Headquarters  Aviation  Support  Group,  and  as Commanding Officer 1st  Aviation Regiment.

 Group Captain Roy McPhail For  exceptional  service  to  the  Royal  Australian  Air  Force  in  the  fields  of engineering  and  project  management,  and  as  the  Commanding  Officer  of Number 1 Recruit Training Unit.

 Awarded the Medal in the General Division:

 Raymond Aitchison For service to the community, particularly the apparel industry.

 Barbara Blackie For service to the community, particularly through the Onward Stroke Club.

 Ross Bowden For  service  to  the  community,  particularly  people  with  impaired  vision, through the development and teaching of braille.

 2

 Patricia Clarke For  service  to  the  promotion  of  Australian  history  through  research  and writing, to the study of Australian women writers of the 19th Century, and to the Canberra and District Historical Society.

 Kevin Cole For service to the farming sector, particularly in the areas of drought relief and  land  protection,  and  to  the  community  of  Tathra  through  a  range  of urban planning, tourism recreation and sporting groups.

 Michael Crozier For  service  to  the  community  through  school-based  organisations  in  the Australian Capital Territory, the Scouting movement, sporting clubs and the Tuggeranong Community Festival.

 Dr Peter Ilbery For  service  to  the  community,  particularly  through  the  recording  of  the history of the air training school at Uranquinty.

 Dorothy Jamieson For  service  to  the  community  of  Queanbeyan  through  youth,  health  and aged care groups.

 Awarded the Medal in the Military Division:

 Commander John Brown For meritorious service to the Australian Defence Force as the Director of Military Support in the Defence Community Organisation Headquarters.

 Group Captain Barrie Miller, (Ret’d) For  meritorious  service  to  the  Australian  Defence  Force  in  the  field  of strategic management of Australian Defence Force Movements.

 CONSPICUOUS SERVICE DECORATIONS

 Awarded the Conspicuous Service Cross:

 Captain James Goldrick For  outstanding  achievement  as  Director  of  the  Royal  Australian  Navy Seapower Centre.

 3

 Warrant Officer Class Two David Connolly For  outstanding  achievement  as  Subject  Master  of  the  Parachute  Jump Instructor’s  Course,  and  as  Wing  Sergeant  Major,  Training  Wing  at  the Parachute Training School.

 Major Sanja Cvijanovic For  outstanding  achievement  as  the  Staff  Officer  Grade  2

 Personnel/Administration, Headquarters 1st Brigade.

 Wing Commander Ken Millar For  outstanding  achievement  as  the  Resident  Project  Engineer  and  Test Director on the P-3C Orion Update Implementation Project.

 PUBLIC SERVICE MEDAL

 Awarded the Public Service Medal:

 Commonwealth Public Service

 Robert Alexander For  outstanding  public  service  through  his  contribution  to  trade  practices law.

 Margaret Hall For  outstanding  public  service  in  providing  executive  support  to  senior members of the Department of the Environment and Heritage.

 AUSTRALIAN POLICE MEDAL

 Awarded the Australian Police Medal:

 Australian Federal Police

 Federal Agent Bob Heggie In recognition of distinguished police service, particularly in the field of close personal  protection  of  Commonwealth  protected  persons  and  in  the planning for major events.

 4

 AUSTRALIAN FIRE SERVICE MEDAL

 Awarded the Australian Fire Service Medal:

 New South Wales Fire Services

 Neil Crawley In recognition of distinguished service with the New South Wales Rural Fire Service,  as  Deputy  Group  Officer  in  the  Eurobodalla  Rural  Fire  District, particularly in the areas of leadership and co-ordination.

 AUSTRALIAN ANTARCTIC MEDAL

 Awarded the Australian Antarctic Medal:

 Dr Joseph Johnson For outstanding service in support of Australian Antarctic expeditions.

 AUSTRALIAN BRAVERY DECORATIONS

 Awarded the Bravery Medal:

 Lawrence Emerson On  the  morning  of  15  June  2000,  Mr  Emerson  rescued  two  people  and attempted to rescue another from a house fire in Ulladulla, New South Wales.

 ARRIVAL TIME:  2.25 PM

 THE ORDER OF AUSTRALIA

 Appointed a Companion in the General Division:

 Professor Judith Whitworth For service to the advancement of academic medicine and as a major contributor  to  research  policy and  medical  research  administration  in Australia and internationally.

 Peter Wills For  service  to  social  and  economic  advancement  through  the development  of  public  policy  in  relation  to  funding  for  biomedical research and evolving biotechnology industries.

 The Honourable Sir Edward Woodward For  contributions  to  Australian  public  life,  particularly  in  the  areas  of public  administration,  social  justice,  cultural  diversity,  education  and advocacy for people with mental illness.

 Dr John Yu For  service  to  the  provision  and  development  of  "state  of  the  art" paediatric care and research, to children's rights, to education, and to the decorative and visual arts.

 Appointed an Officer in the General Division:

 Elizabeth Reid For  service  to  international  relations,  particularly  through  the  United Nations  Development  Programme,  to  the  welfare  of  women,  and  to HIV/AIDS policy development, both in Australia and internationally.

 Appointed a Member in the General Division:

 Kenneth Charlton For  service  to  architectural  heritage  conservation,  particularly  in  the Australian Capital Territory, and to the community.

 James Dunn For  service  to  humanity  as  an  advocate  for  the  rights  of  the  East Timorese.

 1

 Appointed a Member in the Military Division:

 Commodore Trevor Ruting For  exceptional  service  to  the  Royal  Australian  Navy  as  Offshore Patrol  Boat  Project  Director,  as  Director  General  Surface  Warfare Systems, and as Commodore Logistics - Navy.

 Lieutenant Colonel Garry Heald For  exceptional  service  as  the  Director  of  Reserves  -  Army,  and  as Brigade Major 4th Brigade.

 Colonel Mike Lovell For  exceptional  service  to  the  Australian  Army  as  the  leader  of  the Army’s Officer Professional Effectiveness Review, and as the Director of Strategy and International Engagement - Army.

 Awarded the Medal in the General Division:

 Allan Fox For  service  to  conservation  and  the  environment  through  education and management.

 Gregory Gallagher For  service  to  the  community  of  Bungendore  through  emergency services, rural show and church organisations.

 Dr John Gray For  service  to  landscape  architecture  in  the  Australian  Capital Territory, and to the community.

 Kathleen Kelly For  service  to  veterans,  particularly  as  a  fundraiser  and  volunteer worker for the Sir Leslie Morshead War Veterans' Home.

 Peter Lawler For service to Rugby Union football in the Australian Capital Territory as a referee and administrator, and to the community.

 Mary O'Callaghan For  service  to  the  community  of  the  Australian  Capital  Territory through church-based activities, refugee assistance and social welfare organisations.

 Adam Pine For  service  to  sport  as  a  gold  medallist  at  the  Sydney 2000  Olympic Games.

 2

 Jean Pottie For service to the local community of Tarcutta, particularly through the Tarcutta  Hospital  Auxiliary  and  the  Tarcutta  Presbyterian  Women's Association.

 Bill Rushton For service to local government, and to the community of the Cooma-Monaro region.

 Jacqui Thomson For  service  to  the  community  of  the  Milton/Ulladulla  area  through Meals on Wheels, women's, rural and church organisations.

 Awarded the Medal in the Military Division:

 Warrant Officer Bruce Tunnah For  meritorious  service  to  the  Royal  Australian  Navy  as  the  Staff Officer  Aviation  Engineering,  Directorate  of  Navy  Professional Requirements (Engineering and Logistics), Navy Systems Command.

 DISTINGUISHED SERVICE DECORATIONS

 Awarded the Distinguished Service Cross:

 Brigadier Duncan Lewis For  distinguished  command  and  leadership  as  Commander  Sector West,  United  Nations  Force,  the  United  Nations  Transitional Administration - East Timor.

 CONSPICUOUS SERVICE DECORATIONS

 Awarded the Conspicuous Service Cross:

 Warrant Officer Peter Rosemond For outstanding achievement as the Regimental Sergeant Major of the Army.

 3

 Wing Commander Guy Watson For  outstanding  achievement  as  the  Combat  Support  Group Communications Information Systems Projects Officer.

 Awarded the Conspicuous Service Medal:

 Warrant Officer Glenn Howard For  outstanding  service  as  the  HS748  aircraft  Flight  Senior Maintenance Sailor at Number 723 Squadron.

 Wing Commander Leigh Gordon For  outstanding  service  as  the  Project  Manager  for  the  Lead-In Fighter Project.

 PUBLIC SERVICE MEDAL

 Awarded the Public Service Medal:

 Commonwealth Public Service

 Gary McFarlane For  outstanding  public  service  in  the  management  and  engineering design of the Australian frigate and ANZAC ship projects, especially in improving  the  operability  and  maintenance  of  naval  vessels  through innovative design solutions.

 Dr Anthony Nicholls For outstanding public service in the field of ecological research.

 Sue Stevens For outstanding public service in the provision of support to Australian Defence Force families in meeting their housing needs.

 4

 AUSTRALIAN FIRE SERVICE MEDAL

 Awarded the Australian Fire Service Medal:

 New South Wales Fire Services

 Robert Pyers In  recognition  of  distinguished  service  with  the  Eurobodalla Rural Fire District, as a brigade president, captain and trainer, particularly in the areas of leadership and team morale.

 AUSTRALIAN BRAVERY DECORATIONS

 Awarded the Commendation for Brave Conduct:

 Senior Constable Stephen Cremerius

 Senior Constable Tracey Cremerius

 Joanna McNally

 Sergeant Phil Mahoney

 Senior Constable Simon Vials

 For  taking  part  in  the  rescue  of  two  children  from  a  house  fire  in Queanbeyan, New South Wales.

 Awarded the Group Bravery Citation:

 David Savage For  service  as  a  member  of  the  Australian  Federal  Police  while serving with UNAMET in the Maliana region of East Timor in 1999.

