---
title: "Australia's contemporary relationship with the Asian and Pacific nations: the Brisbane Institute Lecture, 3rd October 2001"
date: "2001-10-03"
creators:
  - "Fraser, Malcolm"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "International relations"
  - "Asia, Southeast"
  - "ANZUS"
  - "United States"
  - "Asia, East"
  - "History, 1946-1999"
  - "Regional security"
  - "Foreign opinion about Australia"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "History"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211229600
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/N0B56%22
---

  [Malcolm Fraser]

  

  THE BRISBANE INSTITUTE LECTURE

  Australia’s Contemporary relationship with

   the Asian and Pacific Nations

  

  3  rd  October 2001 

  

  

  In the early post-war years, Australia’s 
natural inclination was still to look to Britain.  The reality 
of the w  ar 
and of Britain’s pre-occupation with North Africa, the Middle East 
and with Europe, was not fully understood by the Australian leadership. 
It was believed that, because of Britain’s interest in the Far East 
and South-East Asia, Malaysia and Singapore, her interest and her concerns 
would continue and that therefore a close defence and strategic association 
with the United Kingdom offered a viable option for Australia’s future.  

  

  There were others, perhaps, led by Percy Spender, who were sceptical 
about the re-establishment of British power and who believed that we 
should look to the United States.  

  

  Australia was suddenly given leverage.  While she had been unable 
to gain America’s attention for a Defence Treaty, America wanted to 
settle and to sign the Peace Treaty with Japan.  That could not 
be done without Australia. In these circumstances, the Australian Government 
was determined we would not sign unless we had a defence relationship 
with the United States.  Without that leverage, ANZUS would not 
have existed.

  

  It is also worth noting that the terms of the ANZUS Treaty contained 
a much lesser commitment than the commitment under NATO and a much lesser 
commitment than the United States gave to its former enemy, Japan.

  

  Soviet Communism had caused major difficulties.  Subversion and 
discord were rife.  The containment of Communism was the main concern 
of the Australian government of the day.  In these circumstances, 
the government believed it absolutely critical to consolidate America’s 
interest in the Western Pacific.  ANZUS was a significant step 
in that direction.

  

  Affairs were stirring in East and South East Asia.  Initially, 
Australia had been reluctant to commit troops to the Korean War but 
the decision was announced by Acting Prime Minister Fadden, on the urging 
of Spender, because to act early and decisively would catch the notice 
of the United States.  We should note that the United States was 
not involved and has not been involved in relation to Malaya and South-East 
Asia generally.  Australia had been reluctant to commit ground 
troops to combat the Communist insurgency in Malaya but, in the end 
Australia participated fully.

  

  From the beginning, Spender and Casey in particular, believed that 
opposition to Communism should not merely be negative and reactive, 
that there should be a battle for the hearts and minds of people and 
that involved exposing Australia to regional influences.  It also 
involved an aid programme, designed to lift living standards, especially 
through countries of East and South-East Asia.

  

  At the time the Colombo Plan was a beacon of hope and enlightenment 
for many people.  Our aid programme steadily developed over the 
years.  You may be surprised to know that the year of greatest 
generosity of Australian aid for the disadvantaged of this world, was 
the last year of the Menzies government, when foreign aid reached .56% 
of Australian GNP.  When the education component was added, it 
became .65% of GNP.  Since the eighties, the aid and education 
components have been combined, therefore the fall over the last 20-25 
years is greater than appears in the figures.

  

  Our aid programme was designed to demonstrate the reality of Australia 
as a cooperative and helpful neighbour.  It was important to supplement 
the considerable military efforts that we had made through numerous 
conflicts.  It rounded out a balanced policy in practical ways.

  

  From the outset there were also difficulties over East Timor.  
I am reminded at this point of an earlier submission of Casey’s in 
which he had wanted Australia to give primacy to long-term relationships 
with Indonesia rather than primacy of support either for a continuing 
Dutch occupation of Dutch New Guinea or for some third solution never 
properly defined.

  

  Perhaps from that point there had been a strong 
depa  rtmental 
view that primacy of relations with Indonesia was the over-riding concern.  
Despite a publication of very substantial documents on the relationship 
with East Timor there are, as I believe, continued unanswered questions.  
There is more of a suggestion in the documents that Suharto himself 
was very much concerned at Australia’s attitude and that he did not 
want to incorporate East Timor into Indonesia if Australia were to be 
outspoken and active in opposition.  Official Australian policy 
was that we favoured incorporation but only after an act of self-determination.  
That of course may well have been a contradiction in terms.  

  

  The memories of Communist aggression against 
Malaya, the abortive coup in Indonesia, which was most publicly attributed 
to the PKI and to perceived Chinese support, had significant implications 
in the region.  Those concerns were shared in Australia.  
Nob  ody at 
the time wanted the reality of an independent East Timor that might 
become a Communist enclave in the under-belly of Indonesia.  But 
how much of policy was distorted as a consequence?  The option 
of a United Nations intervention was never seriously pursued.  
It would have had to be in place before the invasion.  It is highly 
doubtful that it would have had the support of major states, support 
that would have been essential for its success but it was never tested.

  

  The extent of Indonesia’s concern at Australia’s opinion never 
seemed to have been adequately considered.  Realpolitik, in the 
harshest sense of the term, governed the day.  At one point there 
was a suggestion that Australia had information on which Australia could 
not act because it would give away a source.  In reading the documents 
and such information as is therein contained, it seems to me that the 
source was always a senior and respected official of the Indonesian 
Government.  It seemed to confirm that at the highest level there 
was concern that Australia should be informed so that when Indonesia 
acted, Australia would be pre-committed.

  

  In other words I believe that whatever so-called “classified information” 
might have come our way was by the deliberate decision of the Indonesian 
Government and of Suharto himself.

  

  In common with Harold Holt, I had sought to emphasize Australia’s 
relationship with East and South-East Asia.  My first visit overseas 
as Prime Minister was to Japan and to China.  I thought it important 
particularly to make it plain to China that, on a change of government, 
our policy to them would not be altered.  It was not a matter that 
should become subject to party politics.

  

  In my meetings with Hua Kuo-feng in 1976, in response to questioning 
about future policy, the Premier advised me that in China’s relationships 
throughout East and South-East Asia, primacy would be given to relationships 
between governments and relationships with parties would be secondary.  
When this was reported to heads of government in other parts of the 
region, it was accepted as important, indeed as good news.  Subsequent 
Chinese actions demonstrated the validity of Hua Kuo-feng’s comments.  
One of the problems through the region had been a fear that China would 
support overseas communist parties.

  

  When President Carter was elected in 1977, we had some immediate concerns.  
The President was new to Washington and new to foreign policy, he was 
an idealist who wished to test the Russians.  He sought to negotiate 
his own arms limitation in the Indian Ocean.  Our concerns were 
that, if such an arrangement were made, it might preclude assistance 
for Australia under ANZUS.  It was important that these aspects 
be made known to the President before his officials made commitments 
at their levels, which would have down-played the relevance of ANZUS.

  

  After the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the United States led efforts 
to marshal world opposition.  Initially President Carter had given 
assurances, certainly to Chancellor Schmidt, who relayed them to me, 
that a boycott of the Olympic Games would not be part of the West’s 
response.  Schmidt was dismayed to find Carter announcing such 
a boycott on world television and also appealing to other countries 
to support America’s lead.

  

  I had come to have doubts about the reliability of the United States 
as a long-term strategic partner. I had come to believe that we needed 
to work ever more closely with countries of our own region, to seek 
to build a sense of security between countries. I  believed then 
and I believe now that our best security will derive from secure relationships 
with countries in and of this region, including of course China and 
Japan.  We are the ones who live in this region.  

  

  While there were military and security concerns throughout most of 
this period, successive governments worked steadily to improve bilateral 
relations to cooperate with countries of our region and to strengthen 
basic infrastructure.

  

  I can remember when Mr Ohira, Prime Minister 
of Japan, came to Australia in 1980.  We talked about future structural 
developments in the region.  We were both conscious that relationships 
between the nations of East and South-East Asia were less structure  d and less formalised 
than in almost any other part of the world.  This made it more 
difficult to discuss matters of common and general interest, to determine 
whether or not there were common policies that we ought to pursue.

  

  At that time, in 1980 Indonesia and ASEAN would have opposed any suggestions 
that could be construed as diminishing the importance of ASEAN.  
Thus, for a while at least, formal arrangements between the nations 
of East and South-East Asia would not be possible.

  

  We sought a way through this problem and agreed to sponsor a series 
of seminars involving academia, government and the private sector. 

  

  These discussions did much to strengthen confidence, to diffuse latent 
suspicions and concerns that any formal arrangement proposed might cut 
across other existing arrangements, more specifically ASEAN.  Indonesia 
moved from opposition to support of a general approach.  The informal 
seminars had played their part.

  

  And so by 1989 it was possible for Bob Hawke to propose APEC.  
The first proposal involved East and South-East Asian nations.  
The United States objected so it ended up being a proposal involving 
all the nations of the Pacific Basin.  I still believe the original 
proposal for East and South-East Asian countries alone would have been 
better.  There are conflicting interests with the Western hemisphere 
- North American Free Trade Agreement presents some obvious contradictions.  
These will grow as NAFTA moves to accommodate more and more countries 
in Central and South America.  There is still no formal body where 
heads of government from East and South East Asia may meet to consult 
about regional problems.  Nevertheless, APEC has played a constructive 
role.

  

  There had been a continuous deepening of relationships 
with East and South-East Asi  a.  Spender, under the Menzies government, took certain steps, 
especially in relation to the Columbo Plan.  Dick Casey’s tireless 
diplomacy throughout the region advanced Australian interests.  
Harold Holt’s gesture, one which I copied, travelling first to Asian 
countries, rather than to Britain or to the United States, was well 
received and well accepted.  The slow erosion of the White Australia 
Policy, from the rigidity of the immediate post-War years to the more 
flexible administration of the later fifties and early sixties, until, 
in practical terms it was abolished under the Holt government.  
The Whitlam government advanced relations with China.  My Government 
demonstrated bipartisan support for that relationship and for moving 
matters forward.  The development of APEC was not a sudden move.

  

  The main reasons for this was the logic of Australia’s geography 
and the importance of the countries of the East and South-East Asian 
region.  Fast growing economies obviously assisted.  Over 
60% of our trade came to be concentrated in the region itself.  
Exclusion from the European markets as Britain joined the Economic Community 
would have had disastrous consequences for Australia, were it not for 
our regional relationships and for the Trade Treaty with Japan.

  

  It is important that people understand that there has been a continuum.  
Some governments or Prime Ministers have emphasized more than others 
the role that they believe they have played but most have advanced the 
cause in sensible ways.

  

  There are some unhappy circumstances at the present time.  We 
used to have the closest possible relationship with Malaysia.  
In the early years this derived from support in their fight against 
Communist insurgency and continued cooperation thereafter.  We 
sought in specific ways to help the newly industrialising Malaysia, 
nearly thirty years ago now, to understand and to access our market, 
an experience which I am sure has stood by Malaysia as her exports were 
directed to markets around the world.  Why has it gone wrong?

  

  When Prime Minister Mahatir came to power, I was still in office.  
I had an official visit to Malaysia during his stewardship.  It 
wasn’t on all counts easy.  But in private discussions I believe 
a rapport was established.

  

  That the bilateral relationship has been damaged, 
has had consequences for Australia.  Malaysia has also demonstrated 
an independence of mind which has attracted admiration.  After 
the economic meltdown, they objected to the terms of the IMF assistance 
an  d did 
it their own way. By and large they have done it successfully.  
They have demonstrated that the one-track solution proposed by the IMF 
is not necessarily the only way out of economic difficulty and crisis.

  

  More than one Australian government has found it difficult to maintain 
the warmth of the relationship that once existed.  This, however, 
has not been the only problem throughout the region.

  

  During the Cold War, the rationale for the relationship with the United 
States was better understood.  There were indeed a number of countries 
that did not want a direct strategic relationship with the United States 
but were pleased that Australia had such a relationship.  They 
thought indirectly that ties the United States to East and South East 
Asia and, for a variety of reasons, they wanted America’s interest 
to be sustained.

  

  Since the end of the Cold War, however, different elements have emerged.  
There is a perception, certainly until the time of the tragedies in 
the United States that Australia was too close to the United States 
and that we had moved to give priority to the American relationship, 
over and above relationships with Asia.  This is not necessarily 
a fair assessment because Australia has wanted to be further involved 
in the structural development of relations between East and South-East 
Asian countries and has not always been accepted.  

  

  In particular, the discussions involving ASEAN, China, North Korea 
and Japan are of particular significance to the region.  They have 
accepted and largely put in place a Japanese proposal for currency swaps, 
to strengthen their economies at times of emergency.  It is my 
belief that they will move later to establish an Asian Monetary Fund.  
That such discussions are taking place and such relationships are being 
forged without Australian participation is, I believe, a significant 
setback to our regional ambitions.

  

  The perceived desire for closer relationship with the United States 
may also be coming at a time when that may work more to America’s 
advantage than to ours.  I know there is a view that if there is 
only one super-power in the world, it is important for a country to 
be very close to that power and so it is, so long as other important 
interests are not prejudiced.

  

  The ANZUS relationship was critical and would have effectively protected 
Australia in the event of an ideological communist attack on Australia.  
That possibility, remote as it might appear from today’s perspective, 
justified in my mind the priorities given to ANZUS and to the American 
relationship.  But during the Cold War we were still able to accommodate 
that, without prejudicing an ever-closer development of relationships 
between East and South East Asia and Australia.  Acceptance of 
the Hawke proposal which led to APEC is evidence of that.

  

  I have been at meetings in Japan and in Korea in fairly recent times 
and there is an unfortunate perception that Australia’s desire for 
a close relationship with Asia has diminished, that the American relationship 
must be supreme.  This is, in part, unfair because from Australia’s 
point of view, it derives partly from rejection of Australian participation 
in East and South-East Asian arrangements.  This in itself has 
led to a lessening of Australia’s efforts to work with and to cooperate 
with the region.  We need to ask ourselves how these perceptions 
and realities can be put back on track.

  

  There is more to it than an attitude of Prime Minister Mahatir.  
In Malaysia itself, there are views that question the ultimate Australian 
commitment.  Whether these views are true or false is not relevant.  
They exist and the perception therefore has to be handled appropriately.  
So far that has not happened.

  

  There is no need for me to itemise elements 
which have led to this perception of Australia, most of you would be 
a  ble to 
recall statements, incidents, circumstances.  Some of it indeed 
is domestic, the way we have handled racial problems within Australia.  
I can remember three years ago in Beijing.  In discussions with 
Zhu Ronghi I was asked about Pauline Hanson.  It was indeed the 
first question.  The Premier was bemused as to how Hansonism had 
been allowed to grow without earlier condemnation.  

  

  I have no doubt that our treatment of asylum 
seekers in recent times has contributed to a perverse view of Australia.  
There are alternate ways of pursuing that problem, as I have indicated 
in other places.  That we have not attempted to do so in any real  istic way speaks for 
itself.  The perception given in some quarters that more recent 
events have justified our attitude to asylum seekers is itself racist 
and false.  

  

  Asylum seekers coming to Australia have been heavily criticised and 
the  Department of Immigration’s own literature, distributed 
under cover of a Ministerial letter, has given a harsh but I believe, 
quite inaccurate view of Australia’s reaction to people in distress.  

  

  It has been demonstrated in recent times that the numbers of Afghan 
refugees coming to Australia have fallen from 760 in 1997/98 to 400 
in the past financial year.  In other words, the official front 
door has been closing.  Australia’s recent attitude to asylum 
seekers could only be justified if the front door were in fact open.  
It has not been.  It is ridiculous therefore for asylum seeker 
to be told to join some queue when there is no queue; when the option 
of getting on a boat to Europe or to Australia might be five or six 
years in a camp in Pakistan. 

  

  The government’s own figures demonstrate that over 85% of people 
who come in those boats are in fact refugees.  That they are turned 
away, that we pay for accommodation in Nauru, is not regarded as the 
most humane of approaches.  There is certainly a problem but we 
have not yet sought to tackle it appropriately.

  

  We could do so through the United Nations, through UNHCR, we could 
seek to make UNHCR responsible in each case for the assessment of refugees.  
It would then be uniform.  The appeal system could also be handled 
by UNHCR, a uniform system for all countries, making places available 
for refugees.  We could seek to persuade more countries worldwide 
to take more refugees so that the large number of people waiting for 
a home in a safer country, from places like Afghanistan or Iraq, will 
not be so long or so difficult.  It is concerted action of that 
kind, coupled with effective long-term policies designed to assist the 
Third World, that will diminish the market for people smugglers and 
then make it possible effectively to outlaw the trade.

  

  Unfortunately recent events make it difficult for governments to reassess 
policies and attitudes to global problems.  

  

  Let me return to an assessment of ANZUS in today’s world.  
We have seen ANZUS invoked by Australia to support the United States 
at an hour of peril for the United States and for free people everywhere.  
There was no problem with that but in what circumstances might ANZUS 
be invoked in our own region? 

  

  The United States has never been particularly concerned in the region 
around Australia’s periphery, in the Pacific or in relation to Papua 
New Guinea.  The United States was not interested in our views, 
leading up to the incorporation of Dutch New Guinea into Indonesia.  

  

  During Confrontation, Barwick publicly suggested that our troops in 
Borneo would be covered by ANZUS.  Hasluck, as the next Australian 
Foreign Minster to visit Washington, had to eat large quantities of 
humble pie and apologise profusely for something which the Americans 
regarded as quite inaccurate.

  

  Problems in south East Asia in earlier times were regarded as regional 
problems or as Commonwealth problems, they were not matters for the 
United States.  I have mentioned President Carter’s abortive 
attempt to negotiate an agreement with the Soviet Union in relation 
to the Indian Ocean which could have impacted on ANZUS.  We have 
no direct obligations in relation to Korea.  Today it is difficult 
to imagine Japan posing a military threat to Australia.

  

  One area of real concern today involves Taiwan.  While normal 
business and commercial relationships across the Straits continue to 
grow and Taiwan investment is now approaching $50 billion, political 
developments are not so stable.  The current government has made 
moves which can only be construed as pointing towards independence.  

  

  We need to remember the history of this matter.  
We have all accepted, since Nixon’s first visit to China, that Taiwan 
is part of China.  The United States in particular has asserted 
that reunification must take place peacefully.  We would all support 
tha  t. 

  

  The reunification of Hong Kong with China should give Taiwan confidence 
that practical, sensible arrangements can be negotiated, which would 
protect matters important to Taiwan.  

  

  There are people who say the current situation has existed for many 
decades, why become concerned about it?  Because the situation 
has endured for several decades is not in itself a reason why that situation 
can continue.  As time passes the Taiwan issue becomes more sensitive.

  

  Any move for independence will be fraught with   the greatest danger 
and the probability of serious conflict between China and the United 
States.

  

  I have been advised that there may no longer be a majority in Congress 
for a One-China policy.  If that is so, the future looks uncertain.  
At any point there could be calls for independence on the part of Taiwan.  
That is likely to be supported by the religious right of the Republican 
Party and also by the Human Rights Democratic Left of the Democratic 
Party.  That would form a significant coalition which may carry 
the numbers in Congress.

  

  The idea of independence could be strengthened at any point and from 
a number of different sources.  There is a view in the east coast 
policy-making establishment of the United States that, while America 
does not want war with China over Taiwan, it does not presently know 
how to escape it.  America only has to stick by current agreements 
to escape it.

  

  If the United States makes it plain that they will never support a 
declaration for independence, then Taiwan must, in good faith, negotiate 
with Beijing to resolve the issue.  In these circumstances there 
would be no prospect of war.  It is entirely therefore in the hands 
of the United States.

  

  In recent times we have seen United States officials coming to Australia 
and telling us when, or if, the United States goes to war with China 
over Taiwan, Australians will have to do a good deal of the dirty work.  
This has been said on a number of occasions over two or three years, 
most recently by Richard Armitage, publicly in Australia itself.

  

  The fact that there is no outcry against such a statement by a middle-ranking 
American official shows how far matters have slipped.  If it had 
happened in Menzies’ day, at the very least the Ambassador of the 
United States to Australia would have been required to secure the silence 
of that and every other official.  That no such thing happened 
indicates a degree of subservience which is quite unhelpful.

  

  The important point is that war over Taiwan will not and cannot occur 
so long as the United States sticks to previously stated policy.  
So if it comes, it comes because of a shift in American policy.  
The implication from American officials is that, because of ANZUS, we 
must support the United States in such a war.  

  

  We have been warned by Sandy Berger, President Clinton’s National 
Security Adviser, that there is a danger Australia will get caught in 
an argument between China and the United States.  Sandy Berger 
has said that hard-line elements in the Bush Administration view China 
as the new enemy.  He continued:  “If we treat China like 
an enemy, we will make China an enemy.  America’s presence in 
Asia should be a stabilising factor, not a provocative factor”.  
He spoke of Missile Defence.  He said: “It is unwise to put your 
allies, whether it is Japan or Australia, in a spot where they are caught 
in the middle”.  He made it clear that it is not necessary for 
Australia to be in the cross-fire between China and the United States.

  

  While Sandy Berger was speaking principally about Missile Defence, 
the implications are clear.  Australia should avoid being caught 
in the middle of a conflict between China and the United States.  
It is easy enough to see how we could be caught.  

  

  Our Collins Class submarines are to be equipped with American command 
and control systems to maximise cooperation with the United States.  
These submarines can operate in the Taiwan Straits which American nuclear 
submarines cannot do.  If there is a conflict, America will want 
those submarines.  We can be certain that joint planning between 
the Navies has already been undertaken.  There is joint planning 
and cooperation in the patrolling of our Orion aircraft.  Arrangements 
made in the Cold War and continued after its demise, run the risk of 
embroiling us in a conflict of quite a different kind.

  

  It is not difficult to imagine the pressure 
that the United States would put some future government under to enable 
our forces to cooperate in areas where strategic plans had already been 
made and between the services agreed.  Even though such planning 
is   undertaken 
without commitment, it would be a strong government that rejected American 
pressures.  If they were not rejected, we would be directly involved 
in a conflict when America was in the wrong and when America would have 
no friends throughout the entire region in which we live.

  

  A significant point in all of this is that the Australian Government 
of the day signed and endorsed the ANZUS Treaty as a means of securing 
the territorial integrity of Australia.  We certainly undertook 
certain obligations as a consequence.  During the Cold War, the 
Treaty was necessary, it was a comfort to know that it existed.  
With the Cold War over, the sources of threat or danger to Australia 
are diminished and vastly different.  It is unlikely that the United 
States would be interested in potential threats to this country in current 
circumstances.

  

  But what is happening as American officials have made plain, is that 
a Treaty designed to achieve Australian security is now being distorted 
potentially to embroil us in a conflict of America’s choosing with 
another potential super power.  It would be madness for Australia 
to be so involved.  This is not a matter that can be allowed to 
rest.  It is a matter that must be considered and properly handled 
by an Australian government.

  

  The Australian Government has moved closer and closer to the United 
States at a time when prudence and national interest would have suggested 
greater independence and self-reliance.  While the ANZUS Treaty 
needs to be maintained, we need to develop more vigorously a second 
track to our own security and that track has to be dependent upon our 
relationships with countries in and of the region of which we are a 
part.  Matters have been allowed to slip and that must be redressed.

  

  There is one final point t  hat I would like to make.  Through the literature and through 
the writing, there is constant referral to the fact that it is important 
to keep the United States involved in the Western Pacific and in East 
and South-East Asia.  I really believe we have deceived or kidded 
ourselves.  The United States, after the War, had had a taste of 
world power and did not want to set it aside.  As a world power, 
she had to be involved.  Russia had boundaries in East Asia.  
China had emerged as a major Communist power with enormous potential.  
In her own interests the United States was going to be there and whatever 
we did to help keep her involved was of no account.  

  

  So when Australian governments say it is critical to keep America 
involved, they need to qualify it in certain ways.  It is critical 
to keep America involved in balanced and constructive ways.  It 
is critical to make sure that American policies support the general 
aspirations of most of the people and most of the countries of the region.  
It is important that the United States does not introduce the ideology 
of her own politics into this part of the world.  So let’s stop 
thinking that we have to do certain things to keep America involved.  
They are and they will be, for as long as we can see into the future, 
the imperatives of her power will drive her to involvement, even if 
sometimes there is a wish for withdrawal.

  

  In these circumstances it is all the more important, as I have tried 
to do, to define Australia’s interests and we and Japan in particular, 
as two defence partners of the United States, should exercise our minds 
in an effort significantly to influence American policies in productive 
ways.  

  

  We need to learn how to deal with this Super Power with an equality 
of mind and spirit and with a determination that will not be put aside.  
At all times we need to identify Australia’s national interest.  
We must argue that interest forcefully with the United States.  
We need to have the capacity to define those circumstances when our 
interests and the United States interests diverge.  While we should 
maintain the ANZUS alliance, over time we should work to a situation 
where there is an unchallenged primacy given to relations with countries 
in and of the region.  We need to work to make sure that relationships 
between these countries are so advanced that their security is guaranteed 
and there is no further need for external participation.

