---
title: "Good MRT decisions and judicial review. Paper presented at the joint annual conference of the Refugee Review Tribunal and the Migration Review Tribunal, Sydney, 1-2 November 2001"
date: "2001-11-01"
creators:
  - "Glass, Arthur"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Migration Review Tribunal"
  - "Judicial review"
  - "Refugee Review Tribunal"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211231190
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HMBC6%22
---

 Good MRT Decisions and Judicial Review   

 Arthur Glass 

 

 The question I am to speak to, as I understand it, is - in what ways has judicial review  contributed to good MRT decision-making? We are concerned with this question, of  course, not simply to better understand our past. Our concern is with things that will  influence  our  job  in  the  future.  We  are  a  group  of  practical  decision  makers  not  a   gathering of legal historians. So the discussion cannot avoid the dramatic changes to  Part 8 of the Act, of effect from 2 October 2001.    

 If we wish to assess the Court’s contribution to good MRT decision-making we must  first consider, if only in outline, what it means to say that a Tribunal decision is good.  We  all  know  and  acknowledge  that  good  decision-making  is  swift  and  inexpensive   but  it  is  the  other  virtues  I  have  in  mind.  These  other  values  may  be  described  in   different  ways  but  they  point  to  two  basic  ideas.  First  that  the  Tribunal  reach  a   decision  that  is  correct and  second  that  in  doing  this  it  adopt  means  that  are   procedurally fair.   

 In saying that our goal is to reach the “correct” answer I have in mind the following  familiar ideas. First, it would be nice if we could uncover the true facts but this is not  always, or even often, possible. It is enough if we make a thorough investigation of  the salient facts and at the appropriate moment close off the inquiry; and then make  findings that we can publicly justify. Second, the job would be easier if the lawmaker  spoke to us in simple unequivocal terms but the legal material does not always come  to us in this form. It is sufficient however if we explore the legal possibilities to the  full and where there is a dispute as to what the applicable law and policy means we  adopt the most appropriate reading. Third, it would be comforting if once we had the  salient facts and the appropriate law there were impersonal procedures that allowed us  to  decide  a  case  as  we  might  a  mathematical  problem.  But,  as  it  is  put,  in  the   application of law there are no rules for the application of rules. There is only an act  of judgement. Implicit in these three activities - finding facts, understanding the law,  exercising  judgment  -  is  the  idea  that  reasonable  people  may  disagree  about  these   matters.  That  presumably  is  the  point  of  merits  review.  If  review  is  only  to  guard   against obvious error then you do not need a tribunal to do this.   

 Procedural fairness in the tribunal context extends to such matters as - proper notice  to the applicant, proper factual inquiries, disclosure of adverse information, fairness in  the  running  of  the  hearing  (no  bias,  no  interpreting  problems,  etc);  and  as  the   culmination of this process, a persuasive justification for the decision. The Migration  Act  and  Regulations  set  out  some  of  these  obligations  often  in  great  detail  but,  to   make a point crucial to understanding the dynamic of judicial review, no matter how 

 specific  these  provisions  are  they  can  never  exhaust  the  idea  of  procedural  fairness.    Legal ideas are inevitably always more than their present-day formulation. This is a   point I return to below.    

 So  far  I  have  discussed  decision  making  in  individual  terms.  But  there  is  an   institutional side to this. Good decision-making will render decisions consistent with  other Tribunal decisions. And it will attempt where appropriate to stabilise an area of 

 migration  law  by  working  out  a  language  that  could  govern  a  range  of  cases  over   time.     

 To  turn  now  to  judicial  review.  No  doubt  there  are  negatives.  It  is  costly.  It  can  be   abused.  At  times  it  imposes  upon  the  Tribunal  a  standard  of  review  that  is  simply   unattainable under present circumstances. Worse, some court decisions do not appear  to understand the legal and administrative context in which they operate.1 But despite  these  disadvantages  judicial  review  has  contributed  to  the  quality  of  our  decision   making in at least four ways.    

 First,  it  checks  the  lawfulness  of  Tribunal  decisions.  Knowing  that  there  is  the   possibility of review (initiated by the applicant or Minister) lifts the standard of our  work.  Second,  review  helps  to  promote  consistency  as  Court  decisions  bind  the  

 Tribunal. For instance, a not uncommon problem concerns the retrospective reach of a  new provision to matters not finally determined. A Court decision can determine this  point conclusively.2   

 Third,  review  refurbishes  the  Act  and  Regulations  in  the  light  of  basic  legal   principles. For one thing, the Court unlike the Tribunal is in a position to question the  validity of the Regulations.3 For another, the judges see the basic notions of migration  law  from  a  different  perspective.  Such  ideas  as  “spouse”,  “special  need  relative”4,  “orphan”5  “dependence”6,  “usual  residence”7  look  different  to  the  Court.  Not  just   because judges decide few cases on these topics while we decide many; but because  judges understand these notions in a different framework. We work with a context of  specific criteria, policy, fragments of cases and many examples. They work with the  regulatory definitions and place these in the larger context of other legal ideas. So if  the  issue  is  due  process,  for  instance,  then  the  Court  cannot  help  but  approach  the   relevant specific provisions in the Act and Regulations with these broader ideas about  the notion of due process in mind. In my view, this aspect of judicial work explains  (better than other more sinister suggestions) many of the cases on ss 353 (420), 368  (430), 359A (424A).   

 Fourth, judicial review helps the Tribunal to maintain a degree of independence from  the Department and others. It facilitates the questioning of policy that seems unfair in  the  particular  case.8   It  adds  weight  to  the  Tribunal’s  position  in  its  dealings  with   “third party decision-makers”.9 For the Court requires the Tribunal to ensure (as far as  it  can)  that  the  medical  officer  or  relevant  trade  assessor  give  assessments  via  the   criteria  in  the  migration  regulations  and  not  some  other  criteria.10   M o r e  

 

 1  Without naming names I have in mind here cases dealing with the meaning of such terms of art in the  Regulations such as “trade”, “usual occupation”, “work”.  2

  Pradhan (1999) 94 FCR 91  3  Din (1997) 147 ALR 673, Seligman (1999) ALR 173  4

  Narayan [2001] FCA 789  5  Phung (1997) 49 ALD 566  6

  Ha [1996] FC 21 August 1996  7  Gauthiez (1994) 35 ALD 439  8

  Bagus (1994) 33 ALD 601  9  By this I mean other bodies who make decisions often relevant to migration decisions, medical  officers of the Commonwealth, bodies carrying out trade assessments.  10

  Bui (1999) 85 FCR 134, Alkaab [1998] FCA 1353, Inguanti [2001] FCA 1046 (but see Blair [2001]  FCA 1014) 

  2

 controversially the Court is in a stronger position to interpret the Regulations in a way  that  leads  to  justice  in  the  particular  case.11  In  appropriate  cases  the  Tribunal  can   follow these decisions.12   

 So much for the past; the present possibilities for judicial review of our decisions is  unclear.  No  doubt  we  will  hear  more  about  this  in  other  sessions.  But  as  we  are   interested in how these changes may affect our ability to make good decisions, I need  to say something about what I think will happen.    

 Probably  we  will  have  to  wait  a  year  or  more  before  the  High  Court  speaks  on  this   matter. That Court may reject the Hickman approach and find the changes to Part 8  unconstitutional,  at  least  as  far  as  they  apply  to  it.13  More  likely,  the  High  Court   judges  will  re-understand  the  Hickman  principle  in  a  way  that  according  to  them   makes it workable for migration law.14  In the meantime applicants will seek review  of  our  decisions  before  the  Federal  Court  (or  Magistracy)  or  the  High  Court.  But   wherever the application is lodged it will end up in the Federal Court. And it is that  Court  that  will  have  the  initial  task  of  working  out  the  grounds  of  review  presently   available under Part 8.15    

 Without elaborating, in my view two important grounds of review will emerge. First,  apprehended bias. If the Migration Legislation Amendment (Procedural Fairness) Bill  2001  is  passed  this  will  limit  the  operation  of  one  aspect  of  the  ground  of  natural   justice  -  the  fair  hearing  rule.  But  the  rule  against  bias  will  remain,  freed  up  as  a   ground of review from the limitations imposed upon it in September 1994. So develop  a second skin, if you have not already, for there will be more arguments about tribunal  bias.   

 The second ground is jurisdictional error, understood as the decision maker exceeding  in  a  basic way the powers given by the Act. Of course  the  concept  of  jurisdictional   error is unstable and its eventual understanding in this context unpredictable.16 But if  the  present  s  474  and  Hickman  are  to  be  taken  seriously  then  a  way  of  separating   more  serious  from  less  serious  excesses  of  power  must  be  worked  out.  If  this   approach  is  taken,  jurisdictional  error  is  unlikely  to  extend  (at  least  immediately)  to   such errors of law as - errors made in interpreting the law, or applying the law to the  facts; or to errors of reasoning17, or errors in the fact finding process. In other words, 

 

 11  Nong [2000] FCA 1575, Shrestha [2001] FCA 359  12  The question of the penetration of the Court’s decisions, in the sense of their immediate influence  upon tribunal practice, is another matter.  13

  Perhaps this will be a significant case setting out the constitutional basis and limits for judicial  review in our rule of law state.  14  For the possibilities see Aronson & Dyer Judicial Review of Administrative Action (2nd) ed LBC  2000 ch 18. And of interest is the analysis of  Spigelman CJ in Vanmeld v Fairfield Council (1999)  NSWCA 6 (5 February 1999)  15

  That’s the starting point - how to reconcile the apparent contradiction of ss 474 (no review at all) and  475A (review for the grounds that attach themselves to the Constitutional writs). The Hickman  principle is merely one way to read this. While the legislative intention appears to have been to make  Hickman central, intention is one thing its realisation another.   16

  See Yusef (2001) 180 ALR 1   17  Epeabaka (1999) 84 FCR 411 

  3

  4

 

 jurisdictional  error  will  be  a  far  narrower  ground  of  review  than  the  error  of  law   ground previously given by the much-used old s 476(1)(e).18    

 If  only  these  type  of  claims  emerge  as  grounds  for  review  then  for  some  time  there   will be much less checking and guidance from the Federal Court. The problem for us  is  if  the  Court  withdraws,  do  we  have  the  time  and  the  will  to  do  the  four  things   identified  above  for  ourselves?  Will  we  check  the  lawfulness  of  our  own  decisions,   take  measures  to  promote  consistency,  where  appropriate  refurbish  the  Act  and   Regulations  and  make  efforts  to  maintain  a  suitable  degree  of  independence  in  our   thinking?    

 Of course the Tribunal presently addresses these issues in different ways, especially  the  problem  of  consistency.  There  are  templates  for  decisions,  Principal  Member   Directions,  Principal  Member  Advices,  Legal  Policy  Advices,  Registrar’s  Advices.   All  worthy  initiatives  no  doubt.  But  the  aim  is  good  decision-making  and  these  are  

 only some of the preconditions for good decision-making. The Tribunal can facilitate  achieving this goal with new institutional arrangements - perhaps, members meetings  to  discuss  legal  issues,  two  member  cases  at  times  or  other  ways  of  encouraging   exemplary  decisions,  occasional  referrals  to  the  AAT.  But  only  the  members   individually and collectively can raise the standard of tribunal decisions.   

 

 

 18  For some discussion of this point see Dabera [2001] FCA 1390 (2 October 2001), a nice example of  where perceived procedural unfairness did not give rise to a ground for review. And for how what  might be called errors of law are described as errors of fact see Ex Parte Cohen (2001) 177 ALR 473,  Narayan [2001] FCA 789 

