---
title: "Standards and accountability in the adminstration of prisons and immigration detention centres: a description of the role of the Western Australian Inspector of Custodial Services and a proposal for bringing equity and decency to the operation of Australia's immigration detention centres. A speech to the International Corrections and Prisons Association Conference, Perth, 30th October 2001"
date: "2001-10-30"
creators:
  - "Harding, Richard"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Port Hedland (WA)"
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Private prisons"
  - "Western Australia"
  - "Federal state relations"
  - "Accountability"
  - "Standards"
  - "Prison conditions"
  - "Performance indicators"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "State issue"
  - "Dept of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211231042
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3QA56%22
---

  

  

  

  

  

  

  STANDARDS AND ACCOUNTABILITY 

  IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF PRISONS 
AND 

  IMMIGRATION DETENTION CENTRES:

  

  A DESCRIPTION OF THE ROLE OF THE 
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INSPECTOR OF CUSTODIAL SERVICES AND A PROPOSAL FOR 
BRINGING EQUITY AND DECENCY TO THE OPERATION OF AUSTRALIA’S IMMIGRATION 
DETENTION CENTRES

  

  

  

  

  

  A SPEECH TO THE INTERNATIONAL CORRECTIONS AND PRISONS 
ASSOCIATION CONFERENCE 

  

  By

  

  PROFESSOR RICHARD HARDING

  INSPECTOR OF CUSTODIAL SERVICES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA

  

  

  

  

  PERTH - 30  th  OCTOBER   2001 

   

 

  

  I want to sp eak today about two matters: first, the establishment 
and work of the Office of the Inspector of Custodial Services in Western 
Australia, and second the absence of any proper inspection and accountability 
system in relation to Immigration Detention Centres run under the authority 
of the Government of Australia.

  

 To set these issues into 
perspective, I should explain to those of you who are unfamiliar with 
the Australian Federal System of Government that prisons are the responsibility 
of the various states, and Immigration Detention Centres are the responsibility 
of the Commonwealth Government.  Thus, although there are three 
Immigration Detention Centres that are geographically located within 
Western Australia, they do not fall within my jurisdiction as Inspector 
of Custodial Services for the State of Western Australia.  Yet, 
as will emerge, the manner in which those Commonwealth Centres are managed 
has knock-on effects to the situation in the state prisons that do fall 
within my jurisdiction.

  

  The Office of the Inspector of Custodial Services for Western Australia

  

  This Office was established in June 2000.  I took up the position 
of Inspector on 1  st  August 2000.  Before the 
Office was established, the mechanisms for external scrutiny of the 
Western Australian prison system were quite inadequate.  The Ombudsman 
had jurisdiction to enquire into individual prisoner complaints, and 
a variety of people were entitled to visit prisons from time to time; 
but there was no dedicated and expert organisation that was entitled 
to take an overview of the prison system as a whole, or to rigorously 
examine the practices in any given prison.

  

 How, then, did the establishment 
of my Office come about?  The answer lies in the fact that the 
Government of the day was anxious to involve the private sector in the 
construction and operation of a new prison, but to do so it required 
legislative change.  It did not have a majority in the Upper House 
of Parliament, so was obliged to negotiate with a minor party - the 
Australian Democrats - to get the legislation passed.  One of 
the prices that the Democrats demanded and achieved was the establishment 
of an autonomous Office of Inspector of Custodial Services - and its 
jurisdiction was to extend over public sector prisons as well as the 
proposed new private prison.  Thus, paradoxically, the move to 
privatise has had an immediate and far reaching impact upon the structural 
arrangements of accountability for the public sector as a whole.

  

 The Office avowedly drew 
its inspiration from the UK Office of the Chief Inspector of Prisons.  
That is a mature inspectorate, with twenty years’ solid experience 
under its belt and a clearly accepted place in the correctional environment 
of the UK - both within the prison service, within the Home Office 
more broadly, in relation to the lobby and activist groups and perhaps 
above all, with the British media.  The Western Australian model 
could not expect to exceed that upon its establishment. Nevertheless, 
the statutory model was in principle an even  stronger one.  
This comes out in two ways: the reporting arrangements, and the range 
of formal statutory powers.

  

 As to reporting arrangements, 
, the UK Chief Inspector normally reports to the Home Secretary rather 
than to Parliament.  The only exception to this is the Annual report, 
which is a report to Parliament. Consequently, if the Home Secretary 
decides not to table a Report or to order its printing, then the distribution 
is confined to the Chief Inspector’s website, the distribution to 
stakeholders and consequential media coverage.  But the Report 
lacks the status and privilege of a Parliamentary publication.  
A recent example of the drawbacks involved in this arrangement can be 
seen in the fact that Sir David Ramsbotham was obliged to publish his 
very important “Expectations” document as an appendix to his Annual 
Report, that being the only way in which to secure its status as a Parliamentary 
Paper.  

  

  In Western Australia, the decision was made that the Inspector would 
report direct to Parliament rather than to or through the Minister.  
All Reports emanating from my Office are thus tabled in Parliament and 
considered by a specialist Committee of the Le gislative Assembly. 
This is a stronger structure for enhancing accountability of the Executive 
arm of government.

  

 With regard to the question 
of statutory powers, these are quite extensive. The Inspector can require 
the production of documents from the Department, has the right of free 
and unfettered access to any prison at any time, can take whatever equipment 
deemed necessary for our lawful activities into a prison, and so on.  
Note in that regard that the use of a camera within a prison has proved 
to be a crucially important tool for the Inspectorate.

  

 Like the UK Chief Inspector, 
the WA Inspector may also make Unannounced Inspections of prisons.  
Two of the seven prison Inspections that have been carried out so far 
were in fact unannounced.  They are proving to be a crucial tool.

  

 The first Unannounced 
Inspection was of the so-called Special Handling Unit of Casuarina Prison, 
which is the maximum-security prison for the state.  In a context 
where the most difficult and urgent issue was whether there had been 
systematic repression and brutality within this “prison within a prison”, 
obviously the Inspectorate was unlikely to get a reliable picture if 
it gave notice of its intention.  In the event, we were able to 
say with a fair degree of confidence that there was not systematic repression 
or brutality - a finding that gained credence from the very nature 
of the Inspection process.  The other Unannounced Inspection related 
to a prison that, on the basis of intelligence received and other observations, 
we considered to be seriously failing.  On this occasion our judgement 
was completely vindicated and, once more, the impact of the Inspection 
would have been much reduced had notice been given in advance.  

  

 A range of provisions 
that make it a criminal offence to hinder or resist, or to intimidate 
anyone who has given or might give evidence to the Inspectorate, fortify 
these powers.  In addition, the Office is exempt from Freedom of 
Information Legislation or Ombudsman Review.  So, although the 
Statute is not entirely free of some drafting complexities and ambiguities, 
it amounts to a strong set of tools to discharge our statutory tasks.

  

 The other matter that 
should be referred to at this point is the entitlement of the Office 
to carry out thematic reviews.  This also mirrors the UK model.  
This power correctly recognises that defects in the running of the prison 
system as a whole should sometimes be remedied as a whole, rather than 
in response to individual and sequential prison Inspections.  The 
Office has embarked upon a thematic review of prisoner health services, 
the quality of which is a matter of considerable concern at the present 
time.

  

 I come now to the question 
of the standards that we try to apply in the course of our Inspections.  
We have been very much influenced by the “new operational philosophy” 
of the Department of Justice, as epitomised in the RFP relating to the 
Acacia Private Prison bids.  This emphasises the following questions:

  

  

 These 
are the criteria against which we judge a prison regime, though we recognise 
that the importance of these criteria will vary somewhat according to 
the particular place that a prison takes in the sentence management 
continuum of the prison system as a whole. These standards have numerous 
sub-categories, and we are acutely aware of the attempts that have been 
made to develop national and international standards over time.  
However, these often tend to be prescriptive standards directed at inputs, 
whilst we are more concerned with outputs and outcomes.

  

  It would be fair to say at this stage that we have not reached the 
point where we can place precise arithmetical values on the performance 
of a prison.  If we reach that stage, there is a danger that we 
may be too prescriptive and rigid in identifying wha t we are 
looking for.  On the other hand, we do wish to objectivise our 
standards a little more than we have so far managed, and a key underlying 
reason for this is that we wish to work towards an accreditation system.  
I will return to that in due course.

  

  As for the Inspection 
process itself, we have developed what we believe is a fairly unique 
approach.  Of course, we spend a considerable time on site - 
usually about five days - and before going to the prison itself we 
will have sought and obtained and a nalysed a large amount of 
information from the Department of Justice.  We will also - and 
I believe this is a very important feature, one we picked up from the 
UK Chief Inspector - have carried out surveys and focus group discussions 
with both prisoners and staff some weeks before actually going on site.  
The information we obtain helps set the agenda and focus of the on site 
phase of the Inspection.  

  

 As 
well as visiting the prison for survey purposes, we have regular pre-Inspection 
and post-Inspection contact.  I have nominated various Inspections 
Officers as liaison officers in relation to particular prisons, and 
this means that they will visit those prisons so as to identify emerging 
problems, note the progressive implementation of changes that we have 
recommended, and generally develop good working relations with local 
management, staff and prisoners.  In other words, we have developed 
a process of continuous Inspection. The unique value of this is that 
we do not have to wait until our three-yearly cycle of Inspections comes 
around to make an impact in a particular prison if something is going 
egregiously wrong.  There have been several notable examples of 
this, the most dramatic being at Roebourne Regional Prison, where during 
a liaison visit we discovered that the dining room had been closed and 
prisoners were eating off the ground.  We were able to have that 
situation rectified within a few days.  From the point of view 
of the Department, the prisoners, the political arm of government and 
the public interest, it was far preferable to move quickly upon such 
a matter rather than wait until a formal Inspection occurred.

  

 I 
mentioned the question of accreditation.  As I said earlier, prisons 
are state responsibilities, and in Australia there are six states and 
two self-governing territories.  Each has its own prison system, 
its own standards and its own method for checking compliance with those 
standards.  However, only three states have an accountability system 
that is external to the operational department itself.  This is 
a clear weakness in the overall pattern of accountability for prison 
administration in Australia.  

  

 What 
Australia should be striving for is a situation where it is possible 
to compare the actual operational standards, inputs, outputs and outcomes 
of a prison in, say, Queensland with one in Tasmania, or South Australia 
or Western Australia.  Whilst there are always local factors to 
be taken into account in a large Federal country, nevertheless the broad 
picture in these human service and human rights areas should be broadly 
similar.  An accreditation system is a way of doing this.

  

 My 
Office does not, statutorily, have the right to accredit or to withdraw 
accreditation from a Western Australian prison.  We cannot, I regret 
to say, order the closure of an egregiously unacceptable prison.  
But we will, through the Inspection process, work to the point where 
we have identified the levels of performance that must be reached if 
a prison is to receive a notional accreditation.  To give an example 
from our experience so far, the Karnet Prison Farm would be accredited, 
whilst the Eastern Goldfields Regional Prison would not.  An ambition 
I have is to try to use Western Australian experience, as it evolves, 
as a lever and example to other Australian states so as to go beyond 
the so-called Standard Guidelines for Australian Corrections to a stage 
of national accreditation, be it actual or notional.  The natural 
ally, if I may say so in the presence of Ms Penny Armytage, is the State 
of Victoria, which is at this point of time the most advanced in Australia 
in trying to spread and require acceptable operational standards across 
a complex system.

  

  It should be noted 
that, just as the Inspection process takes in privately managed prisons, 
so would a notional or actual accreditation process.  It is extremely 
important that it be possible to compare not only prisons in different 
states but also prison s run by different contractors across Australia 
- the public sector and the private sector.

  

 It 
should be emphasised that this model goes far beyond the American Correctional 
Association accreditation approach, which is still predominantly process-based, 
rather than derived from intensive observation.  Having said that, 
this process has made a positive impact in the United States, particularly 
as prison privatisation has increased.

  

 Let 
me briefly refer to the impact of our Reports.  I will just cite 
two of them.  The very first Inspection we did was, as I have mentioned, 
and Unannounced Inspection of the Special Handling Unit at Casuarina 
Prison.  That was in December 2000.  In September 2001 we 
did an Announced follow-up Inspection.  The initial Report had 
contained 13 recommendations and the Department of Justice had indicated 
which of these it accepted and what timetable it would adopt in implementing 
them.  It was a matter of great satisfaction to us to find that 
the Department had implemented virtually all of our recommendations, 
including those it had previously said were not acceptable, and that 
the impact of this was indeed to improve immensely the quality of the 
services available to prisoners and the working conditions for staff.  
All this, it should be said, had been achieved with virtually no expenditure 
- just spending the same money in different and more effective ways. 

  

 The 
Eastern Goldfields Unannounced Inspection had revealed a prison that 
was failing rapidly and badly.  The de-brief given to senior management 
following that Inspection was transcribed and made available to them 
so that they could, and did, commence implementing some radical improvements 
long before our Report was made available to them in draft form, let 
alone before it was tabled and published.

  

  To summarise; 
the experience of this Office has been that external, autonomous Inspection 
is able to see things that the operational department cannot see, is 
able to present them in a timely and effective manner, and is able to 
levera ge significant change for the better.  That is enough 
to justify fully the creation and continuation of an Inspectorate.

  

  That brings me 
to the question of Immigration Detention Centres. In Australia these 
are an absolute dis grace in terms of the conditions and standards 
that are applied.  Whilst there are several factors contributing 
to this, one of the most important is that there is a complete absence 
of proper accountability and transparency across the whole system.  
Immigration Detention Centres need an autonomous Inspectorate of the 
kind that now exists in Western Australia.

  

 There 
are eight mainland Detention Centres in Australia.  Two of them, 
Curtin and Woomera are ‘in the middle of nowhere’, whilst the other 
six are within or near urban conurbations.  There are also two 
offshore Detention Centres, at Christmas Island and Nauru, and the possibility 
of yet a third at Port Moresby.  (Even more bizarrely, Kiribati 
has also been suggested as a detention area.)

  

 Various 
agencies or groups have visiting rights or privileges.  They include:  
the Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Migration; the Human Rights 
and Equal Opportunity Commission; the Commonwealth Ombudsman; and various 
welfare groups such as the Uniting Church in Australia.  Note that 
this list does not include the state authority responsible for overseeing 
detention and imprisonment - in the case of Western Australia, myself 
as Inspector, and in the case of Victoria, Ms Armytage as Correctional 
Services Commissioner.  As it happens each of us has gained access 
to one or more of these Detention Centres, in my own case, Curtin, and 
I wish to draw some lessons from that visit.

  

 Before 
doing so, let me briefly explain why the operation and management of 
the Detention Centres is a matter of direct concern to me.  Obviously, 
as a citizen I have a concern about human rights, but as Inspector I 
have a far more tangible concern.  This audience will be aware 
that protests about conditions, sometimes culminating in riots, are 
a frequent, even endemic, aspect of the running of Detention Centres, 
particularly the worst ones at Curtin, Port Hedland, Woomera and Villawood. 
When these riots occur, they usually result in criminal charges being 
laid.  At that point the refugee becomes a prisoner of the state, 
to be accommodated in state facilities until such time as the case has 
been heard and any consequential sentence being served.  In other 
words, if Curtin Detention Centre, for example, is managed in such a 
way that riots occur, there are inevitably knock-on effects into the 
WA Prison System - the system for whose standards I myself am responsible. 

  

  In the last year 
or so major riots at Curtin and Port Hedland have had impacts on the 
prison populations in Broome and Roebourne Regional Prisons, with knock-on 
effects to the southern prisons, including Hakea and Bunbury.  
To give just one example:  in m id 2000 the number of persons 
sent from Curtin Detention Centre to Broome was so great that the total 
female prisoner population of that prison had to be ‘shanghaied’ 
to Roebourne Prison, with knock-on effects causing some Roebourne-based 
prisoners to be moved further south.  The notion of accommodating 
Kimberley female prisoners in the Pilbara and Pilbara female prisoners 
down south is absolutely inappropriate from the point of view of prisoner 
care and wellbeing.  The impact of what happened in those Detention 
Centres thus is of direct concern to my Office.

  

 The 
external scrutiny that takes place at present is fragmented and somewhat 
amateurish.  The Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Migration, 
in its September 2000 Report proudly stated that it “did not formally 
meet with or talk to the detainees”.  With that single sentence 
in the Foreword of their Report, the Committee in effect disqualified 
itself from being taken seriously about any of its findings with regard 
to conditions.  Subsequently, the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign 
Affairs, Defence and Trade also undertook a review of the detention 
centres.  This Committee did actually talk to detainees, so it 
was no surprise that it was much more cognisant of care and wellbeing 
issues at the centres.  It expressed some concern about the appropriateness 
of the current Immigration Detention Standards, and suggested that they 
be revised and improved.  However, on the key issue of accountability, 
it accepted that the system whereby DIMA was responsible for performance 
monitoring, against the backdrop of a commercial-in-confidence contract, 
was adequate.  

  

 The 
Commonwealth Ombudsman has conducted two reviews, and although the ensuing 
Reports were each critical of system deficiencies in the management 
of detainees, particularly in the care and wellbeing areas, neither 
of them contained a comprehensive discussion of accountability issues.  
An independent report, the Flood Report - commissioned by the Minister 
for Immigration - likewise did not address this issue.  The Human 
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commissioner has also conducted two enquiries.  
His discussion of accountability revolved around the notion of detainees 
being able to complain about conditions to the Operator - ‘There 
is a secure box at each Centre for deposit of detainees complaints” 
- and the continuance of access to the Human Rights Commission in 
the case of individual complaints.  These complaints cannot be 
resolved satisfactorily as the Commissioner has no enforcement powers 
and in any case the process takes too long.

  

 Missing 
in the above picture are the qualities of expertise, continuity, systemic 
overview, and a real ability to bring about compliance and change.  
If I now tell you about my own experience at Curtin, you will perhaps 
understand clearly what are the current deficiencies, how these inevitably 
produce unacceptable performance, and what can be done about it.

  

 I 
visited Curtin Detention Centre for a nine-hour visit on 25  th  
June 2001.  It is a five-hectare site, with just over 100 temporary 
accommodation and service buildings scattered amongst the red dirt that 
is characteristic of the area.  The nearest town is Derby, some 
40 kilometres away, but the Centre itself gives the impression of being, 
“in the middle of nowhere”, as it is about 6 kilometres away from 
the main road.

  

 The 
day I visited there were 849 people living there, mostly Iraqis, Iranians 
and Afghanis.  Recent arrivals were quarantined from those whose 
processing had commenced, on the basis, I later discovered, that they 
should not be given any coaching as to what they should say so as to 
maximise their chances of being screened through the process successfully.

  

 The 
operators of the facility are Australian Correctional Services; they 
have some staff permanently on site, but the majority of the guards 
operate on a fly-in/fly-out basis from Sydney, Brisbane or Perth.  
I mention this because it indicates how difficult it is to achieve any 
continuity of standards and attitudes in such circumstances.  Also 
on site are representatives of the Department of Immigration and Multicultural 
Affairs (DIMA), the agency which is responsible for the administration 
of all the Commonwealth Government’s Detention Centres.  The 
DIMA representatives are there to see that the conditions are appropriate 
and the obligations of the operators are met.  In other words, 
DIMA is the nearest thing to accountability agency available in relation 
to detention centres.

  

  What soon emerged, 
however, is that the DIMA representatives and the ACS personnel see 
themselves as part of a unitary team.  There is absolutely no differentiation 
in the day-to-day behaviour of their roles.  As I walked around 
the facility, I was accomp anied by two representatives of ACS 
and two of DIMA.  In asking questions I found that they deferred 
to each other on operational and policy matters quite indiscriminately.  
There was absolutely no role differentiation apparent between them.  
When I probed about this, I was informed that DIMA was not at liberty 
to discuss monitoring or accountability arrangements as these were dealt 
with in Canberra, and were in any case, commercial-in-confidence.  
In other words, accountability consisted of little more than tick-a-box 
checks of documentation, supposedly taking place 2,500 kilometres south-east 
of Curtin.

  

  This point rapidly 
became apparent in a practical sense.  ACS/DIMA had been very anxious 
that one should arrive before 9.00am so as to be able to see the  
Centre’s education classes in progress.  They were evidently 
very proud of this initiative. A glossy brochure indicated that children 
were receiving five hours’ daily education in four different groups.  
In reality, they were receiving one hour’s education.  Teaching 
took place between 9.00am and 10.00am; thereafter, the children stayed 
in the teaching area until 11.00am, during which time some contact with 
teachers might occur;  then there was a lunch break until 1.00pm;  
and after that so called ‘homework’, if the children felt like doing 
it, occurred in the classroom area until about 2.00pm.    
The so called ‘education program’ was largely a charade - though 
doubtless five hours’ full education was being paid for and signed 
off by the Canberra-based ‘monitors’.

  

 That 
insight really set the tone for the whole place.  The huts in which 
people lived were grossly overcrowded; many of the toilets were broken; 
some of the washing machines were also broken;  the so-called ‘shop’ 
was abominably stocked and rather inaccessible;  the system for 
sending mail breached all standards of privacy and confidentiality;  
and above all the medical and dental facilities were inadequate.  

  

 With 
regard to dental facilities, a dentist apparently called for about two 
days every five or six weeks.  However, there was no dental surgery 
on site, and the dentist’s main activity was apparently pulling teeth 
in makeshift conditions.  When ACS/DIMA representatives were asked 
to explain how less drastic dental treatment was made available, there 
seemed to be a lot of confusion.  

  

 There 
was also widespread dissatisfaction amongst the detainees with the medical 
services.  It had become an article of cynical faith that the main 
‘treatment’ recommended was to drink more water, and that necessary 
medication was not readily offered.  (Perhaps there was a cost 
factor in the commercial-in-confidence contract that might help explain 
this.) The day previous to my visit, a Port Hedland detainee had died 
of cancer, and notices were going up around the Curtin Camp, stating: 
“Cancer - take water and valium and this will cure you”.  
There were no specialist women’s health services.  When questioned 
about these conditions, ACS/DIMA said they felt that they should ensure 
that health services in the detention centre did not exceed those for 
Aboriginal people in the Kimberley generally.  

  

 There 
was enormous frustration amongst the detainees.  A month or so 
earlier the media had been permitted to visit the centre, but had not 
been allowed to talk to any detainees.  When I began to walk around 
the camp, one detainee shinned up a tree and put a symbolic rope around 
his neck indicating that it was a matter of life and death that he and 
his colleagues should be able to talk to me and the other outsiders.  
In fact, I spoke to many detainees who were polite and deferential and 
totally non-threatening in their attitude, even when one was surrounded 
by as many as 100 or even 200 of them.  Their sense of being cut-off 
from any kind of proper communication is profound.  Nor was this 
helped by the presence of a scruffy little ‘complaints box’ in the 
dining area.  There was nothing to indicate that their complaints 
were given any credence nor that letters to the Ombudsman or the Human 
Rights Commission necessarily got through - in fact, detainees believed 
that for the most part they did not get to their destination.

  

  These, then, were 
my impressions gained from my own observations and discussions with 
detainees.  Not surprisingly, every one of these observations was 
challenged by ACS/DIMA.  From the point of view of external scrutiny 
and accountability, let me say tha t there was no way of reconciling 
the two versions of events.  To spell that out a little more:  
when one goes to a prison there is invariably some overlap between what 
prisoners tell one and what officers tell one.  What is different 
is the perspective from which they see events, rather than their representation 
of what events have occurred.  It is always possible to cross-check 
and triangulate information so as to make some sense of it.  

  

 In 
the case of the Curtin Detention Centre, there were quite simply two 
stories that never overlapped or intersected.  But there should 
have been some way of evaluating them.  In a situation like this, 
there should have been a third or middle view.  This should have 
been supplied by DIMA, whose on-site representatives should have been 
straddling the positions of the operators and the detainees.  But 
DIMA is not, in reality an agency that is concerned with accountability; 
it is in effect an operational agency.  All it sees is what the 
operator sees. One is thus left with irreconcilable conflict - though 
to the extent that it is possible to choose between the two stories 
of conditions in the Centre, the view of the detainees was usually preferable 
to that of ACS/DIMA.

  

 To 
compound this, it became apparent from a conversation between a particularly 
angry detainee, who had pointed me towards several substandard features, 
and one of the DIMA group that the relationship is extremely unequal.  
The detainee was told: “I will get you for this”. When challenged 
about this comment, the DIMA person indicated that s/he had only been 
joking.  That is not an acceptable kind of ‘joke’, given the 
unequal power structure within the Centre.

  

 Thus, 
in summary, the conditions that exist at the Curtin Centre are almost 
intolerable.  Such evidence as exists indicates things are little 
better at the other Centres. Yet these things are also largely invisible, 
except when riots occur.  Let me emphasise: it is no coincidence 
that riots do occur in a system that lacks accountability.  Riots 
occur for a reason; they are seldom “mindless” or the work of “rabble 
rousers”. Anyone who knows the simplest thing about prison riots knows 
also that unacceptable conditions against which there is no recourse, 
and thus in relation to which there is a profound sense of inequitable 
treatment, are the precursor to riots.  We do not have riots in 
our detention centres because we have a riotous group of refugees; we 
have them because we run appalling systems.  It is thus in the 
interests of Australia to have some proper accountability system.

  

 So 
I come to the question of how we can rectify this.  In the UK, 
although the Chief Inspector of Prisons does not by statute have jurisdiction 
in relation to immigration detention centres, in practice during Sir 
David Ramsbotham’s time as Chief Inspector an administrative arrangement 
was entered into whereby these centres could be inspected.  There 
can be no doubt that this has headed off problems and worked to protect 
civilised standards.  

  

 My 
suggestion for the Australian situation is as follows.  Several 
states, most notably Western Australia and Victoria, have expert and 
experienced standing bodies possessing inspection skills in relation 
to closed facilities.  I have already pointed out that problems 
in detention centres have knock-on effects into state prison systems.  
Accordingly, it is my belief that the Commonwealth should enter into 
a Memorandum of Understanding with those states that can provide such 
a service, to have the immigration detention centres inspected on a 
regular basis by these expert bodies.  In Western Australia my 
own Office would thus inspect Curtin, Port Hedland and Perth Detention 
Centres; but obviously we could go further afield if necessary into, 
say, Woomera or up to Darwin.  The Victorian Office of the Corrective 
Services Commissioner could likewise cover those detention centres on 
the east coast of Australia.  The inspections could occur against 
a set of evolving standards to which the inspection agencies would contribute.  

  

  To utilise existing 
agencies in this way would not only be far less expensive than setting 
up a separate Commonwealth inspection agency, but it would also enable 
existing expertise to be utilised rather than having to wait for expertise 
to be built up.  I t would also have the benefit of beginning 
to reassure our neighbours in the Region that Australia is trying to 
do a somewhat better job than has previously been the case.  Sometimes 
those of us who live in Australia remain deeply and parochially unaware 
of how sullied our reputation is by our treatment of refugees, not only 
in terms of trying to divert them off-shore, but also in terms of their 
treatment once they arrive.  Of course, the off-shore detention 
centres should also be the subject of inspection by one or the other 
of the competent agencies.

  

 Australia’s 
reputation for fairness and accountability has been besmirched over 
the last two or three years.  It will never be rectified until 
the main policies on refugees are sorted out.  But it can be improved 
somewhat by the systems in place to ensure proper treatment of those 
who have come to Australia in their desperate quests to escape repression 
in their homelands.

  

 I 
hope very much that this idea will be taken up by whichever party is 
elected to Government on 10  th  November.

