---
title: "Harradine slams Goverment response to refugee"
date: "2001-02-09"
creators:
  - "Harradine, Brian"
source: "Office of HARRADINE, SEN BRIAN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211220746
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1ZG36%22
---

  Harradine Slams Government Response to Refugee Inquiry 

  Senator Brian Harradine (Ind, Tas) has labelled the Government response to a Senate   inquiry into Australia’s refugee determination system, shameful. 

  Senator Harradine said he was astonished that the Government had dismissed all 46   recommend ations made by The Legal and Constitutional References Committee   which were designed to ensure a more just process and outcome for asylum seekers. 

  “I call upor. th,e Prime Minister, Mr Howard, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr   Downer and Mr Ruddock to personally intervene and urgently review the   Government response, ” Senator Harradine said. 

  Particularly disturbing was the Government’s response to the recommendations   relating to the case of the Chinese asylum seeker, MS Z. 

  In July 1997, MS Z, who was eight and a half months pre&mant, had pleaded with   DIMA offilzials to allow her to give birth before being put on the flight to China,   insisting that ,she would be forced to have an abortion on arrival. However the   deportation proceeded and seven days later she wa.s subjected to an injection through   her abdomen to destroy the baby”s nervous system. Labour was induced., and the baby   delivered dead. 

  MS Z told her tragic story in a video interview which was smuggled out of China and   screened b:y Senator Harradine at a Senate Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade   Committee: hearing. “The manager [of the detention centre] said I couldn’t [have my   baby]. He said you must go back to China, all the procedures have been arranged. [He 

  said] You won’t be persecuted when you return to China..“’ 

  A Sanctua) y under Review: An Examination of Aza’stralia !s Refugee and Humanitarian   Determination Processes was tabled June 28 last yeas fc)llowing a wide-ranging year-   long inquiry :into Australia’s refugee determination practices and obligations. The   inquiry - long sought after by Amnesty International., The Law Council of Australia 

  and the International Commission of Jurists - was agreed to in the Senalte in May 1999   after the fxcled abortion of MS Z came to light. 

  The Committee described the deportation and forced abortion as “abholrent and a   tragedy. ” 

  The Committee recommended that pregnant women subject to removal should be   given special consideration by the Minister, or a senior delegate, to remain in   Australia until after the birth to ensure that no woman is returned pregnant to a   country in circumstances where there is a risk the woman will be coerced to undergo 

  an abortion. It also recommended “that all steps be taken and put in pladce to ensure   that the situation of Ms Z never occurs again in Austral.ia.” 

  To these recommendations the Government responded: “Any risk associated with 

  returning a wl3man to her country of origin will have been assessed as part of the   protection determination” and “The visa assessment process, combined with   Ministerial intervention powers where public interest grounds exist, enable all cases   of possible concern to be sensitively handled.” 

  “It’s business as usual for the Government and the Dlepartment of Immigration,”   Senato:r Han-adine said. 

  “The fact is that the information gathering procedures at the Country Information   Service were shown to be serious flawed in accepting the l?RC Government’s line   about abortion not being sanctioned and in falsely assuring immigration officials that   a forced abortion was unlikely,” Senator Harradine said. 

  Minister Ruddock, said at the time: “The country infonmation available 

  on China at 

  the time of the case in question indicated that abortion on request is available in the   PRC, blut that forced abortions were not sanctioned by the Chinese government, and   the likelihocd of this occurring was low.” 

  In a written submission to the inquiry, international China. authority, Dr Jlohn Aird, a   former analyst on China to the [JS Bureau of Census and expert witness to   immigratior. hearings in the US. wrote:“. . . when any foreign government forcibly   repatriates a Chinese woman with one child, who thereupon faces almost certain   forcible IUD insertion, or a Chinese woman pregnant ywitlnout the permission of her   local family planning authorities, who faces the virtual certainty of a forced abortion   regardless of duration of pregnancy, or a couple of childbearing age who already have   two or more children, who face the strong probability that one or the other of them 

  must be sterilized, the foreign government shares responsibility for what happens to   these people in China. There is no excuse for not knowing what the risks are. The   evidence necessary for a rational judgment in such cases is in the public domain and   has been for years.” 

  “The case of MS Z and other similar cases have no![ been sensitively handled. Yet   nothing has been done to change this. There are no new processes in place to stop   another woman being forcibly aborted on return fi-om Australia. And as far as I know,   those respcnsible for her deportation are still in their positions,” Senator Harradine   said. 

  “There is also no effective monitoring by DIMA of the fate of returnees who feared   persecution on their return. 

  “DIMA has innocent blood on its hands. Its pathetic response to our inquiry trivialises   the dly3ath of the baby and the torture of his mother.” 

  Issued Canberra February 9,200l   Senator Brian Harradine   Ph: 02 62’773735   Mob: 0418127623 

