---
title: "Reith wants to turn Navy into a brown water policy force."
date: "2001-09-26"
creators:
  - "Martin, Stephen"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211229311
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TXH86%22
---

  Hon Dr Stephen Martin MP  Shadow Minister for Defence  Federal Member for Cunningham 

  D  I 

  S  E 

  072/01 

  Wednesday, 26 September 2001 

  RElTH WANTS TO TURN NAVY INTO A  BROWN WATER POLICE FORCE 

  Labor’s Australian Coast Guard would effectively free up the Navy to get  on with its core task of training and preparing for the military defence of  Australia, the Shadow Minister for Defence, Stephen Martin, said today. 

  “The point of having a separate agency wholly responsible for maritime  policing of Australia’s waters is to allow our Navy to carry out the tasks and  duties that the Australian public expects of them. That’s why countries  such as the United States have separate Coast Guard agencies. 

  “Peter Reith would prefer to have cruise ship Manoora ferrying asylum  seekers from one Pacific nation to another, rather than preparing for the  military defence of Australia. 

  “For the sake of national security it is time for a co-ordinated dedicated  single agency such as Coast Guard. The current arrangements for border  surveillance are a bureaucratic mismatch of Commonwealth agencies and  Labor‘s Coast Guard would streamline this and provide better outcomes. 

  “Experts agree, the public agrees, the only people that don’t agree are  John Howard and his cohorts. 

  “The Howard Government would rather spend $20 million a week on an ad  hoc, knee-jerk operation in Australia’s northern waters rather than  establishing a Coast Guard that would provide excellent coastal  surveillance 52 weeks a year, without compromising our naval resources. 

  “Labor‘s plans for a Coast Guard would ensure that all naval personnel  could remain in the Navy or if they wish transfer to the new Coast Guard,  and the relationship between Navy and the Coast Guard would be a very  close one. The operational commander of the Coast Guard would also be  seconded from the RAN. 

  “At a time when Australia already has a ship in the Persian Gulf and is are  awaiting the formal request from its ally for more military components, it is  time for Reith to stop playing politics and support good public policy,” Dr  Martin said. 

  More Information: Andrea Tanner on (02) 6277 4363 or 0408 796 747.  Avaiiabie at www.stephenmartinmp.com 

  Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600 u Phone (02) 6277 4363 u Fax (02) 6277 8596  s.martin.mp@aph.gov.au 

