---
title: "The other rich list: address by the President of the International Crisis Group on the occasion of conferral of degree of LLD Honoris Causa, University of Melbourne, 27 March 2003 [ie 2002]."
date: "2002-03-27"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Social values"
  - "Justice"
  - "Leadership"
  - "Former Ministers"
  - "International relations"
  - "Human rights"
  - "ie 2002"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211235527
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZM966%22
---

  

  THE OTHER RICH LIST

  

   

  

  Address by Hon Gareth Evans AO QC, President 
of the International Crisis Group, on occasion of conferral of degree 
of LLD Honoris Causa, University of Melbourne, 27 March 2003

  

  ________________________________________________________________________

  

   

  

  The very first time I ever spoke from this platform, 
here in Wilson Hall, I got myself into a great deal of trouble. It was 
Orientation Week 1965, I was the recently elected President of the Students 
Representative Council, and I was telling the freshers about the university 
experience. What I said to them was something like this: “You’ll 
never get a better chance than your university years to live life to 
the full. So make sure you make the most of it. Work hard, play hard, 
drink hard and think hard. Everything you do, do to excess!”

  

   

  

  Well it   was   the 60s - HIV/AIDS didn’t exist, and 
the most dangerous drug around was the one that Bill Clinton, you’ll 
remember, wasn’t inhaling. The students thought the speech was great 
stuff. But it was all too much for the mums and dads when they got to 
hear about it, and the editorial writers, and the priests and parsons 
in their pulpits. The University Council wasn’t very thrilled about 
it either, and I suspect if anyone from that time was still running 
the place I wouldn’t be standing here in these robes today… 

  

   

  

  While this wasn’t exactly 
the   last   speech 
I ever made to get me into a lot of trouble, as some of you may have 
heard, tonight’s occasion is much too dignified for me to even think 
about adding to those credentials. My purpose tonight is really a very 
modest and gentle one (although I can’t guarantee I won’t break 
out just a little bit around the edges in the next few minutes): it’s 
above all to thank the University of Melbourne for honouring me in the 
magnificent way you have just done, and in doing so, to say something 
not just about the fun I had here but about the   values   I learned to cherish here. They are values which 
have guided me in my whole subsequent professional and public life, 
and I hope that you - the graduating students - might see them as 
having some role in the choices you make in your own professional lives.

  

   

  

  I should say at the outset 
that, as important as this place has been in nurturing and inspiring 
me it’s not only to my alma mater that I owe the values I want to 
talk about. I owe them to a lot of other people as well, some like my 
late father no longer with us, but some right here in this hall. I owe 
them to my marvellous mother, Phyl Evans. I owe them in abundant measure 
to my wife Merran and her father Jock Anderson, and very specially to 
Caitlin (who is sharing her graduation with me) and Eamon, two kids 
of whom no father could be prouder.

  

   

  

  And I also owe those values 
to someone else here present tonight: a man whom I have known as a colleague 
and mentor and friend for over 35 years, a man who has been a model 
of every public virtue of decency, honour, integrity and intelligence 
(apart from his lapses on the issue of the monarchy), a man who has 
certainly been an inspiration to generations of law students just as 
he has been, I can testify, to thinkers and policy makers around the 
world - and a man who has recently been through a very tough time that 
nobody in the world could have deserved less: His Honour Mr Justice 
Michael Kirby.

  

   

  

  In a nutshell, the values 
and sustaining beliefs I am talking about - the things I have learned 
from this place and these people to cherish - come down to these: a 
horror of injustice in all its forms, and in particular racial injustice 
; a horror of war and deadly conflict, and its unending capacity to 
generate death, destruction and human misery; a sustaining belief in 
the power of ideas to make a difference; a sustaining belief in the 
capacity of this country of ours, Australia, to make a difference; and 
a sustaining belief in the power of individuals to make a difference.

  

   

  

  I guess it was on the issue 
of   injustice   that Melbourne 
University, and the people in this law school made their first and biggest 
impact on me: the social injustice issues we confronted at the then 
newly founded Fitzroy Legal Service, the constitutional injustice issues 
we fought in 1975 and after, the racial injustice issues we fought in 
establishing the new Aboriginal Legal Service, the campaigns we waged 
in the student movement - big and noisy campaigns, which did help 
change the climate of opinion - against the White Australia policy, 
against Apartheid in South Africa, for recognition and respect for Aboriginal 
Australians. They were passions that sustained me throughout my years 
of teaching law here, practicing law, being a member of Michael Kirby’s 
Law Reform Commission, working for the late Lionel Murphy, and in all 
my early years in politics, including as Attorney General. And they 
are passions that will stay with me forever.

  

   

  

  The horror of   war and deadly conflict   in all 
its forms is something I, like so many others, came to understand and 
absorb during the Vietnam war years, partly here on this campus. As 
I became in my later political life more and more absorbed with foreign 
policy issues, culminating in my long period as foreign minister, I 
became obsessed not only with issues like finding a way to end the genocidal 
conflict in Cambodia, but with arms control and disarmament - working 
not only with diplomats but with legal experts and scientists and engineers 
around the world, to find ways of not only controlling but eliminating 
nuclear and chemical and biological weapons, and having technically 
workable inspection and verification regimes. 

  

   

  

  And that’s an obsession 
that continues to this day with the work I am doing at the International 
Crisis Group, an extraordinary and unique organization now working in 
more than twenty crisis areas across four continents, with high-level 
advocacy offices in the world’s major capitals - using all the contacts 
and applying all the strategies I learned as Foreign Minister - to 
prevent and contain deadly conflict. The thing about prevention, of 
course, in Burundi or Macedonia or Uzbekistan or Ecuador or anywhere 
else, is that if you succeed nothing happens - and nobody notices. 
That doesn’t appeal much to practicing politicians: asking a Minister 
or MP to do something useful for which he or she is almost bound not 
to get any recognition is like trying to bath a dog. But it’s a great 
job for political has-beens like me, who have already had our 15 minutes 
of fame and don’t want or need any more!

  

   

  

  In conducting this kind of 
advocacy, I have learned never for one moment to underestimate or lose 
sight of the   power of 
ideas   to change policy. And that’s 
something I really did absorb in my years in this great institution. 
It’s ideas that universities are particularly good at generating, 
and it’s the   idea   of ideas, and the power of ideas to change the 
world, that universities must continue to believe in. Yes, ideas have 
to be operationalised, made relevant to the real world, turned into 
programs and strategies, and campaigned and lobbied for, if behaviour 
is to change. But they do have the power to change the way decision 
makers think about and respond to issues. Think about the huge significance 
of the idea of “sustainable development”, invented by the Brundtland 
Commission, in setting the agenda for a whole new constructive international 
and domestic debate on environmental issues.

  

   

  

   It’s my modest hope 
that another simple but powerful idea - suggesting we talk about not 
the “right to intervene” but rather “the responsibility to protect”, 
as recommended by the international commission that I recently co-chaired 
on the humanitarian intervention issue - might make a difference. The 
hope is that it will get the debate in the UN on these issues back on 
the rails, reducing the chance of the world turning its back on some 
of the awful cases, like Rwanda, of genocide and ethnic cleansing from 
which they’ve walked away in the past.

  

   

  

  The idea that   Australia   as a country, 
small as we are in world terms, and lacking the military or economic 
clout to impose ourselves on anyone, can really make a difference on 
some of the great international policy issues of the day is one that 
certainly sustained me all the years that I was making a nuisance of 
myself in New York and Washington and Jakarta and lots of other places 
as Foreign Minister. It sustains me still, but as a vision I’m afraid 
for the future rather than the present, as the current Australian government 
continues to walk away not only from a leadership role, but I’m afraid   any   kind of 
good international citizenship role.

  

   

  

  On the great current international 
issues of the environment, human rights, the treatment of refugees, 
arms control and disarmament and, as recently as last week in Monterrey, 
finance for development, we’re just not there. It’s not doing our 
reputation much good now, and it won’t help us when we want cooperative 
support from others in the future. I’m glad that we maintain our record 
of friendship with and support for the United States, not least as it 
wrestles with the ugly new phenomenon of global terrorism, but it’s 
not something around which to build an entire foreign policy. 

  

   

  

  Here, as elsewhere,   individuals   make a 
difference, and this is the theme on which I want to finish, because 
it so directly and immediately matters for those of you graduating here 
tonight.

  

   

  

   Of course individual   leaders   make an 
enormous difference. How they choose to play their cards on enormously 
sensitive social issues, like race and immigration, can affect the whole 
fabric of a country, and how it stands and appears in the world. In 
every country in the world, and Australia is no exception, there are 
some rather ugly prejudices and currents running through society - 
based mainly on economic anxieties, combined with a fear of the personally 
unknown. It’s the job of political leaders not to make those currents 
respectable, not to let prejudice become acceptable social behaviour, 
not to let those genies out of the bottle. On hot button issues like 
refugees and immigration, decency in public life is fragile and needs 
strong bipartisan consensus to sustain. If one side slips, almost certainly 
the other side will feel politically compelled to follow the debate 
down. It’s something that political leaders on both sides of the fence 
seem to have instinctively understood at least from the early 1970s 
on, if not before. It’s a real tragedy for this country - certainly, 
as I can attest, for our international reputation - that that willingness 
to maintain a consensus of decency seems, for the time being anyway, 
to have gone.

  

   

  

  But it’s not just leaders 
who can make a difference to the way our societies and the wider world 
works. Passionate and caring individuals in all walks of life, who choose 
to direct even just part of their energies to working for public goods, 
can make a difference. I have seen it every day of my working life as 
young lawyers take a couple of years off to work as investigators or 
prosecutors or defenders in East Timor, or do pro bono work in Aboriginal 
legal services; as young economists and accountants go off to help commercial 
enterprises develop, or non-government organizations build stronger 
civil society institutions, in war-wracked or authoritarian or poverty-stricken 
countries; as young engineers go off to work on development projects 
in the Pacific or in Africa or South Asia, or in Aboriginal settlements 
in the outback. To do these things is a wonderful way not only of helping 
others, but of giving substance and satisfaction to your own professional 
and personal lives.

  

   

  

  My final plea - now that 
you’re thinking, as you all are, about your life beyond this great 
university - is that you do think very seriously about a career in public 
policy and public service (whether in government or non-government organizations), 
even in fact in politics, as an alternative to a headlong plunge into 
business or professional life. If you do care passionately about some 
of the things I have been talking about, or other great policy issues 
like the environment, it can be fantastically rewarding to spend your 
whole life, not just a marginal part of your life, wrestling with them. 

  

   

  

  It’s a life bound to be 
full of frustrations and disappointments, and reverses and dips and 
u-turns: you practically never achieve as much as you’d like to. But 
it’s fantastic when something, just occasionally, goes more or less 
right, and you feel that you really have made a difference. You’re 
never going to make a huge amount of money doing this kind of thing, 
but you’ll be immensely well rewarded in other ways. The personal 
satisfaction rich list is not a bad one to be on. 

  

