---
title: "Population policy forum needed."
date: "2002-01-25"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211233770
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KAT56%22
---

 Peter Andren MP - Independent Member for Calare

 M e d i

 a

 R e l e a

 s e

 25  January 2002

 Population Policy Forum Needed

 Renewed calls for a national population policy by in recent days must be heeded especially in light of the divisive impact of events such as the Tampa Crisis, September 11 and the War on Terrorism, according to Peter Andren, Member for Calare.

 His comments followed Dr Tim Flannery’s Australia Day address that highlighted the need for a government inquiry into a population policy that would achieve “better environmental and humanitarian outcomes”.

 “In 1999 I moved a motion in Parliament, supported by Brendan Nelson, part of which called for a national population forum to consider and propose a population policy for much the same reasons.

 “My motivation was the politics of the time in which immigration and migrants were targeted by Hanson hysteria.

 “Australia was divided then by One Nation’s simplistic calls for limiting immigration which tapped both fearful and racist seams in our society, in much the same way the present Government’s ad hoc, reactive, but election winning approach to refugees is doing today.

 “The Tampa crisis, asylum-seekers and their detention (and their protests), September 11 and the war on terrorism have created a very tense climate in which knee-jerk reactions prove politically effective, but solve neither the asylum problem or our long term immigration needs.

 “A national forum to help develop a forward-looking policy will help us determine what levels of population, and therefore immigration, our country can sustain.

 “Importantly, the process will provide an opportunity to recognise the fact that immigration, many post-war refugees, built modern Australia.

 “I recognise that population policy is about much more than just immigration. It’s about our carrying capacity, the environment, infrastructure, resources  - ‘our interaction with the land’ as Dr Flannery said.

 “I join Dr Flannery, and others in recent days, calling on the government to become proactive rather than politically reactive around our immigration and refugee policies,” Mr Andren said.

 For more information: 02 63 326 229

