---
title: "Reintegration package for Afghan TPV holders."
date: "2002-12-16"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211251314
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/U1686%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS  AFFAIRS

 Population Change Border Protection Migration Program Humanitarian Program Multicultural Affairs Indigenous Affairs

 Home Minister's Profile Frequently Asked Questions Contact the Minister Media Centre

 MEDIA CENTRE

 Reintegration Package for Afghan TPV Holders

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Philip Ruddock, today announced details of a  reintegration package for current Afghan Temporary Protection Visa (TPV) holders who volunteer to return to Afghanistan.

 The offer to TPV holders in Australia, was prompted by interest generated by the package offered to Afghans still seeking  asylum here in Australia and those in the offshore processing centres on Nauru.

 The package includes $A2,000 per individual adult or child (or up to $A10,000 per family unit comprising husband, wife and  dependent children). The Government will also pay for international travel to Kabul. In addition, Afghan TPV holders will  receive a range of support services to help re-establish their lives in Afghanistan.

 "My Department will write to all current Afghan TPV holders eligible for the package and provide them with information  about voluntary return and the details of the package," Mr Ruddock said.

 Afghan TPV holders will be asked to notify the Department if they have changed address, to ensure they will receive their  letter of offer.

 There will also be community consultation sessions and notices in the multicultural press advertising the package.

 Afghan TPV holders wishing to depart voluntarily before a decision is made on their application for a further Protection Visa  (PV), must agree to withdraw their application in writing (by completing a Declaration for Voluntary Return form) when  accepting the package.

 The Department has also arranged for the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) to continue to provide a range of  support services to Afghans returning to Afghanistan with the package. IOM services include counselling, arranging air travel  to Kabul, reception upon arrival, facilitating access to vocational training and helping with transport from Kabul to other  destinations within Afghanistan if required.

 The reintegration package will be available only until 30 June 2003. Those not taking up the offer before the cut-off date will  lose the opportunity to accept this package.

 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has called for Afghans to be returned with a reintegration package, such  as that offered by Australia. The package is roughly equivalent to those offered by the UK, Denmark and France to Afghans  returning home.

 Media Contacts Steve Ingram, 0419 278 715

 16 December 2002 



