---
title: "Humanitarian flows and the system of international protection; issues for developed asylum systems. Paper presented at the Dept of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs Conference, Migration: benefiting Australia, Sydney, 7-8 May 2002"
date: "2002-05-07"
creators:
  - "Casella, Alexander"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Refugees"
  - "Asylum"
  - "Federal issue"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211236740
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0AR66%22
---

 Humanitarian flows and the system of international protection; issues for developed asylum systems.

 Dr Alexander Casella

 International Centre for Migration Policy Development

 MIGRATION       BENEFITING AUSTRALIA

 2

 The purpose of this presentation is to describe the international system of protection and  the  challenges  faced  in  particular  by  the  asylum  systems  of  industrialised democracies as a result of changing patterns of international migration. This paper is designed to sketch a broad canvas for further discussion.

 Managing  migration  flows  is  one  of  the  great  challenges  of  globalisation.  Ensuring the protection of refugees, by guaranteeing their right of asylum, is the main moral component of this challenge.

 The word asylum comes from the Greek language.  It describes a place of refuge, where  a  man  could  stay  to  escape  from  the  reach  of  the  power  of  the  state.  In keeping with the religious origin of the concept, the place of asylum was traditionally the  temple,  that  is  to  say  the  place  of  worship.  However,  if  the  person  who  had sought refuge in the holy place had committed a blatant crime he would be denied food and water so as to compel him to leave the place of worship. This then enabled the temporal power to lay hand on him and render him accountable for his misdeeds.

 In other words, a fundamental issue with asylum was management. 3000 years later, the problem is still unchanged.  Asylum without management leads to abuse, which in  turn  leads  to  the  erosion  of  the  principle.  Thus  the  preservation  of  the  principle requires that it be managed.  The problem then and today is how?

 To manage an asylum process essentially means answering three broad questions: Firstly, who is a refugee? Secondly, where should he/she seek asylum? Thirdly, for how long?

 A  refugee  is  defined  by  persecution,  be  it  for  political,  religious  or  social  reasons. Somebody seeking asylum is by definition an asylum seeker. If the person's claim to asylum  conforms  to  the  definition  of  a  refugee,  he/she  is  recognised  as  such.  If  it does not conform he/she is not. One is therefore either a refugee or one is not.

 Traditionally  refugees  sought  asylum  within  their  own  cultural  and  geographic environment with the ultimate aim of returning home when the danger for them was over.  While  this  situation  still  endures  in  some  parts  of  the  world,  with  refugees seeking  asylum  in  neighbouring  countries  or  in  their  own  region,  it  has  become increasingly  undermined  by  a  new  phenomenon  which  emerged  in  the  late  1980's; globalisation.

 Ease  of  transportation,  the  global  revolution  in  communications,  the  enduring economic  crisis  of  the  third  world,  combined  with  protracted  internal  conflicts  and social  upheavals  which  have  further  fuelled  the  lingering  discontent  of  the

 underdeveloped,  have  led  to  a  globalisation  of  population  displacement.  The  end result  is  that  today  a  combined  mass  of  legal  and  illegal  migrants,  asylum  seekers and  refugees.   Within  this  global  movement,  the  purpose,  increasingly,  is  not  so much to leave, as it is to arrive with two constants.

 First, asylum seekers / migrants essentially converge towards countries where they will join an existing community of compatriots. And secondly the population flux will generally  move  towards  those  countries  that  provide  the  most  generous  social

 benefits.  In  other  words,  for  the  refugee  component  of  the  movement,  personal convenience  increasingly  takes  precedence  over  protection  and  what  might  have

 3

 started, as an imperative quest for refuge becomes a quest for social grants. While the phenomenon is subjectively understandable it becomes, when multiplied by the hundreds of thousands, unbearable to the few industrialised  countries  that  end  up  carrying  a  disproportionate  burden  of unauthorised arrivals.

 In  1983  the  total  arrival  of  asylum  seekers  in  Western  Europe  was  a  manageable 73.700. In 1992 it reached 692.000.In 1983 some 4200 asylum requests were made in the UK. In the year 2000, the number reached some 70.000. At the other end of the spectrum, asylum requests in Italy fell from 3000 in 1983 to 681 in 1996. In other words, some 2.4 million asylum applications were filed in Western Europe between 1991  and  1995.  As  the  number  of  asylum  claims  increased  so  did  the  costs.  It  is estimated that from 1990 to 1998, the European countries spent between 40 and 45 billion US dollars managing their asylum systems. In 2001 the cost was projected at some 10 billion US dollars.

 By any standards, the exercise is staggeringly costly, and even more so for two reasons. First this sum, or part of it, could have been far better spent in assisting the countries of first asylum in the third world that receive refugees, not to say in the countries of origin. Secondly it is one thing to spend money to care for refugee and quite  another  if  the  overwhelming  majority  of  arrivals  are  either  not  refugees,  or  if they are refugees, they already benefit from asylum. Indeed at best only 10% of the asylum seekers processed by the Western European asylum system were found to have genuine claims to refugee status. Thus what the procedure underlined was the fundamental  difference  between  a  hapless  refugee  in  desperate  need  of  sanctuary and a refugee who already has asylum but wishes to further emigrated for reasons unrelated  to  refugee  status.  Intimately  what  the  industrialised  countries  were confronted  with  were  not  so  much  refugees  in  need  of  asylum  but  either  illegal immigrants  seeking  refugee  status  or  refugees  already  benefiting  from  asylum  and seeking to emigrate by evading normal immigration procedures.

 Confronted  with  a  crisis  which  showed  no  sign  of  abating  the  western  European governments,  in  the  late  1980's  had  to  reluctantly  acknowledge  that  their  asylum systems  which  had  been  designed  both  to  handle  far  smaller  numbers  and  to address  claims  which  in  their  majority  were  those  of  genuine  refugees  were  now collapsing under their own weight. Within this reappraisal, the 1951 Convention was

 not the issue. The Convention, in substance only sets out two main principals. First the definition of a refugee and second that he or she should not be sent back to a country  or  area  where  he  or  she  would  be  persecuted.   As  they  stand,  these principals  remain  unquestioned.  Indeed,  through  various  instruments  such  as  the Convention  Against  Torture  or  the  creation  of  a  "humanitarian  status"  the industrialised democracies had already, on their own moved far beyond the Refugee Convention.  What  was  at  issue  was  the  various  national  pieces  of  legislation  that spelled out the implementation of the Refugee Convention. While these procedures, by and large, were exceedingly generous and made great efforts to ensure that no asylum  seeker  with  a  genuine  claim  to  refugee  status  be  excluded,  they  were exceedingly long and costly. However, they were not geared to address a massive and complex influx of which the refugee component sometimes did not exceed a few percentages.

 The  problem  for  the  industrialised  democracies  was  simple:  how  to  ensure  the preservation  of  asylum  while  curbing  the  potential  for  abuses.  To  say  that  the solutions are incomplete, painful to implement and sometimes difficult to realistically

 4

 identify  is  an  understatement.   One  of  the  approaches  has  been  Temporary Protection. Confronted with a mass exodus, Temporary Protection provides blanket asylum for the duration of the crisis. Without a time-consuming and costly individual screening, followed by repatriation, voluntary or not, once the conflict has ended.

 This solution was successfully applied by the Europeans in the case of the crisis in Bosnia  and  Kosovo.   Regarding  continued  unauthorised  arrivals,  states  have increasingly sought to implement the principle of first asylum, which is the notion that an asylum seeker should request asylum in the first country where he is not at risk. A Tamil  who  requests  asylum  in  Switzerland  after  having  transited  through  India, Hungary, Poland and Germany is a case in point. While he might well be a refugee, he  was  not  in  danger  in  any  of  the  countries  of  transit,  and  thus  his  request  for asylum  in  Switzerland  was  motivated  by  personal  convenience  and  not  by  a  quest for safety. Acting on this principle, European democracies now have reciprocal return agreements  and  people  intercepted  at  the  border  are  returned  from  Holland  and Denmark to Germany, from Germany to Poland and the Czech republic and the like. Ultimately, what the system seeks to do is to delink asylum from the presence of the asylum  seeker  in  the  state  of  preferred  refuge.  This  is  what  the  US  Cuban  asylum policy has achieved.

 Cuban boat people headed for the US are now intercepted on the high seas by the US coast guard and forced on board. There they are given a rapid screening for a  presumption  of  refugee  status.  Those  who  are  not  presumed  to  be  refugees  are

 returned to Havana within 12 hours. Those with a positive presumption are taken to Guantanamo where they are placed in detention while they are being screened. The screened-out  are  then  sent  back  to  Cuba  and  the  screened-in  are  resettled  in  a number of countries excluding the US. In parallel, the US has a  regular  emigration program  from  Cuba.  The  US  approach  is  perfectly  consonant  with  the  Convention because it does provide that a refugee will have access to asylum procedures and will  be  provided  with  a  place  of  protection.  However  it  does  not  permit  refugees  to either impose their presence on a preferred country of destination.

 Acting on the same principle, the Aegean Sea Initiative, presently under discussion between  Italy,  Albania  and  Greece  would  provide  for  the  creation  in  Albania  of  a holding centre for all illegal arrivals in Italy. There the inmates would be processed,

 with the recognised refugees accepted   for resettlement and the others deported to their countries of origin.

 If  we  look  beyond  the  Cuban  example.  it  is  clear  that  addressing  the  asylum/migration issue requires an international effort and cannot be addressed by one  country  alone  -  the  country  of  origin,  the  country  of  first  asylum,  the  various

 countries  of  transit,  the  countries  of  destination-  are  involved.  These  international efforts  are  now  an  ongoing  process  and  include  the  Bali  conference,  the  Bern Initiative,  the  Global  Consultations,  the  IOM  MPRP  and  the  ICMPD  Budapest Process. But whatever the indispensable International efforts, there is no substitute for realistic and implemented National Policies.

 Within  this  comprehensive  effort,  as  the  Europeans  have  learned  to  their  chagrin, there is no room for complacency. The effort can also not be unprincipled because we are dealing with asylum, which is a moral principle, albeit one which is exercised in  the  real  world.  Thus  the  challenge  is  to  find  a  realistic  balance  between  what should be done and what can be done. As of today, and with all their imperfections, the industrialised democracies, have not failed the principle of Asylum.

