---
title: "New border Bill an election wedge - Andren."
date: "2002-06-20"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211241170
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LJT66%22
---

 Peter Andren MP - Independent Member for Calare

 M e d i

 a

 R e l e a

 s e

 EDS: Please note correction in second paragraph.

 20 June 2002

 New Border Bill an Election Wedge - Andren New legislation rushed through the House of Representatives today is simply a device to trigger a double dissolution election, according to the Member for Calare Peter Andren.

 Mr Andren told Parliament that legislation to place thousands of offshore islands in a migration exclusion zone was flawed.

 “An asylum application can be made from anywhere inside Australia’s 12 nautical mile limit, on terra firma or not,” Mr Andren said.

 “This legislation doesn’t solve any immigration dilemma, but it is certainly serves a political imperative, and that’s to keep the refugee issue bubbling along, so an election trigger is in the draw.

 “This is a further demonising of people, most of whom have fled their country because of the tyrannical forces we are ready to join the US in fighting.

 “Greece has not excised 10,000 islands for immigration purposes, as far as I am aware, though they are so close to the tyranny that breeds the refugee exodus.

 “Let’s fight those tyrants and at the same time analyse who helped those tyrants reach their position of power,” he said.

 Mr Andren supported an Opposition amendment that called for a far greater effort to bring Indonesia and other countries to our north into line to meet their refugee responsibilities and outlaw people smuggling.

 He also warned a double dissolution would open the way for a re-emergence of extreme political fringe groups.

 “We have already seen the outrageous campaign perpetrated by the Australia First Party in the Young district where Afghan abattoir workers on temporary protection visas who have been strongly welcomed into that community, have been pilloried and smeared,” he said.

 Mr Andren called on the Government to analyse an alternative refugee processing system delivered to Parliament this week by a new alliance of 25 refugee support groups that includes the Churches, Oxfam and Caritas.

 For more information: 02 63 326 229

