---
title: "Sociology and the crisis of public education. 2002 Ashworth Lecture, University of Melbourne, 21 October 2002"
date: "2002-10-21"
creators:
  - "Connell, R. W."
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Sociology"
  - "Government schools"
  - "Private sector public sector comparisons"
  - "Curriculum"
  - "Neoliberalism"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211249040
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GCP76%22
---

 SOCIOLOGY AND THE CRISIS OF PUBLIC EDUCATION

  

  2002 Ashworth Lecture

  University of Melbourne

  21 October 2002

  

  

  Delivered by

  Professor R.W.Connell

  University of Sydney

  

  

  

  1. The Queen of Sciences

  

 Nearly a hundred years ago Francis Anderson, the professor 
of philosophy at the University of Sydney, made a public plea to introduce 
the teaching of sociology in Australian universities.  There was 
every reason why he should.  Sociology at the time was regarded 
by its proponents, in the metropole and the colonies, as the new queen 
of sciences.

  

 Sociological texts a hundred years ago offered the 
grandest of grand theories, linking social development to organic evolution 
and placing "man" in a cosmic context.  Sociology undertook 
a vast survey of human experience, ranging from the dim beginnings of 
history up to modern industry, and including every culture and race 
in the world.  (As Durkheim's   L'annÃ©e sociologique  shows, globalization is nothing new in 
sociology.)  Sociology was, to that generation, the science of 
progress itself.  No wonder that, at the inaugural conference of 
the American Sociological Society its president, the world-famous Lester 
Ward, declared that the place of sociology at the summit of the scale 
of sciences had been "definitely fixed".  Just as biology 
had been the leading science of the nineteenth century, sociology would 
be the leading science of the twentieth.

  

 It didn't quite work out.  In the same decade 
as Ward made his prediction, Einstein published the special theory of 
relativity, Freud published   The Interpretation of Dreams , Picasso painted   The Young Women of Avignon , and a young lawyer from India became 
a serious nuisance to the British authorities in South Africa.  
The decade that saw Anderson's plea also saw the Mexican revolution, 
the Chinese revolution which brought Sun Yat-sen briefly to power, the 
collapse of the only remaining Muslim empire and the first Western invasion 
of Iraq, the imperialist powers' massacre of each others' young men 
in the trenches of Europe, and Gandhi returning to India and launching 
mass struggle against British rule.  (That's the decade we celebrate 
on Anzac Day.) By the end of all this, evolutionary sociology and its 
program of intellectual synthesis were in shreds.

  

 Academic sociology survived the debacle, especially 
in the United States, and gradually turned into a different kind of 
enterprise.  Rather than being an overarching synthesis, sociology 
accepted a modest place as one department among half a dozen specialized 
social sciences - the best-known of the others being anthropology, 
psychology, history, political science, and economics.  Sociology's 
particular specialty was hard to define, but most of its business had 
to do with social difference, group formation, and social problems in 
the industrialized countries.  The application of research in solving 
social problems became a trademark of the discipline, and led to a close 
alignment of sociology with the expanding welfare state.  Sociology 
developed a particular sophistication about research methods (as early 
as the 1920s) and thus became a leader in the shift towards empiricism 
which still dominates the social sciences.

  

 It was this chastened, re-focussed, and above all, 
useful discipline which became the basis of the sub-discipline which 
I will now explore, the sociology of education.

  

  2. The sociology of education

  

 Education is no big deal for mainstream sociology.  
Open a famous theoretical text of general sociology - Parsons'   The Social 
System , Giddens'   Constitution of Society , Coleman's   Foundations of Social Theory  - and you will find little about 
education.  In fact only two of sociology's leading thinkers in 
the last eighty years have had much to say about education.  They 
were Mannheim, who formulated a dessicated sociology of education towards 
the end of his life, and Bourdieu, who has had more impact but managed 
to get most things about educational processes wrong.  Educational 
sociology has always been somewhat marginal in sociology as a profession.

  

  The sociology of education has also tended  to be intellectually 
dependent.  With the shining exception of Bernstein's work on restricted 
and elaborated codes, sociology of education has received ideas from 
general theory and other fields, rather than being an arena where important 
conceptual developments occur.  The paradigms of educational sociology 
have, broadly, followed those of mainstream theory since the 1950s: 
functionalism, social reproduction theory, constructionism and post-structuralism.  
Educational sociology has also tended to borrow methods developed elsewhere, 
notably the survey, participant observation, institutional ethnography 
and discourse analysis.

  

  This marginality is surprising, because education might be a paradigmatic 
field for sociological work.  The growth of the modern school system 
is roughly contemporary with the growth of sociology.  The dissemination 
of knowledge and morality was a perfect  example of that "improvement" 
so greatly valued, and so muddily theorized, by the liberal intelligentsia 
who created sociology.  The post-WWII expansion of secondary and 
higher education was a major part of the building of the welfare state.  
"Better education" was a favoured solution to social problems 
- ranging from poverty, to race conflict, to economic growth - for the 
class-compromise governments that dominated Western politics from the 
1940s to the 1980s.

  

 More: contemporary mass school systems have a workforce, 
the teachers, who are exactly the kind of partners that academic sociology 
needs.  Teaching is a profession based on knowledge, and capable 
of using knowledge and insights about social process in its daily work.  
Teachers and schools have practical problems that sociology can illuminate.  
Teachers also (as we found in the "teacher reference groups" 
who contributed to   Making the Difference ) have a capacity for critique, for reflection, 
and for grounded response to research.  This kind of encounter 
with an informed constitutency can lift sociological research from the 
rather one-dimensional realm of data-collection-and-academic-publication 
to a multi-dimensional world with possibilities of debate, strategising 
and social action.

 In its empirical work, the sociology of education 
has realized some of this possibility.  Here I would like to boast 
a little, as the sub-discipline has some jewels to show.  You would 
go a long day's march before finding a better modern ethnography than 
three US studies of schools:  Thorne's   Gender Play , a brilliantly observed and subtly reflexive study 
of two primary schools; Foley's   Learning Capitalist Culture , a vivid and frightening study 
of a Texas high school that should be read by everybody who wonders 
what planet George W. Bush comes from; and Wexler's   Becoming Somebody , which threads a disturbing analysis of postmodern 
alienation through a narration of high school realities of class and 
race.

  

 Going back a little earlier, sociological work on 
poverty and racial inequality in schools was central to the growth of 
an "equity" agenda in education, producing a whole generation 
of social justice programs from Headstart and Title One in the USA to 
the Disadvantaged Schools and Participation & Equity programs in 
Australia.  In the huge outpouring of modern research on gender, 
some of the very best - the most illuminating and original - is sociological 
work on schools, from Davies' intricate and inventive studies of gender 
discourses in Australian classrooms, to Arnot's macro-analysis of the 
"gender gap" in British institutions.  And in education 
studies, some of the best writing one can find on teachers (and the 
most useful in teacher training) is sociological research on the teaching 
profession, its labour process, and schools as workplaces.

  

 All this sounds promising, and it is not hard to find 
examples of the interplay between sociological research and educational 
strategy.  They include Livingstone's work on the links between 
education and the economy, Yates' work on gender equity strategy, and 
my work on curricular justice.  Around such issues there is an 
arena of practical social theorising (I don't call it "applied 
sociology" as I think the field is much more interactive than that) 
that is of great relevance to educational policy, and could be of great 
intellectual and practical importance to sociology.

  

 But this is not where the cutting edge currently is, 
in debates about education and society.  The whole field of discussion 
has been taken over by another force, the market agenda of neo-liberalism.

  

  3. Neo-liberalism and social analysis

  

 The most astonishing feature of intellectual life 
in our day is the triumph of neo-liberalism.  In less than thirty 
years, starting from no larger base than an unfashionable school of 
thought in one academic discipline, neo-liberal theory has more or less 
taken over the world.  Neo-classical economics has become a paradigm 
for every social science.  Neo-liberalism has swept Keynesian economics, 
welfare state concepts and socialism from the field, and has removed 
much of the radical potential from postmodernism.  Neo-liberal 
ideas now provide the policy framework for every major government in 
the world and for every major international or transnational institution.

  

  Of course it did help that neo-liberalism has been backed by the world's 
ruling classes.  Corporate funding of right-wing "think tanks" 
and neo-conservative magazines, especially in the USA, has been important 
in developing neo-liberal ideas and applying  them to specific 
policy areas such as education. (Australian neo-liberals habitually 
borrow the language, such as "political correctness", "provider 
capture", "vouchers", etc., direct from these sources 
and their websites.)  The aggressive dissemination of neo-liberal 
ideas, texts and imagery through corporate-controlled media, including 
our very own News Limited, has been very important in getting them wide 
circulation.

  

 The time was certainly ripe.  The promotion of 
neo-liberal ideas corresponded to a major shift in strategy by owners 
of capital, from state-centred class compromise to market-centred class 
discipline.  This was linked to the rise of new groups of entrepreneurs, 
new kinds of institutions (global electronic media, transnational corporations, 
global capital markets), new patterns of business masculinity and management 
training.  The shift of strategy by capital in the 1980s was made 
possible by the deepening paralysis of older forms of opposition - 
industrial unionism, social democracy and bureaucratic communism - 
which became evident at the same historical moment.

  

 Considered simply as a set of ideas, neo-liberalism 
is thin for an ideology with so much influence.  A rhetoric of 
individual freedom and "choice", a technical analysis of the 
working of markets, and a critique of bureaucracy and state regulation, 
are the core of the package.  Turning this into a broad social 
agenda has required a good deal of work, in which neo-liberals have 
welcomed support from the new genetics (widely understood to validate 
ideas of natural difference and inequality), from conservative religion 
(also suspicious of the state and social radicalism), and from a variety 
of "backlash" movements opposed to reforms (especially state 
action) concerning gender, race, immigration, and environment.  
This has produced hybrid policies, such as the education and social 
welfare policies in Australia which exalt the market, but also act as 
subsidies to conservative churches.

  

 The package works because the commodity is a genuinely 
protean social form.  Almost any kind of relation between people, 
almost any kind of human service,   can  be commodified and exchanged in markets.  The converse 
is also true and important - these relations and services can exist 
without markets.  Market ideology theorises as natural and inevitable 
what is in fact a highly contingent social form.  For markets to 
function, especially to predominate, requires particular historical 
circumstances, particular cultural presuppositions, and the formation 
of particular kinds of personality.  Neo-liberal practice is better 
than the theory.  Neo-liberal governments and ideologues put a 
lot of energy into promoting these conditions, and destroying alternatives.

  

 The market agenda is like a new form of mining, directed 
at social relations themselves.  The social is treated as a landscape 
in which commodifiable processes are to be found and extracted.  
You can hear the note of discovery and triumph when neo-liberals work 
out how to commodify something new - a main road, or garbage collection, 
or national mapping, or census data, or railway maintenance, or government 
printing, or prisons, or unemployment relief.  However unlike BHP-Billiton, 
which can walk away from the hole in the ground, this mining of the 
social continues to presuppose the non-commodifiable ground, the processes 
that continue to produce culture, personalities and social relations.  
In this respect neo-liberalism is more like a new form of colonialism, 
which continues to need its colonized workforce in order to realize 
the benefits of conquest.

  

 This is not just an analogy.  The rise of neo-liberalism 
coincides with the processes now popularly called "globalization", 
in which vast proportions of the world's population have been brought 
under the sway of international markets and transnational corporations.  
The rhetoric of neo-liberalism describes a world of competitive markets 
in which every individual is a small enterprise competing on a level 
playing field.  The reality of the contemporary capitalist world 
is staggering global inequalities, unprecedented concentrations of wealth, 
institutionalized privilege, and vast movements of underprivileged labour 
forces.

  

  Neo-liberalism systematically argues against collective strategies 
to correct these inequalities, and neo-liberal institutions (from industrial 
relations laws to the IMF) have systematically undermined such strategies.  
This constantly generates the need  for an   enclave strategy  for the privileged.  Groups benefiting 
from the concentration of social resources through commodification try 
to separate themselves from the unprivileged and surround themselves 
with protections - corporate security, gated communities, private 
schools, private insurance, private hospitals, and so on.

  

 And if "enclave strategy" sounds like a 
description of Australian foreign policy, the analogy is exact.  
The race politics of rich countries become interwoven with the security 
agenda of the corporate elite.  Indeed that is a key way in which 
support for the security agenda is gained from the broad populations 
which live outside the gated communities. 

  

  4. Neo-liberal education

  

 In education, neo-liberalism has followed the general 
line of commodifying human services, promoting markets and shrinking 
the public sector.  Where markets do not already exist, the strategy 
is to create them by corporatising public institutions, forcing them 
to compete against each other and thus behave like profit-maximising 
companies.  This process is now far advanced in Australian universities 
and TAFE, and most of the people in this room are living with the consequences.

  

 Corporatization has been slower in schools, though 
Kennett made a noble effort in Victoria and the Metherell expansion 
of selective schools has permanently changed NSW public education.  
Schools, however, have been the objects of alternative strategies to 
expand markets.  In the United States there has been a striking 
commodification of the curriculum, for instance through "Channel 
One" commercial TV in schools.  The main Australian device 
is the redirection of tax revenues from public institutions to private 
institutions as subsidies that make it easier for customers to buy their 
services.  This redirection is now the centrepiece of federal government 
schools policy.  A squeeze on public funding to public schools 
of course makes them more vulnerable to commercial operators wishing 
to colonize another tract of society.  The Murdoch press is currently 
advertising a "books for schools" promotion, intended to increase 
its own circulation.

  

 Sociology should have a lot to say about these developments, 
though it has taken time to get our bearings on them - the owl of 
Minerva flies only at dusk.  One reason for the speed of the neo-liberal 
takeover has been the number of public sector officials who have promoted 
the privatisation agenda, apparently destroying their own heritage and 
certainly angering much of their workforce.  It has taken time 
to see the social process that has increasingly assimilated public sector 
managers into the managerial elites of business - in employment conditions, 
incomes, social networks, and ideology.

  

 It has also taken time to develop research exploring 
neo-liberalism's impact on schools.  The market "reforms" 
went ahead without research on their likely consequences; to neo-liberals, 
the market is so unquestionably right that research is redundant.  
Cassandras who predicted ill consequences had no evidence to go on, 
and were easily brushed aside.  Research is now emerging, through 
the work of scholars such as Ball in the UK, Apple in the USA and Marginson 
in Australia, and it is clear that the market agenda is widening social 
divisions within public education.  Not because it produces (as 
neo-liberals suggest it should) diversity in curriculum and pedagogy.  
Educational markets require a measurement system to register market 
success and failure.  Public examinations and testing systems provide 
this, and the markets provide a fierce motive to teach to the test.  
(You will notice the neo-liberal push for a national testing system, 
under the rubric of "standards" and "accountability".)

  

 Therefore market forces in mainstream schooling do 
not generally produce a spectrum of niche marketers.  Rather they 
produce a convergence on the strategy of the "market leaders", 
i.e. the elite private schools, by those for whom that strategy is possible 
- and they produce residualization for others.  Guess which schools 
middle-class children are driven to.  Guess which ones refugee 
children walk to. And guess which country's school system is becoming 
more conformist rather than more creative.

  

  5. Public education as social project

  

 These depressing effects were entirely predictable; 
so predicable that one must wonder whether they were intended.  
However my purpose here is not to trace the causes of the disaster, 
but to reflect on ways out of it - and specifically on the role of 
sociological ideas in the renovation of public education.  For 
the crisis in public education is, as much as a fiscal crisis, a crisis 
of ideas.  And the core of the problem is social process.  
Education is inherently a social process, acting through social relationships.  
Education involves both the development of the capacities of the person, 
and the development of the capacities of society.  To restore this 
full project, we need to develop educational practices which grow from 
that non-commodifiable ground beneath the markets - the social process 
that markets have colonized.

  

 At this point, being a card-carrying empiricist, I 
want to quote from field research, specifically from a study of vocational 
education in upper secondary schools I am currently involved in.  
We interviewed parents about their children's schooling, and therefore 
heard their general views of education.  Wanda is a mother at an 
urban working-class school, reflecting on public education, which she 
thinks is "the best system":

  

  If you put them into selective high, or private schools, where they're 
all one religion or all one kind, basically what you are doing is isolating 
them, in the time where they shouldn't be isolated.  So that when 
they go out into s ociety, they're not as tolerant, they're not 
as understanding.  And they have a lot more problems in coping 
with all those different people of different religions, different backgrounds, 
and all that sort of thing.

  

  That is a particularly articulate statem ent, yet the underlying 
idea is not exceptional.  What many parents value in public education 
is the common ground it provides in a world of social difference.  
Not through imposed conformity and sameness (the old neo-liberal complaint 
against public institutions), but through   meeting , through the possibility of social encounter.

  

 Revalidating encounter, developing this common ground, 
it seems to me, is one of the most powerful directions we can give to 
education.  That is a job that needs serious thinking about the 
nature of contemporary society.  It also has direct realization 
in classroom practice, as it would emphasise teaching practices (for 
instance in science teaching) that foreground student interaction in 
group activities such as planning, investigation and interpretation 
of experiments.

  

  There is an inherent difficulty for teachers in doing this, since 
teachers are, by the nature of their employment, agents of a large institutional 
system.  Research on education influenced by Foucault has shown 
how  modern schools systems operate as a disciplinary system.  
There is an apparatus of surveillance and classification, from the report 
card to the public exam to diagnosis for special education.  Disciplinary 
practices apply to pupils' classroom behaviour, to their language, and 
to their bodies.  School sport, for instance, is an important means 
by which gendered disciplines are applied to children's bodies, and 
meanings of masculinity and femininity are learnt.

  

 This can mean that schools function as means of oppression.  
Schools often do; there is a dark side to institutional education which 
we cannot wish away. There is no simple solution to this, as we cannot 
throw off all disciplines of social process without ceasing to be human.  
But there are different ways of designing institutions, and different 
ways of understanding the relationship of human growth to social discipline.  
An older generation of sociology pictured this as "socialization", 
the imposition of social roles on passive learners.  But human 
growth is an active process, whatever constraints surround it.

  

 The crucial point is that intellectual and emotional 
development consists of projects that have social grounds, projects 
that take off from, and utilize as resources, the social relations in 
which the growing child is involved.  Understanding human growth 
in this way gets us far beyond the "nature vs nurture" debates 
of the past.  This perspective on growth has implications for curriculum, 
as it will lead us to value curricula which are not bounded by a fixed 
point of arrival (such as examination) which prevents the development 
of genuine learning projects.

  

  The structure of the curriculum is at issue here.  The old-style 
subject curriculum has enjoyed a strange revival under neo-liberalism 
- strange, on any consideration other than neo-liberalism's need for 
a means of distinguishing sheep from goats, that is , for a framework 
of competition.  The hierarchies of knowledge on which the subject 
curriculum is based no longer have credibility, as Lyotard observed 
more than twenty years ago, in discussing the collapse of "grand 
narratives".  The market agenda has no response to this, except 
an artificial privileging of traditional "subjects", meanwhile 
abandoning the whole arena of popular culture to the mercies of commercial 
mass entertainment.  One of our society's most disturbing symptoms 
is that far more space and attention is given in popular media to chance 
(gambling) and lottery-style "promotions"), pseudoscience 
(will your lover remain faithful? take this simple test) and outright 
superstition (your week by the stars) than is given to real science.

  

 Developing more relevant curricula is, of course, 
an immensely complex business, and I am not going to offer blueprints 
here.  But I want to mention two important criteria.  One 
is the productive role of education, quite literally, the role education 
plays in developing the productive capacities of the society.  
Contrary to the self-serving rhetoric which pictures business entrepreneurs 
as the only "wealth creators", the actual production of resources 
depends on the capacities of the workforce as a whole, and education 
is crucial in developing these capacities.  This includes vocational 
education, but goes beyond it. I would argue that much of what is taught 
in vocational education programs should be part of general education.

  

 The second criterion is what I have called "curricular 
justice", an idea which develops when the role of curriculum and 
pedagogy (not just funding) in producing educational inequalities is 
recognized.  The creation of a socially inclusive curriculum requires 
an interplay of knowledge and experience from diverse points of view.  
It is, if you like, the curricular side of the "encounter" 
discussed above.  Common ground in the curriculum cannot be defined 
in advance without privileging one point of view - usually the point 
of view of the most powerful social groups concerned. It emerges from 
the process of encounter, and can emerge to the extent that democracy 
is being realized in schooling.

  

 This brings us to the people who must do the job of 
educational reform, the teachers.  A sociological perspective allows 
us to think about the collective practices of teaching, about the occupational 
culture of teachers, and above all about teachers' structured relationships 
with pupils and their communities.  These relationships are intricate 
and varied, as anyone knows who has done research in schools.  
A democratic agenda for schools is not about changing these relationships 
categorically, but must concern itself with improving teachers' capacities 
for effective work.

  

 Given the cultural transformation affecting the curriculum, 
a key change now must be to improve teachers' capacities to act as intellectuals 
- responding to broad issues in the culture, developing ideas and 
strategies.  From this point of view, the decline of "in-service 
training" for teachers is a major weakness in our school system.  
Not that we need "training" specifically, but we do need regular 
and adequate opportunities for teachers to do in-service developmental 
work, researching the issues they face in schools and communities and 
developing methods and resources for dealing with them.  There 
is tremendous scope here for constructive relationships between the 
school system and universities.

  

  6. Sociology and world society

  

 We are not living in a global village, and we may 
never do so.  But there is no doubt we are living in a moment of 
history where local social orders are being transformed by globally-acting 
social forces:  global commodity and capital markets, which are 
now capable of destabilizing all but the largest national economies; 
transnational corporations with their huge capital bases, international 
workforces and global marketing; global electronic media, both the corporate 
entertainment/sports/news/advertising complex and the Internet; international 
migration, both migrant labour and refugees; and state power, especially 
that of the one remaining military super-power and its allies, with 
the associated surveillance and policing systems.

  

  For the impact of these forces on everyday life and consciousness 
we need look no further than the daily news bulletins.  The huge 
inequalities and social turbulence they have created across the world 
are direct sources of the violence we lament in Venezu ela, and 
Palestine, and (one must presume) in the recent tragedy in Bali.  
The currently fashionable notion that we are seeing a "clash of 
civilizations" could hardly be more wrong.  We are seeing 
conflict, sometimes desperate conflict, within a world-system from which 
no-one can escape, no group or culture can separate themselves.

 

 The market agenda - "economic rationalism" 
in Australia - is the ideology of neo-liberal globalization.  Its 
intellectual models offer an account of world society as an interlocking 
system of markets, and its practical politics has smoothed the path 
for transnational business. But since market models cannot "see" 
what lies beneath or beyond markets, neo-liberalism offers a terribly 
distorted view of the emerging world society - with its blindness 
to institutions, and its dominant images of competition, threat, and 
rivalry for scarce resources.  It was this distortion, as much 
as simple racism, that was at work in the "Tampa" and "children 
overboard" stunts last year, when Australian voters were recruited 
to support a dramatic abuse of power.  Broadly, it is this distortion 
that makes it possible for neo-liberals to mobilize an enclave strategy.

  

 Of all the social sciences, sociology is the best 
placed to "see" what economic rationalism cannot, given sociology's 
historic concern with the different forms of human association, and 
with the interplay of power and knowledge.  It therefore seems 
to me that sociology has a strategic role to play, among contemporary 
intellectuals, in developing understandings of the contemporary world.  
As I put it (a little pompously) in another essay, sociology can play 
a key role in the development of the democratic self-knowledge of world 
society.

  

 Part of this role is developing models of association 
that are polycentric and polyvocal without being alienated - and therefore 
have the possibility of being governed by democratic dialogue.  
We have too long been influenced by the belief that the only alternative 
to conformity is chaos.  Here, I think, recent post-structuralist 
work in fields like gender and sexuality is important, in showing how 
lives can be lived and communication can work with multiple, shifting 
and cross-cutting identities.  We should also pay careful attention 
- difficult as it may be when we are bombarded with images of ethnic 
and religious hatred - to situations where multiculturalism works, 
where people do speak across difference, and conflict is open to negotiation.  
Public schools are among the best examples that I know, and teachers' 
experience is an important resource for wider democratic practice, if 
we can learn to use it.

  

 This is the context in which we should now think of 
sociology and education. Schools and teachers have a lot to offer sociology, 
as our academic discipline re-thinks itself in relation to global society 
and the changing roles of intellectuals.  Teachers are not just 
an audience for the work of academics, but can be an active constituency, 
participating in the making of new forms of social knowledge. For both 
of these reasons, giving serious thought to education is a necessary 
part of the re-making of sociology.

  

  At the same time sociological work has a lot to contribute to school 
systems.  Sociological research always has had understandings and 
information to off er.  There are now new ways of thinking 
that sociology has to contribute, as educators grapple with issues about 
teaching and learning in an always more complex society, in a policy 
context transformed by the grand simplifications of neo-liberalism.  
In this new way, I hope we can still realize the vision of our intellectual 
ancestors, like Ashworth, who believed that sociology could improve 
the world and that it was worth committing resources to make this happen.

