---
title: "Constitutional law, the rule of law and systems of governance in Islam. Paper presented at the Islamic Law and the West: Can Secular Laws and Syriah Co-exist? seminar, 19 September 2002"
date: "2002-09-19"
creators:
  - "Faruqi, Shad Saleem"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Islamic law"
  - "Tolerance"
  - "Constitutional law"
  - "Malaysia"
  - "Terrorism"
  - "Overseas item"
  - "Rule of law"
  - "Jurisprudence"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211247844
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7V186%22
---

 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW,  THE RULE OF LAW AND 

 SYSTEMS OF GOVERNANCE IN ISLAM 

 

 Professor Dr Shad Saleem Faruqi 

 Professor of Law, Universiti Teknologi, Mara 

 

 Introduction 

 

 It is not very reliable to measure the depth of the sea at low tide.  Likewise, civilisations,  religions and cultures cannot be safely evaluated at a low point in their history.   

 Since September 11, 2001 Islam is widely perceived to be at its lowest ebb.  A miasma of  shame and sadness surrounds the life of most Muslims due to the tragic events of the last  few  years  -  the  fanaticism  of  the  Taliban  in  Afghanistan,  the  suspected  involvement  of   Muslims in the September 11 tragedy, the sentencing by a Syariah court in Nigeria of an  adultress to death by stoning, the enactment of “hudud laws” prescribing amputation and  stoning to death by the Malaysian states of Kelantan and Terengganu.  The two states of  the  Malaysian  federation  are  controlled  by  a  Muslim  party  (PAS)  that  interprets  Islamic   law in the most conservative, literal and heartless manner.   

 At  the  economic  front  the  Arab  Human  Development  Report  2002  released  in  Cairo  on   July 2 paints a bleak picture of economic and intellectual stagnation in Arab societies.  A  UN  Report  indicates  that  out  of  47  low  income  countries,  25  are  Muslim  majority   countries.  A large number of non-Muslims of the world, specially in the North-Atlantic  countries,  stereotype  the  57  or  so  Muslim  majority  nations  as  backward-looking,   oppressed by religion and inhumanely governed.  Islam is associated with terrorism and  with jihad - which concept is wrongly interpreted to  refer  exclusively  to  holy  war  even   though it refers to any struggle, including a struggle with oneself.  The Saddams, Osamas,  Mullah Omars and Shaik Yassins of Muslim societies bring Islam a great deal of adverse  publicity.   The  violence  and  ferment  in  Chechnya,  Kosovo,  Kashmir,  Afghanistan,   Pakistan, Iraq, Palestine, Mindanao and Indonesia continue to cause loss of lives without  any proportionate gain in politics or economics.   

 In  such  a  scenario  any  fair  assessment  of  Islamic  civilisation  is  difficult.  Much  Western   commentary on Islam is marked by a number of errors.   

 First,  in  dealing  with  Muslims,  there  is  a  willing  confusion  in  Western  commentary   between the faith and the faithful.  The wrongs of Muslims are attributed to their religion.   Thus,  acts  of  terrorism  in  Kashmir,  Palestine,  Chechnya  and  Mindanao  that  are  fuelled  

  1

 largely  by  historical,  political  and  economic  grievances  are  attributed  to  Islamic   fundamentalism.  In fact in most of these crucibles of conflict, the struggle has nothing to  do  with  Islam.   The  violence  is  about  long  standing  political,  territorial  and  economic   problems.  But it is assigned to Islam.  At the same time acts of aggression and injustice  e.g.  the  brutalisation,  dehumanisation  and  demonisation  of  Palestinians  is  not  pinned  on   the  lapel  of  Judaism  and  Christianity  -  and  rightly  so.   The  holocaust  in  Germany,  the   ethnic cleansing in former Yugoslavia, the pulverisation of Afghanistan, and before that of  Vietnam, Laos, Kampuchea and Japan, the shooting down of an Iranian civilian plane by  the United States are not attributed - and rightly so - to Christianity.  When Saddam tries  to manufacture a bomb, the appellation “Islamic bomb” is used to describe his object.  But  the  American  bombs  that  have  devastated  twenty  countries  since  World  War  Two  are   rightly not described as “Christian” or “Caucasian” bombs.    

 Second, the wide chasm in all systems between theory and reality must always be borne in  mind.  International  commentary  on  Islam  tends  to  evaluate  Islam  by  reference  to  the   ground or gutter realities of post-colonial Muslim societies.  But it judges North Atlantic,  Christian  and  Caucasian  societies  by  reference  to  their  pristine  ideals.   In  fact  the  gap   between Islamic and Western societies on a large number of issues - e.g. human rights -  is  narrower  than  we  think,  provided  practice  is  compared  with  practice  and  theory  with   theory.     Third,  Islam  is  not  a  homogenous  or  monolithic  religion.   There  are  as  many  faces  of   Islam as there are of Christianity, Judaism and Hinduism.  In a similar vein one can say  that there are many varieties of democratic, capitalist or socialist systems.  In evaluating  Islam,  the  commentator  can  choose  any  paradigm.  He/she  can  focus  on  the  arch-conservative,  fundamentalist  and  radical  versions  of  Islam  found  in  Taliban’s   Afghanistan,  Saudi  Arabia  or  Pakistan.  Or  he/she  can  look  at  the  softer,  modernistic,   tolerant versions of religion in Malaysia, Bangladesh and Turkey.  One can seek to be a  gutter  inspector  or  one  can  give  a  softer,  sympathetic  assessment  of  the  possibilities   without  being  trapped  in  any  particular  territorial  or  time-frame.   I  wish  to  attempt  the   latter.   

 Islam - Terrorism or Tolerance? 

 

 After  the  horrendous  killings  of  September  11,  2001  it  has  become  fashionable  to   associate  Islam  with  terrorism.   The  caricaturing  and  demonisation  of  Muslims  and   Muslim-nations  is,  of  course,  not  new  but  has  lately  become  a  popular  and  profitable   pastime. Samuel Huntington’s thesis of  “civilisations at odds” has been metamorphosed  into a “clash between good and evil” and “between civilized and uncivilized people.”   

 Does Islam promote violence and terrorism? Are Muslims in a perpetual state of war with  non-Muslims? Does Islam allow the taking of hostages and the killing of innocents? Does  it encourage suicide? If Islam is a religion of  mercy  as  claimed  by  many  Muslims,  then   how  can  we  explain  the  clear  connection  between  Muslims  and  terrorist  movements  in   many parts of Southeast and Central Asia, Afghanistan, Africa  and the Middle East? The  answers  to  these  questions  are  not  easy  but  must,  nevertheless,  be  attempted.   A  few   cautious generalizations are proposed. 

  2

 

 Sanctity  of  life:  Islam  is  a  religion  of  tolerance  and  peace  and  its  cardinal  principles   amply  demonstrate  this  belief.1  The  very  name  of  Islam  comes  from  the  root  word   ‘salama’  which  means  peace.   Islam  is  a  religion  which  is  based  upon  achieving  peace   through submission to the will of Allah. 

 

 Islam stresses the sanctity of  human life.  The Holy Qur’an in Surah 5:32 lays down that  “anyone who saves one life, it is as if he has saved the whole of mankind and anyone who  has killed another person (except in lieu of murder or mischief on earth) it is as if he has  killed  the  whole  of  mankind.”  Prophet  Muhammad  (peace  be  upon  him)  once  listed   murder as the second of the major sins2 and he warned that on the Day of Judgment “ the  first  case  to  be  adjudicated  between  people  on  the  Day  of  Judgment  will  be  those  of   bloodshed.”3    

 Even in times of war, Allah forbids extremism.  In Surah 2:190 it is stated “And fight in  the way of Allah those who fight you.  But do not transgress the limits.  Truly Allah loves  not  the  transgressors.”  It  is  reported  to  us  by  Ahmed  that  Prophet  Muhammad  (s.a.w.)   once said “those who go to extremes are destroyed.” Suicide bombing is undoubtedly one  such extreme. Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) advised his followers: “Do not betray, do not  be excessive, do not kill a newborn child,”4 And he also said “whoever has killed a person  having  a  treaty  with  Muslims  shall  not  smell  the  fragrance  of  Paradise,  though  the   fragrance is found for a span of forty years.”5 He forbade punishment with fire.6    

 Surah  an-Nissaa  4:29-30  is  explicit  about  the  principle  that  Islam  forbids  suicide.   The   messenger  of  Allah  once  said:  “He  who  kills  himself  with  anything,  Allah  will  torment   him with that in the fire of hell.”   

 In the light of the above it can be stated categorically that inciting terror in the hearts of  defenseless  civilians,  destruction  of  civilian  properties  and  maiming  of  innocent  people   are forbidden and detestable acts in Islam.   

 Tolerance: All  religions  contain  a  message  of  tolerance  towards  other  human  beings.    History  is,  however,  full  of  examples  of  the  most  horrible  atrocities  committed  in  the   name of religion by adherents of one religion against followers of  another.  Persecution of  the  faithful  by  atheists  and  agnostics  is  also  a  recurrent  event  in  history.   Despite  these   facts,  the  civilizing  and  central  role  of  religions  in  the  life  of  human  beings  cannot  be   denied.  In this part of the note Islam’s attitude towards other religions will be highlighted.   

 

 1  This is not to deny that those seeking to vilify Islam can discover materials that extol war and violence.  A  “gutter inspector” can find such ammunition in every religious text.  Refer for example to Catholic Asian  News of December 2001/January 2002 at pages 11-12 that quotes (and explains in context) many passages  in the Old Testament that call for killing and destruction of property.  Reference may be made to Jos 6; Jos  8; 1 Sam 15: 1-3; 1 Sam 15: 24-26.  2

  Saheeh Al-Bukhari # 6871 and Saheeh Muslim # 88.  3  Saheeh Muslim # 1678 and Saheeh Al-Bukhari # 6533.  4

  Saheeh Muslim # 1731, Al-Tirmizi # 1408.   5  Al-Bukhari # 3166; Ibn Majah # 2686.  6

  Abu Dawood # 2675. 

  3

 

  In the Holy Qur’an, Surah Al-Baqarah (2:256) it is stated: “Let there be no compulsion in  religion”. In Surah Al-Kafirun (109:1-6) it is stated: “O you that reject Faith: … To you be  your way and to me mine.” In Surah Yunus (10:99) the Holy Qur’an reminds us that Allah  SWT  could  have  made  the  entire  mankind  alike  and  so  no  compulsion  should  be   employed  to  change  people  from  one  belief  to  another.   “If  it  had  been  thy  Lord’s  will,   they would all have believed, all who are on earth.  Will you then compel mankind against  their will to believe?”   

 Islam  shows  the  highest  respect  for  Judaism  and  Christianity.   In  Surah  Al-Baqarah   (2:136) it is stated “… we believe in Allah, and in that which has been revealed to us and  in that which was revealed to Ibrahim and Ismail and Ishaq and Yaqub and the tribes and  in that which was given to Musa and Isa and in that which was given to all the prophets  from the Lord.  We do not make any distinction between any of them and to Him do we  submit.”7 Respect for all previous prophets is part of a Muslim’s articles of faith.   

 In  the  sixth  year  of  Hijrah,  Prophet  Muhammad  S.A.W.  granted  to  the  monks  of  St.   Catherine, near Mount Sinar, a charter of rights:8   

 “(1) They were not to be unfairly taxed (2) no bishop was to be driven out of his bishopric  (3)  no  Christian  was  to  be  forced  to  reject  his  religion  (4)  no  monk  was  to  be  expelled   from his monastery (5) no pilgrim was to be detained from his pilgrimage (6) nor were the  Christian  churches  to  be  pulled  down  for  the  sake  of  building  mosques  or  houses  for   Muslims (7) Christian women married to Muslims were to enjoy their own religion (8) if  the  Christians  should  stand  in  need  of  assistance  for  the  repair  of  their  churches  or  any   other matter pertaining to their religion, the Muslims were to assist them.”   

 Similar  treaties  with  the  Jews  of  Medina  and  the  Christians  of  Najran  in  Yemen  were   signed.9  Ameer Ali says of the treaty at Najran: “Has any conquering  race of faith given  to  its  subject  nationalities  a  better  guarantee  than  is  to  be  found  in  the  words  of  the   Prophet?”10   

 Even idol-worshippers are not to be abused.  Surah An’am (6:108) states: “Do not abuse  those  whom  they  worship  besides  Allah.”  Surah  Al-Tauba  (9:6)  commands  that  “if  any   pagan asks you for asylum, grant it to him so that he may listen to the word of Allah and  then escort him to where he can be secure.”   

 If enemies from other countries attack the non-Muslims in an Islamic state, Muslims are  asked  to  fight  in  order  to  protect  the  freedom  of  religious  worship  of  the  non-Muslims.    Non-Muslims  have  the  right  to  keep  their  languages  and  customs,  to  establish  their   schools and colleges and to be visited by missionaries.  In the Turkish empire, Christians 

 

 7 The equivalent Christian name for Ibrahim R.A. is Abraham; for Ismail R.A. is Ishmael; for Yaqub R.A. is  Jacob; for Musa R.A. is Moses; and for Nabi Isa is Jesus Christ.   8

  Ibn Hisham, Sirah, p. 718  9  Hamidullah, Introduction to Islam, IIFSO Publication, Kuwait, p. 171  10

 Ameer Ali, The Spirit of Islam, London, 1992, p. 273. 

  4

 were represented in the Council.  In the Mughal Empire state aid was given to build and  restore  Hindu  temples.   In  Egypt  the  oldest  churches  were  built  during  the  pre-colonial   (Islamic) period.11   

 If a non-Muslim minor is taken a prisoner of war and if his parents die, the child has the  right to continue with the religion of his father.12   

 There is historical evidence of long periods  of peace and harmony between Muslims and  non-Muslims  through  much  of  Muslim  history.  This  is  in  contrast  with  the  shameful   record of  Jew-baiting throughout Europe; discrimination against Catholics; the holocaust  against  Jews;  and  massacre  of  Muslim  Bosnians  on  several  occasions  in  the  last  three   centuries.    

 Malaysia  is  a  shining  example  of  how  a  Muslim  country  can  embrace  pluralism  and   endeavour  to  build  a  cultural  mosaic  rather  than  a  melting  pot.   Malaysia  also   demonstrates  how  modernity  and  religiosity  can  go  hand  in  hand  and  how  middle  paths   can be forged between religious and secular militancy.   

 In sum, the general history of Islam is one of tolerance towards other religions.  No doubt  there  are  a  few  incidents  of  repression  but  these  do  not  match  the  brutality  of  the   Inquisition,  the  long  and  barbaric  history  of  Jew-bashing  in  Europe,  the  oppressive   practices  of  European  and  American  colonizers  in  Mexico,  Latin  America,  Africa  and   Asia, the annihilation of indigenous peoples in three continents and the enslavement and  dehumanization of Africans. The world is little aware that Bosnian Muslims have been the  victim  of  genocide  throughout  the  last  three  centuries.   For  example  from  1941  to  1945   about  100,000  Bosnian  Muslims  were  slaughtered.   In  the  Balkan  Wars  of  1912-14,   around  13,000  Muslims  were  forcibly  converted  to  Christianity  and  over  3,000  were   killed.   No  one  was  punished  for  these  crimes.   One  is  left  wondering  whether  the   collective amnesia of the European nations towards these monstrosities contributed to the  slaughters and ethnic cleansings of the last decade13   

 Terrorism  is  not  a  monopoly  of  Muslims:  Terrorism  is  as  old  as  the  times.   Muslims   have  no  monopoly  over  it  especially  if  we  are  to  view  the  aberration  in  all  its   manifestations.  In  a  learned  paper  Prof.  Dr.  Ataullah  Bogdan  Kopanski  of  UIAM  has   surveyed  terrorism  in  history.14   He  has  correctly  pointed  out  that  throughout  the  ages   people  have  suffered  the  ravages  of  terrorism.   To  the  ancients  of  Rome  the  Kelts  and   Germans  were  terrorists.   The  Huns,  the  Vikings,  Scottish  rebels  against  Edward  II,  the   Christian crusaders, the Nazis, the ‘American patriots’ who fought against the British, the  republicans  who  fought  against  the  monarchists  in  France  between  1793-1795  were  all   variously  described  as  terrorists.   The  European  Union  has  a  list  of  terrorist  groups  that  

 

 11  See Abdur Rahman Doi, Non-Muslims Under Shariah, 1979, p. 77-82.  12  Ibid, p. 81.  13

  Alijah Gordon, Bosnia: Testament to War Crimes As Told by Survivors, Malaysian Sociological Research  Institute, 1993, pp. xv-xxix.  14

  Prof. Dr. Ataullah Bogdan Kopanski, “Terrorism in History.” Unpublished paper at a one-day Seminar on  Terrorism on 15 November 2001 organised by the International Islamic University, Malaysia. 

  5

 includes  the  Basque  separatist  group  ETA  and  the  Irish  Republican  Army.   The  US  list   includes Kahane Chai, Liberation Tigers of Tamil, National Liberation Army (ELN), Real  IRA,  Revolutionary  Armed  Forces  of  Columbia  (FARC),  Revolutionary  Nuclei,  Peru’s   Shining  Path  and  United  Self  Defence  Forces  of  Columbia.   There  are  other  unlisted   groups  like  Germany’s  Baader  Meinhof  gang  and  the  outlawed  Cambodian  Freedom   Fighters  whose  members  include  an  American  citizen15.   The  U.K.  has  outlawed  Sikh   groups  Babbar  Khalsa  and  the  International  Sikh  Youth  Foundation;  17  November   Revolutionary  Organisation  (N17)  and  the  Revolutionary  People’s  Liberation  Party.    Muslim militants around the world are regarded as terrorists.  But, due to American and  Jewish domination of the media, not much is heard of Zionist terrorism in the Near East  between 1944-1948.16  Even lesser is heard of ongoing state-sponsored terrorism by Israel  in the Middle East and periodic forays by the United States into Sudan, Somalia, Iraq and  Afghanistan.   All  that  can  be  said  is  that  those  who  are  in  power  are  always  exempted   from the charge of atrocities of terror.  It is often the retaliating victims who are branded  as terrorists.  Thus Israeli policy of assassinations of Palestinian leaders, its slaughter of  thousands of refugees in Sabra, Chatilla and Jenin, its indiscriminate bombing of civilian  areas using Apaches and F-16s supplied by the US, its murder of stone-throwing children,  the  brutal  and  collective  punishment  it  inflicts  on  Palestinians  who  reside  in  camps  or   villages  inhabited  by  leaders  of  the  intifada,  and  its  bombing  of  an  Iraqi  nuclear  plant   would  satisfy  any  definition  of  a  terrorist  act.   Likewise  American  hijacking  of  a  plane   over  the  Suez,  American  shooting-down  of  a  civilian  Iranian  plane,  US  bombing  of   civilian  targets  in  Sudan,  Libya,  Somalia  and  Afghanistan,  the  American  bombing  of   Vietnam, Laos, Kampuchea, and the devastation of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were terrorist  attacks that escaped condemnation.  In early 2002 the BJP dominated government in the  Indian  state  of  Gujrat  colluded  with  Hindu  extremists  to  butcher  more  than  a  thousand   Muslims.  The world took little note because the victims were mostly Muslims. 

 

 There  can,  however,  be  no  doubt  that  there  are  terrorist  individuals  and  terrorist  groups   within  the  Muslim  ummah.   Many  of  them  clothe  their  missions  in  Islamic  religious   vocabulary.  But in relation to them a few observations need to be made.     

 First, we need to distinguish the faith from the misguided actions of some of the faithful.  Terrorists  constitute  a  small,  lunatic  fringe  of  Muslim  society.   Unfortunately,  however,   their  words  and  deeds  are  given  such  concentrated  publicity  by  sections  of  the  Western   media  that  viewers  and  readers  begin  to  associate  the  evils  committed  by  Muslim   wrongdoers with Islam the religion.     

 Second,  it  is  not  fair  to  judge  Islam  by  reference  merely  to  the  ground  realities  of  post-colonial Islamic societies while evaluating Western civilization by reference to its pristine  ideals.  Theory  must  be  compared  with  theory;  reality  with  reality.  When  the  Western   world  exploits  and  demeans  Asia  and  Africa  through  colonialism;  practices  slavery  and   apartheid;  annihilates  indigenous  groups  in  three  continents  and  supports  genocide  in   Yugoslavia, Palestine and Iraq, these atrocities are not pinned (and rightly so) on the lapel 

 

 15  NST, February 19, 2002, W5.  16  An Official UN Report (A Summary of Zionist Terrorism in the the Near East - 1944-1948 prepared for  Dr. Ralph  Bunche, UN Mediator for Palestine) lists 259 incidents of terrorist attacks by Jewish Stern gangs   

  6

 of  Christianity.  Nazi  and  Serbian  atrocities  and  brutal  dictatorships  in  many  Christian   countries  in  Africa  and  Latin  America  are  not  attributed  to  Christianity  but  Saddam’s   atrocities and Taliban’s fanaticism are laid at the door of Islam.  Countries with Christian  majorities  like  Brazil,  Argentina,  Guatemala,  Peru,  Chile,  Nicaragua  and  Colombia  and   political  leaders  like  Hitler,  Mussolini,  Franco,  Pinochet  and  Videla  have  been  guilty  of   the  worst  possible  human  rights  abuses.  Their  sins  were  never  laid  at  the  door  of  their  

 religion  -  and  rightly  so.  When  Saddam  tries  to  manufacture  a  bomb,  it  is  an  Islamic   bomb. But the bombs that devastated Hiroshima and Nagasaki and tens of other countries  were not Christian bombs.    

 Third,  there  are  many  forms  of  terrorism.  War  is  the  ultimate  form  of  terrorism  and  the   American-European  record  of  involvement  in  this  form  of  savagery  is  hardly  worthy  of   praise.  Indiscriminate  bombing  of  weak  and  poor  nations  brings  terror  to  innocent   civilians. No one committed to peace and justice can note without dismay that the United  States  has  since  Word  War  Two  bombed  the  following  20  countries:  China  (1945-46,   1950-53),  Korea  (1950-53),  Guatemala  (1954,  1967-69),  Indonesia  (1958),  Cuba  (1959-60),  the  Belgian  Congo  (1964),  Peru  (1965),  Laos  (1964-73),  Vietnam  (1961-73),   Cambodia  (1969-70),  Grenada  (1983),  Libya  (1986),  El  Salvador  (1980s),  Nicaragua   (1980s),  Panama  (1989),  Iraq  (1991  to  present),  Somalia  (1990s),  Sudan  (1998),   Yugoslavia (1999) and Afghanistan (2000 to present).      

 Terrorism  can  have  an  economic  dimension  as  in  attempts  to  impoverish,  strangulate  or   starve  whole  populations  through  blockades,  trade embargoes or interference with water  supply.    

 Once we view terrorism in all its manifestations, it becomes apparent that Muslims have  no monopoly over terrorism. Due to American and Jewish domination of the media, not  much is known of Zionist terrorism in the Near East between 1944 and 1948. Even lesser  is heard of ongoing state terrorism by Israel in the Middle East and periodic forays by the  United  States  in  20  countries  since  Word  war  II.  Rightly  nobody  blamed  Judaism  and   Christianity for these cruel acts.    

 Fourth, most of the terrorists who belong to the Muslim faith are not engaged in a struggle  for Islam.  Except for Afghanistan’s Taliban which had a very obscurantist and medieval  view  of  Islam,  most  other  so-called  “Muslim  groups”  are  primarily  motivated  by   historical,  political  and  economic  grievances.   Foremost  in  this  category  are  “Islamic   groups”  in  Palestine,  Lebanon,  Kashmir,  Central  Asia  and  Mindanao.  Religion  provides   them a rallying point. But the root causes of their rebellion are economic and cultural.   

 Fifth, like the rest of humanity the Muslims of Palestine are entitled to human rights and  human  dignity.  Those  who  condemn  these  dispossessed,  suffering  and  starving  people   need to ask themselves why the Palestinians have descended to such depths of desperation  that they are prepared to kill and be killed in the most horrible ways possible. Perhaps the  life  of  people  in  occupied  Palestine  is  so  intolerable  that  the  Palestinians  have  no  other   choice but to die on their feet than to live on their knees.     

  7

 The  concept  of  jihad:  The  concept  of  jihad  or  religious  struggle  does  not  necessarily   refer  to  holy  war.   It  could  be  a  war  of  words,  an  effort  to  make  the  doctrines  of  Islam   accepted  and  acceptable.   Jihad could  take  place  by  persuasion.   The  Qur’an  enjoins:  

 “Invite (all) to the way of the Lord with wisdom and beautiful preaching; and argue with  them in ways that are best and most gracious” (xvi: 125).  According to a famous saying  the best jihad is by the one who strives against his own self for Allah.  (Sahih Ibn Hibban  # 4862).  In Surah Al-Furqan 25:52 it is stated “So obey not the disbelievers, but make a  great jihad against them (by preaching) with (the Qur’an)”.   

 Islamic Law of War 

 

 The  great  non-Muslim  jurist,  C.G.  Weeramantry,  in  his  study  of  Islamic  jurisprudence17  has  pointed  out  that  modern  humanitarian  law  is  seeking  to  build  increasing  protections   for  civilians,  non-combatants  and  prisoners  of  war.   Many  centuries  earlier,  Islamic   international law worked out a set of principles in relation to the treatment of enemies in  war.  Among the acts forbidden in war were:   

 a) cruel ways of killing  b) killing of non-combatants  c) killing of prisoners of war  d) mutilation of human beings as well as beasts  e) unnecessary destruction of harvests and cutting of trees  f) adultery and fornication with captive women  g) killing of envoys even in retaliation  h) massacre in the vanquished territory  i) the use of poisonous weapons   

 Weeramantry  points  out  that  along  with  principles  now  incorporated  in  the  Geneva   Conventions,  the  Islamic  law  books  contained  other  principles  not  yet  incorporated  in   modern  conventions.   These  principles  have  been  collected  from  numerous  works  of   authority, and from the Qur’an itself.   

 Prisoners  of  War:  At  the  battle  of  Badr  the  prophet  ordered,  “Take  heed  of  the   recommendation  to  treat  the  prisoners  fairly.”  At  the  termination  of  hostilities  it  was   recommended that prisoners be released either gratuitously or on ransom.   

 Non-combatants: The prophet forbade the killing of women and children.  “Do not kill  any old person, any child or any woman,” runs one tradition (Sunnah Abu Daud).18  “Do  not kill the monks in the monasteries,” runs another, and “Do not kill the people who are  sitting  in  places  of  worship,”  (Ibn  Hanbal,  Musnad)  states  a  third.   Others  who  were   protected were traders, merchants, contractors and the like who did not take part in actual  fighting.   

 

 17  C.G. Weeramantry, Islamic Jurisprudence, An International Perspective, Macmillan, 1988, pp. 134-148.  18  Saheeh Muslim # 1744; Saheeh Al-Bukhari # 3015; Bukhari, English Translation, vol. 4, p. 160, No. 258. 

  8

 Conduct  on  the  field  of  battle:  Unnecessarily  cruel  ways  of  killing  were  expressly   forbidden.  So was mutilation.   

 Enemy territory and property: Time and again the Islamic literature relating to the rules  of war expresses a concern for the preservation of natural vegetation, crops and livestock.   The laws of war, as stated by Malik in the Muwatta, prohibit the slaying of flocks and the  destruction of beehives.    

 

 Public Law Doctrines in Islam 

 

 Historical  Perspective:  It  is  generally  believed  that  the  theory  and  practice  of   constitutionalism  originated  in  the  West.   Generations  of  students  of  public  law  have   uncritically accepted the orthodox belief that the seeds of constitutional and administrative  law were planted in Europe and North America by such historical documents as England’s  Magna Carta in 1215, Hungary’s Great Golden Bull of 1222, England’s Bill of Rights in  1689, France’s Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen in 1789 and the United  States’ Declaration of Independence in 1776. 

 

 The  ideas  of  the  'inalienable  rights  of  human  beings'  and  of  'limited  sovereignty'  are   attributed to John Locke. He is seen as the pioneer in Western thought of such concepts as  'trusteeship of power for the benefit of the governed' and the 'removability of the ruler if  the  ruler  fails  to  keep  to  his  trust'.  But  these  ideas  were  basic  propositions  of  Islamic   political thought hundreds of years before John Locke and Maitland popularised them.19  Similarly Rousseau's idea of the 'general will' is very similar to the Islamic idea that the  community  as  a  whole,  through  the  means  of  consensus,  determines  the  law  in  cases  of   doubt. 

 

 Most  textbooks,  Western  and  Eastern,  trace  the  idea  of  the  rule  of  law  to  Dicey.  The   doctrine of separation of powers is attributed to Montesquieu and Madison. The roots of  judicial  independence  are  said  to  be  anchored  in  England's  Act  of  Settlement  1701.   Constitutionalism in earnest is seen as having begun only after the launching of the United  States Constitution in 1787.  The common law courts in England are seen as the architects  of  personal  liberties.  Judicial  review  on  constitutional  grounds  is  generally  seen  as  a   monument constructed by the American Supreme Court in Marbury v Madison (1803). 

 

 Much of this credit is justified. In our times, democracy, constitutionalism and rule of law  have thrived best in the West. Europe and America may not have invented these "pillars of 

 

 19  It is well known that Locke while at Oxford attended lectures of Edward Peacocke, the first Professor of  Arabic Studies at Oxford. Rousseau, in the later phases of his life, came under strong Islamic influences and  wrote admiringly about Islam and Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) in his Social Contract (1968 ed., Book IV,  pp.  87-8  &  179).   Montesquieu  was  greatly  influenced  by  Ibn  Khaldun.  For  further  discussion  of  Islamic   influences on European law, see C.G. Weeramantry, Islamic Jurisprudence: An International Perspective,  Macmillan, 1988, esp. pp. 94 ff.   

  9

 civilised political conduct" but they sure have perfected and patented them and articulated  and exported them far and wide.   

 Nevertheless,  for  historical  accuracy,  it  needs  to  be  pointed  out  that  the  ideas  of  limited   government  and  constitutionalism  were  not  born  in  the  crucible  of  Western  political   philosophy but in the religious doctrines of the East. Hundreds of years before the Magna  Carta and the Bill of Rights, human dignity and freedom were sanctified in the doctrines  of most religions - especially of the Judeo-Christian-Islamic tradition.20 The section below  will concentrate on the forgotten contribution of Islam to constitutional and administrative  law. 

 

 Islamic Constitutional Law: The idea of a written Constitution was known to  the State of  Medina that Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) had established.   The Medina Constitution was,  perhaps, one of the earliest constitutional  documents in the world.   

 No  State  Sovereignty:  The  dominant  approach  in  Western  jurisprudence  is  to  link   sovereignty with the state or with a person or group  exercising ultimate authority within a  state's territory.  Hegel, Hobbes, Austin,  Bentham and Bodin subscribe to the view that  sovereignty  is  "the  highest  power   over  citizens  and  subjects,  unrestrained  by  law."   According  to  Austin  the  powers   of  the  human  sovereign  are  unlimited,  illimitable,   indivisible and continuous. The Islamic concept of sovereignty is similarly absolutist. But  whereas  Austin  insisted   on  a  determinate  human  superior  to  occupy  the  seat  of   sovereignty, in Islam  sovereignty lies with Allah and no human being or human agency  can claim  absolute power.  The law in Islam precedes the state both logically and in terms   of  time  and  the  state  exists  for  enforcing  the  Shariah or  'the  right  path'.   In  an   Islamic   system supremacy cannot be assigned to a human Constitution or to a  Parliament.  It is  Allah who is the Cherisher and Sustainer of the worlds.21    

 In  Islam,  as  sovereignty  belongs  only  to  Allah22,  the  state  and  its  functionaries  are  not   above the law. Politically this rules out all forms of absolutism. Legally it paves the way  for the development of constitutional and administrative law to limit state powers and to  enforce accountability. In Islamic theory the government is a "limited government". There  is a strong commitment to the rule of law and to an independent judiciary.  There is no  theoretical possibility, as in many modern legal systems and in many modern theories like  those of Bodin, Hegel, Hobbes, Austin, Bentham and Kelsen, of a supreme Parliament or  and absolutist ruler.  Fundamental rights as defined by the Shari’ah are entrenched and the  legislature  and  the  executive  cannot  amend  or  repeal  what  Allah  (S.W.T.)  has  decreed.   The  "flexibility"  and  amendability  of  constitutional  safeguards  in  many  countries  are  in   contrast with the certainty and visibility of Islam's basic texts. Weeramanty is of the view 

 

 20  Shad  Saleem  Faruqi,  "Human  Rights  in  Legal  And  Political  Philosophy",  INSAF  -  The  Journal  of  the     Malaysian Bar, vol. XXI, No. 1, Dec. 1992, pp. 1-19.   

 21  Holy Quran Surah 1 Ayat 2; Surah 12 Ayat 40; Surah 43 Ayat 85; Surah 18 Ayat 26; Surah 9 Ayat 129;  Surah 3 Ayat 26; Surah 59 Ayat 23; Surah 114 Ayat 2; Surah 57 Ayat 5.  22

  Surah 6: 57 & 62; Surah 3: 26; Surah 5: 45, 47, 48 & 50; Surah 12: 40; Surah 28: 88. 

  10

 that the thinking of both Locke and Rousseau on the limitations on state sovereignty may  have been influenced by Islam.    

 The  Government  As  A  Trustee:  Islam  supports  the  idea  of  answerability  and    accountability  of'  public  authorities  to  the  law.  The  Holy  Qur'an  commands  the  Muslim   ruler "to render fback his trusts to those to whom they are due": Surah al-  Nisa' (4): 58.  Islam requires that power be used scrupulously towards the fulfillment of  objectives  enshrined  in  the  Shari’ah.  It  requires  ruler  and  ruled  alike  to  be  virtuous  and   ethical. It requires the state to establish all that is right (al-ma'ruf) and to eliminate all that  is  wrong  (al-munkar):  Surah  al-Hajj  (2):  41.  In  Islam  human  beings  are  the  trustees  of   Allah (S.W.T.). The trusteeship is collectively entrusted to the believers and the right to  rule belongs to the whole community.    

 The ruler rules by virtue of the trust the community has delegated to him. This "popular  viceregency",  in  Maududi's  phrase,  "forms  the  basis  of  democracy  in  an  Islamic  state".   The  ruler  is  duty  bound  by  the  Holy  Qur'an  to  conduct  public  affairs  by  mutual   consultation,  subject  of  course  to  the  overriding  duty  to  obey  and  enforce  the  Shari'ah:   (Holy Qur'an Surah al-Shura (42): 38;  Surah Al-‘Imran (3):159).  Inherent in the people’s  right to be consulted is the right to watch over of the government and to differ with the  rulers  on  issues  of  policy.  The  Holy  Qur'an  clearly  envisages  situations  in  which  the   believers  cannot  settle  their  differences  through  consultation  and  exhorts  them  in  those   circumstances  to  turn  to  Allah  (S.W.T.)  and  His  Apostle  for  guidance:  (Surah  al-Nisa'   (4):59).  Citizen's  Duty  To  Obey  Law  Is  Conditional:  All  Muslim  have  a  duty  to  obey  those   in   authority. "Oh you who believe!  Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger, and those charged  with  authority  among  you...":  Surah  al-Nisa'  (4):59.   But  this  duty  is  not  absolute  and   unconditional.   If  the  ruler  commands  something  that  is  contrary   to  the  Shari’ah,  the   community has a right to disobey his command.  According to a famous Hadith "there is  no obedience to man in the disobedience of the Creator". The head of the state being the  representative  (wakil)  of  the   community,  the  representee  (muwakkil)  is  entitled  to   supervise  and  ensure  the  proper  fulfillment  of  the  contract  (wakalah).  The  first  Caliph,   Abu  Bakr  As-Siddiq  (R.A.A.)  declared  after  his  election:  "Cooperate  with  me  if  I  am   right; set me right  if I go astray…  Obey me as long as I obey God and His Prophet. If I  disobey Him and His Prophet obey me not". If the ruler abuses his authority or violates  the trust reposed in him, his authority can be withdrawn. The community may  impeach  the ruler before the courts and have him declared disqualified to lead.   These ideas seem  very  similar  to  the  later  theories  of  Locke,  Rousseau  and  Maitland  which  emphasised   'limited  sovereignty'  and  'trusteeship  of  power'.    Rousseau's  notion  of  the  General  Will   similarly  echoes  the  Islamic  idea  that  in  cases  of  doubt,  the  community's  consensus   determines the law on the point. 

 

 The  State  and  The  Law  Are  Not  Ends  In  Themselves:   Unlike  Western  constitutional   theory  which  distrusts  political  power,  in  Islam  power  is  not  seen  as  an  inevitably   corrupting thing. The government is seen as a necessary instrument to "check those evils  which cannot be eradicated merely by the Book". Yet the law and the state are not seen as  ends themselves but as means of promoting the goals of the Shari’ah. 

  11

 

 Fundamental Rights: In Islamic political theory, human rights have been given an   honourable  place  and  it  is  noteworthy  that  not  only  political  but  also  socio-economic   rights have been given legitimacy.23 The poor, the orphan, the widow and the needy have  rights to state protection irrespective of their religion.   Squatters on public lands have an  equitable  right  to  the  fruit  of  their  labour  under  the  principle  of  ihya  al-mawat.  In  a   variation of the modern concept of a welfare state, the duty to help the needy does not fall  solely on the shoulders of the state.   Individuals  have  a  judicially  enforceable  duty  to  help  their  poor  relatives.    Individuals   also have a duty to contribute to Islamic funds for the poor.       

 There  is  strong  emphasis  on  dignity  and  equality.   Neither  race  nor  economic  standing   entitles one to any superiority.  Only devotion to Allah and moral uprightness qualify one  for superiority over another.   

 In  the  criminal  process  there  is  a  legal  presumption  of  innocence.  There  is  right  to  due   process  during  interrogation  and  trial.  Islamic  justice  prohibits  someone  other  than  the   offender  from  being  responsible  for  a  crime.24  "No  soul  commits  [an  evil]  but  against   itself, and no bearer of burden bears the burden of another": Surah al-An'am (6):164.   

 Mohammad Hashim Kamali in his book Freedom of Expression in Islam (1994) informs  us  that  Islamic  theory  supports  the  idea  of  rights  and  fundamental  rights.  The  rulers  are   supposed to rule through consultation. Implicit in the right to be consulted is the right to  disagree with the governors, to give sincere advice, to exercise personal reasoning and to  express  an  opinion.  There  is  freedom  of  religion  and  freedom  of  association.  There  is  a   right  to  privacy.   Human  rights  theory  in  Islam  is,  however,  marked  by  differences  of   perception from the “West” on a human being’s place in society, his relationship with a  divine order of things, his duties to society, to the established order, to his community, to  his family and to himself.    

 The  West  is  motivated  by  a  militant  brand  of  secularism  or  rationalism  that  denies  any   significant  place  for  religious  considerations  in  the  human  rights  discourse.  In  Islam  the   law  and  practice  of  fundamental  liberties  is  subjected  to  religious  and  ethical   considerations.   

 The  Western  version  of  human  rights  tends  to  emphasise  the  individual  and  his  rights   against society. In many areas, Islam subjects individual rights and liberties to collective  welfare.  For example, there is no right to property over “public lands” like lakes, rivers,  forests and mines. These must be used only for the benefit of the community.       

 Western theory puts a premium on political and civil rights (“negative liberties”).  Islam  emphasizes socio-economic and “positive” rights. It has a very strong welfare ethic.   

 

 23  See Shad S. Faruqi, supra, pp. 2-4.  24  Contrast this with a recent German decision in which a delinquent child, who was born in Germany, but  whose parents were immigrants, was deported from Germany along with his parents. 

  12

 Western theory is rights-based. Islamic thinking is that rights must go hand in hand with  duties to the state, to the community and to oneself. Rights per se have no value. It is what  rights are for. It is the use to which they are put and the sense of responsibility with which  they  are  exercised.  Further,  a  distinction  is  made  between  rights  and  dignity.  As  in   Kantian morality the concept of dignity generates duties both to others and to oneself.   

 In Western theory the state is seen as the main violator of human rights. In Islam the belief  is that the threat to human rights and dignity comes as much from private centres of power  as from wielders of public authority.     

 Establishment  of  Justice:  The  establishment  and  enforcement  of  justice  is  a  duty  of  the   highest order in Islam. "0 you who believe, be maintainers of justice, bearers of witness to  Allah  even  if  it  is  against  yourselves  or  your  parents  or  close  relatives":  Surah  al-Nisa'   (4):135. 

 

 Judicial Independence: Independence of the judiciary is a cardinal principle of  Islam. The  Shari'  ah  envisages  a  competent,  committed  and  courageous  judiciary.  The  theory  of   ijtihad  requires  the  judges  to  be  independent  in  the  exercise  of  personal  reasoning.  The   subordination of the state, the ruler and the officials of the state to the ordinary law and  the  subjection  of  them  to  the  ordinary  courts  necessitate  independence  and  security  of   tenure for judges in an Islamic society. 

 

 The Electoral Process: In the Holy Qur'an, Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) was commanded  to  administer  the  state  in  consultation  with  the  people:  (Surah  Al-'Imran  (3):  159).   In   Islamic history the process of election called bay'ah is recognised as the means of electing  the chief of the community. The election of the imam may be direct or it may be through  the  representatives  of  the  people,  the  ulu  al-amr.   There  is  no  hereditary  succession  to   public office in Islam. Islamic   theory  offers  an  interesting  contrast  to  modern-day  competitive  politics  in  which   candidates jostle with each other to obtain a nomination and then conduct a vigorous and  expensive camping to win (or buy) over the voters. The Islamic ideal is that public office  should not be sought. It should be accepted as a trust only when offered. 

 

 Form of Government: The ideal Islamic system of government is somewhere in between  the  British  parliamentary  system  and  the  American  system  of  independent  government.   The Amir many  be  popularly  elected  (as  in  Iran)  but  he  is  not  separate  from  and   independent  of  the  legislature.  However,  as  he  was  elected  by  the  people,  he  cannot  be   dismissed by the legislature on a vote of no-confidence. 

 

 The  Rule  of  Law:  Sovereignty  of  the  state  is  denied  in  Islam.  Islamic  law  is  a  divinely   ordained system which precedes the Islamic State and regulates its functioning. The state  and  the  ruler  hold  authority  as  delegates  and  as  trustees  under  the  sovereignty  of  God.   They are subject to the law of Allah25 and are not allowed to issue commands contrary to  the  requirements  of  the  Shariah.  This  means  that  the  government  is  required  to  act   according to the law and state powers are limited by the law. Furthermore, the validity of                                                   

 25  Surah 2 Ayat 30; Surah 38 Ayat 26. 

  13

 human law in an Islamic state is dependent on the law meeting the prescribed standards of  Islam.    Unlike  modern  natural  law  theories  which  treat  natural  law  as  a  mere  ideal;   violation of which does not affect the validity of positive law, the Islamic Shariah is not a  mere  advice,  admonition  or  distant  goal.   It  is  the  supreme  law  in  a  state  and  anything   violating it is not entitled to the legitimacy of law.26   

 The  rule  of  law  is  an  essential  principle  of  Islam.  But  unlike  Dicey's  narrow  concept   which  emphasised  'due  process'  and  'government  according  to  the  law',  the  Islamic   concept of rule of law foresaw hundreds of years ago the need to give to the ideal a socio-economic dimension.  In Islam the rule of law goes beyond the requirement of legality to  the requirement of just legality; it goes beyond political and legal rights to socio-economic  rights.  Individuals have a duty to help their relatives, their neighbours, the wayfarers, the  poor, the orphans and the needy. The state is made the guardian of all those who have no  guardian. 

 

 Doctrine  of  Separation  of  Powers:  Islamic  political  theory  does  not  emphasise    Montesquieu’s  strict separation of powers amongst the various organs of the state. But the  functional  independence  of  the  judiciary  is  treated  as  of  great  importance  subject  to  the   power  of  the  Amir  to  order  a  re-trial  if  injustice  has  resulted.  Western  political  theory   places great importance on separation (Montesquieu) or on check and balance (Madison).   But in practice neither strict separation nor check and balance are working well in most  liberal democracies. Western constitutional theory does not permit the executive to order a  re-trial of a case already concluded. But the same effect is achieved (it is submitted in a  more  unsatisfactory  way)  by  granting  the  Head  of  State  wide  powers  to  grant  pardons,   reprieves etc. The power of pardon is contrary to the spirit of Islam. 

 

 The  Duty  to  Consult:  The  Ruler  is  duty  bound  to  conduct  public  affairs  by  mutual   consultation.  This paves the way for a whole regime of consultative processes in   the making of laws and the framing of policies.   

 The Right to Information: The right to be consulted would imply right of access to basic  information about the affairs of state. Openness and transparency in government would be  supported by Islamic theory.   

 Principles of Judicial Review of Administrative Action: The doctrine of ultra vires and the  common law principle of audi alteram partem (no person should be condemned unheard)  have their equivalent in Islarnic jurisprudence. Every accused is allowed a prior hearing  and an opportunity to defend himself.   In Pakistan v Public At Large PLD 1989 SC 304  and in Re Passport Act PLD 1989 SC 39, the courts in Pakistan relied on the Holy Qur' an  and the Hadith to subject   Pakistani  legislation  to  the  rules  of  natural  justice.  This  took  natural  justice  far  beyond   what the common law requires. In the UK the rules of natural justice have   no  applicability  to  the  legislative  function:  Bates  v  Lord  Hailshm  [1972]  1  WLR  1373.   The rule against bias is also accepted in Islamic public law. 

 

 

 26  Surah 5 Ayat 48. 

  14

 The  Holy  Qur'an  enjoins  that  punishment  must  be  equivalent  to  the  suffering  inflicted.   "The  recompense  for  an  injury  is  an  injury  equal  thereto":  Surah  al-Shura  (42):40.  This   principle of equivalence is similar to the French doctrine of "proportionality" and the rule  of "Wednesbury unreasonableness" in England. 

 

 Remedies  In  Administrative  Law:  In  the  area  of  judicial  review  of  administrative   discretion, though the writer has not been able to find any references to the "prerogative  orders  or  writs",  Islamic  public  law  is  not  lacking  in  methods  and  procedures  to  enable   wrongs to be challenged as in modern public law.27  There is clear evidence of  "review"  (al-isti'naf)  and  "judicial  reconsideration"  (l'adah  al-nazar)  in  a  host  of  circumstances   such as when the judge departs from the clear   injunctions of the Qur'an, Sunnah and ijma'. Generally, the judgment of a qadi is   final and there is no appeal from it. This is because of the idea of the inviolability   of the ijtihad of a competent mujtahid and the immunity of ijtihad against arbitrary   intervention and review. But there being a fundamental duty to do justice, Islamic   public  law  does  supply  internal  and  external  "corrective  mechanisms"  to  the  judicial   process. Firstly, the qadi who pronounces a judgment has the authority to   reconsider  his  own  decision  if,  upon  reflection,  it  appears  to  him  that  it  is  defective.   Unlike judges in Westem-based legal systems, the qadi need not wait  for the aggrieved  party to apply to him before commencing the I'adah al-nazar (lit.   reconsideration). Secondly, there is power of review (al-isti'naf) before a separate   tribunal. It is exercised, inter alia, if the personal reasoning of a kadi is a clear violation of  the  Qur'an,  the  Sunna  and  ijma'  or  amounts  to  gross  error  of   judgment  or  a  manifest   miscarriage of justice or because of suspicion of personal   bias.  But  the  decision  is  not  reviewable  simply  on  the  ground  that  the  reviewing  qadi  disagrees  with  it.  The  ijtihad of  one  competent  qadi  is  not  reversible  by  the  ijtihad of  another.  The  reviewing  tribunal  may  consist  of  the  head  of  state  (for  administration  of   justice in accordance with the law is one of the basic obligations   of the imam) or of regular courts and tribunals which have been appointed by the head of  state in accordance with siyasah shar'iyyah (shariah-oriented policy). 

 

 Locus Standi: The Islamic state as well as every citizen of such a state are duty bound to  enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong: Surah al-'Irnran (3):104 and 110; Surah al-hajj (22):41. Viewing this is the perspective of the law on locus standi, it is arguable that  individual citizens or a class of citizens who go to the courts to seek justice, or to stand up  for  what  is  right  and  oppose  what  is  wrong,  should  be  treated  by  the  law  as  public   benefactors and not as busybodies to be denied locus standi and turned away. 

 

 The  Ombudsman  Principle:  The  ombudsman  principle  which  is  usually  attributed  to  the   genius  of  the  Scandinavians  may  have  had  its  origin  in  Middle  Eastern  civilisations.   During the Caliphate of Hazrat Ali (R.A.A.) from 35-40 Hijrah or 656-  661 A.D. a system of Mazalim courts was fully in operation to adjudicate disputes   between citizens and the administration. The Diwan al-Mazalim was a powerful tribunal  which  performed  the  dual  function  of  a  general  administrative  tribunal  to  hear  disputes                                                    

 27  Mohammad Hashim Kamali, “Appellate Review and Judicial Independence in Islamic Law”.  Copy of  Public Lecture delivered at the International Islamic Univesity, Malsysia on 5th March 1991. 

  15

 between  the  citizen  and  the  state  as  well  as  to  entertain  appeals  from  decisions  of  the   Shari'ah courts.   

 Proceedings  Against  The  State:  In  Islam  the  state  or  the  ruler  are  not  entitled  to   immunities  and  privileges  normally  granted  to  the  Head  of  State  or  the  government  in   modem constitutional law. The qadi can accept a suit against the very person of the Amir  and try him in open court. 

 

 Islamic Jurisprudence 

 

 The Idea of Law: Western natural lawyers of the "classical" natural law persuasion trace  law  to  a  superior,  metaphysical  source.   But  they  are  not  in  agreement  on  whether  the   "superior source" is God, Nature, Reason or General Will.   

 This  brand  of  natural  law  has,  however,  gone  out  of  fashion  in  the  West  and  has  been   replaced  by  positivism,  historical  and  sociological  approaches  which  free  law  from   metaphysics and insist that laws are man-made.  Austinian positivism, for example, treats  law  as  the  command  of  the  sovereign  backed  by  sanction.  Salmond,  another  positivist,   describes  law  as  the  body  of  principles  recognised  and  applied  by  the  state  in  the   administration of justice. The historical school in Germany identifies law with custom and  volksgeist  (spirit  of  the  people).  The  sociologists  in  the  USA  emphasize  the  role  of   associations and groups and point out that the centre of gravity of the legislative process  lies not in Parliament but in society.   

 Islam's  concept  of  law  is  close  to  the  "classical"  natural  law  tradition  of  the  West.  The   basic  principles  of  Islam  are  of  divine  origin sent to human beings  through  revelation.28  These  principles  are  believed  to  be  universal,  eternal  and  unchangeable.  They  are  of   superior validity to positive law.   

 Separation  Between  Law  and  Morality:  Contrary  to  the  central  thesis  of  positivism  that   there  is  a  fundamental  distinction  between  the  'is'  and  the  'ought',  in  Islam  there  is  no   separation  between  law  and  morals.  Islam  is  treated  not  only  as  a  religion  but  also  as  a   political  and  legal  system  which  encompasses  all  duties  of  human  beings  to  God  and   fellow-humans. The influence of morality over the whole field of civil obligations is very  strong. The criteria of morality are not utility, the opinion of the people in the jury box or  the  current  notions  of  propriety.  The  criterion  of  morality  is  objective,  impersonal  and   external.  It rests on the Holy Qur’an and the Hadith.   

 Enforcement  of  Morality:  In  Islam  the  state  has  a  clear-cut  duty  to  foster  morality;  to   promote  all  that  is  right  and  forbid  all  that  is  wrong.29   Positivism's  separation  between   law and morals and its indifference towards immoral laws (legality is one thing; morality  another) is repugnant to Islam. Legal liberalism’s belief that morality is not definable; its 

 

 28  Surah 4 Ayat 105; Surah 57 Ayat 25.  The laws given by Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) also fall in the  category of what Allah has revealed; Surah 53 Ayat 3 & 4; Surah 59 Ayat 7.  29

  Surah 22 Ayat 41; Surah 3 Ayat 104. 

  16

 reluctance  to  intrude  into  private  lives;  its  `harm  to  others’  test;  its  opposition  to  state   paternalism are unlikely to find acceptance in Islamic jurisprudence.   

 Nevertheless it must be noted that Islam does not require the machinery of the state to be  employed to enforce everything virtuous and prevent everything that is undesirable. There  is  no  need  to  convert  every  moral  rule  into  a  legally  binding  command.  Many  Islamic   duties like prayer are left to the individual conscience because  they are matters between  the Creator and His subjects.      

 Role  of  human  law:  Does  Islam  recognize  a  role  for  positive  law?  There  is  some   controversy  on  the  point.  Some  writers  assert  that  God  alone  is  the  law-giver  and  His   words  alone  are  to  be  obeyed.   He  perfected  the  religion  of  Islam.  All  other  legal   pronouncements  exist  only  as  interpretations  of  the  words  of   Allah.  The  state  has  no   power to legislate. It exists only to apply the Shariah.   

 It is humbly submitted that the above point of view is too narrow. Though ultimate law is  divine, the role of human beings and society in making the law is not denied.  Islamic law  consist  of  divinely  imposed  obligations  as  well  as  commands  of  positive  law  (wad'i)   provided  the  latter  are  within  the  limits  permitted  by  God.  An  elected  legislature  is   permitted  to  legislate  and  the  Caliph  or  the  Imam  is  able  to  decree  administrative   regulations  within  the  limits  of  the  Shariah  in  order  to  promote  justice.  They  have  a   controlled and limited freedom in respect of legislation.    

 Can secular laws and syariah  co-exist? The answer to this is a qualified “yes”. The state  has undoubted authority to legislate to achieve justice and to meet the demands of society.  But  it  lacks  sovereignty  and  its  discretion  is  constrained  by  the  perimeters  supplied  by   religion.  It  is  submitted  that  this  is  not  a  radically  different  position  from  the  one  that   exists in countries with written and supreme Constitutions.      

 Is  Islamic  Law  Static?:  It  is  part  of  Islamic  belief  that  the  Holy  Qura’n  and  the  Hadith   supply  the  core,  essential  values  on  which  all  Islamic  societies  must  be  built.   Because   these values emanate from a superior or absolute source, they transcend time and territory  and  are  immutable  and  eternally  valid.  They  supply  the  permanent  foundation  on  which   the detailed and derivative rules of an Islamic legal, political, economic and social system  must be built.   

 Are  these  derivative  secondary  rules  capable  of  growth  and  adaptation  to  the  needs  of   different societies and different times? It is submitted that innovation (ibda) is not totally  prohibited in Islam provided that the solutions found to satisfy the new needs of society  conform to the Holy Qura’n and the Sunna. The existence of such sources of Islamic law  as Ijma  (consensus)  and  Qiyas (analogical  deduction)  give  some  scope  for  reaching   solutions  to  new  problems  by  evolution  of  new  principles.  The  gates  of  ijtihad  (independent  reasoning)  are  not,  and  never  can  be,  closed  though  of  course  only  the   mujtahid (the Islamic jurist) has the right to use independent reasoning and that too within  the limits of the Shariah. However it must be noted that being a mujtahid is not a matter of 

  17

 belonging to a priestly aristocracy. Anyone who has acquired learning and has gained the  respect and acceptance of the community is entitled to provide religious leadership.     

 In Islamic jurisprudence detailed rules of legal reasoning and scores of legal maxims have  been  evolved.   Abu  Hanifa  developed  the  notion  of  istihsan  or  juristic  preference.   By   acceptance of the better of two possible solutions, legal norms can be established through  personal  reasoning.   Malik  developed  the  notion  of  istislah  (public  good).  If  the  law  is   silent on a particular point, then the decision can be based on principles of public interest.  Al-Shafii developed the notion of istishab - the presumption that what existed in the past  continues to exist today. It is clear that ijma, giyas, istihsan, istislah along with many legal  maxims established by the jurists permit interpretation of Islamic law to encompass new  problems and challenges coming to the fore.   

 Role of Sanction: The imperative theory of law (law is a command) promoted by English  positivism finds its correspondence in Islamic jurisprudence.   

 The importance of sanctions in a legal system underlined by Bentham, Austin and Kelsen  is evidenced in Islam.  But the concept of sanction is different. Sanctions may be in this  life or in the hereafter.  Further, the idea of "reward" is emphasized in Islam. Obedience to  law is based not only on fear but also on the anticipation of the blessings and rewards of  compliance.   

 Islam  and  Kelsen's  Grundnorm:  Kelsen's  theory  of  the  hierarchy  of  norms  with  a   grundnorm   at  the  apex  reflects  an  Islamic  perspective  of  the  legal  system.  Like  Islam,   Kelsen does not support the distinction between public and private law. All norms - public  or  private  -  must  be  traceable  to  and  derivable  from  the  grundnorm  of  the  legal  order.   However,  Kelsen's  belief  that  the  grundnorm  may  not  be  the  same  everywhere  is  not   acceptable in Islam. A Muslim society must be premised on the sovereignty of Allah and  the supremacy of the Holy Qur’an. This means that. the grundnorm in Islamic society is  predetermined and its content and divinely established.   

 Islam  and  Pragmatism:  The  pragmatism  of  the  sociological  school  ("that  is  best  which   works best") is out of line with the Islamic approach.  In Islam just ends must be achieved  through  just  means.  It  is  not  sufficient  that  the  end-product  is  desirable  if  the  means  to   achieve  it  are  immoral.  In  Islam,  law  and  institutions  must  not  only  achieve  just   consequences;  they  must  also  have  a  just  and  moral  content.  Islam  is  opposed  to  the   tendency in sociological jurisprudence to displace moral truths with a melange of "social  values" or "jural postulates of the time and place".  Islam does not allow the forsaking of  religion and reason for the pursuit of "relevance".   

 Sociological  analysis  to  measure  the  consequences  and  effectiveness  of  law  will  be   permitted in Islam.  But ultimate choices will have to be based on ethics.   

 Judicial  Activism:  The  central  role  that  the  sociologists  (specially  the  realists)  assign  to   judicial  activism  does  not  find  support  in  Islam.  The  Islamic  judge  must  be  a  mujtahid   and in his interpretation of Islamic law he must be guided by the Shariah and the Fiqh.  

  18

 For  obvious  reasons  an  Islamic  judge  cannot  emulate  his  common-law  brothers  in   granting legitimacy to the emerging claims and expectations of right-to-die advocates and  those  who  claim  a  constitutional  right  to  abortions,  pornography,  blasphemy,  same-sex   marriages and autonomy in matters of sexual choice.    But it must also be noted that like the realists, Islam does not support rigid adherence to  the doctrine of binding judicial precedent. The ijtihad of one mujtahid cannot be set aside  by  another  jurist  simply  because  of  disagreement  of   views.  Also,  the  Islamic  judge  has   greater freedom than his/her common law colleague to act in an inquisitorial manner and  to subject written law to the considerations of equity.    

 Values:  Muslims believe that Islamic values are transcendental.  This contrasts with the  sociological school's idea that "jural postulates" or legal ideals vary according to time and  place.   

 In  its  attempt  to  be  empirical,  the  sociological  school  seeks  to  derive  evaluative  criteria   from social experience.  It bids the jurist to "face the facts" of society and to engineer the  legal  system  to  accommodate  the  emerging  demands,  claims  and  expectations  that  have   manifested  themselves  in  society.   Islam,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not  accept  a   phenomenan just because it is widespread. A thing does not become right just because it  was,  or  because  it  is  or  because  it  is  going  to  be.  The  yardstick  of  evaluation  must  be   supplied by the Shariah. The reality must be changed to conform to the ideal rather than  the ideal changed to conform to the reality.   

 Similarly,  the  relativism  of  the  historical  school  is  not  in  accordance  with  Islamic  fiqh   The  criterion  of  the  historical  school,  "is  it  right  for  us",  cannot  be  used  in  Islam.   Whatever is forbidden, (for example intoxication and usury) cannot be justified simply by  reference  to  "local  conditions"  or  expedience.  Another  contrast  between  historical   jurisprudence and Islam is that the historical school emphasises the uniqueness of national  law and institution whereas Islam asserts the universality of values and laws.   

 Islam is opposed to the "perverse new virtue" of  "value relativism" which urges people to  be non-judgmental on issues of right and wrong. The tendency in Western jurisprudence  (other  than  of  the  classical  natural  law  persuasion)  to  dismiss  universal,  eternal  and   absolute  values  has  led  to  a  downgrading  of  the  concept  of  justice  and  has  prevented   people from talking with any conviction about good and evil. Rejection of absolute values  has often led to a rejection of all values.  Belief in relativity has led to the acceptance of  the  idea  that  nothing  is  good  or  bad  but  thinking  makes  it  so.  Rejection  of  religion  and   tradition  has  led  to  a  situation  where  "belief  in  nothing  leads  to  a  belief  in  anything!".    While modern Western philosophers dismiss traditional values as "dated rhetoric".  Islam  promotes "eternal verities" and reasserts moral truths over relativistic values.   

 Customary  Rules:  The  role  of  custom  (urf)  is  recognised  in  Islamic  law.   Though  many   ancient customs were abolished others that did not violate Islamic precepts continued to  be applied in Islamic societies.  Indeed, in the area of contracts and obligations, customs  and practices were significant aspects of Islamic law.   

  19

 However  unlike  Savigny's  thesis  which  glorified  and  exalted  the  volksgeist,  in  Islam   custom  in  not  law  per  se.  There  is  no  assumption  that  customs  reflect  justice;  that   volksgeist  leads  to  volksrecht.  Customs  must  always  be  tested  by  reference  to  the  basic   precepts of religion.   

 Islam, Democracy and Rule of Law — The Case of Malaysia   

 Malaysia  has  a  supreme  Constitution  that  provides  for  a  parliamentary  system  of   government,  a  constitutional  monarchy,  a  federal-state  division  of  powers,  a  chapter  on   fundamental  rights,  a  partly  rigid,  partly  flexible  Constitution,  an  independent  judiciary   and an impartial public service.  The Constitution  confers  special,  overriding  powers  on   the  federal  executive  and  the  federal  legislature  during  times  of  subversion  and   emergency.   The  basic  charter  entrenches  affirmative  action  policies  in  favour  of  the   indigenous Malays  and the Natives of  Sabah and Sarawak. It adopts Islam as the religion  of the federation but with freedom to all communities to practice their faiths in peace and  harmony.   

 There is much in the theory and practice of the Malaysian Constitution that takes Malaysia  outside of democratic norms.  Critics can point to the armory of preventive detention laws,  continuing  state  of  emergency  since  1964,  executive  control  over  speech,  assembly  and   association and several episodes reflecting badly on judicial independence and integrity.    

 On  the  other  hand  there  is  in  Malaysia’s  45  years  of  constitutional  history  much  that  is   worthy of emulation by friends and foes alike.  Malaysia offers an example of a moderate,  enlightened  and  tolerant  Muslim  society  that  embraces  modernity  and  encompasses   democracy and a relatively liberal system of values.  The laws permit other religions and  cultures  to  flourish  along  with  Islam.   Secularism  and  religion  are  permitted  to  co-exist   side by side.   

 Despite significant legal restraints on personal liberty and freedom of speech, a number of  other  fundamental  rights  are  working  very  well.   Among  them  are  protection  against   slavery (Article 6); protection against backdated criminal laws and repeated trials (Article  7); freedom of religion (Article 11); freedom of movement (Article 9); rights in respect of  education (Article 12); and the right to property (Article 13).   

 The success of socio-economic measures and social welfare policies have brought human  dignity and the graces of life to many who were living on the fringes of existence at the  time  of  independence.   The  standard  of  living  is  one  of  the  highest  in  Asia.   The  vast   opportunities  for  upward  social  mobility  that  are  available  to  members  of  all  races  are   unmatched in Asia.   

 Despite  a  continuing  state  of  emergency  since  1964,  the  regular  courts  have  never  been   replaced  and  remain  in  operation.   Habeas  corpus  has  never  been  suspended.   Judicial   enforcement  of  human  rights  though  not  effective  because  of  the  existence  of  wide,   subjective powers in security legislation is, nevertheless, always a possibility and for that  reason a restraining influence on the executive.  Judicial review is possible because of the 

  20

 existence  of  a  supreme  Constitution  that  confers  power  on  the  courts  to  scrutinise  state   action  on  the  ground  of  unconstitutionality.   There  are  hundreds  of  judicially  decided   cases in which the actions of federal and state executive, local authorities, the police and  statutory  bodies  have  been  declared  ultra  vires  or  in  breach  of  natural  justice.   Since   Merdeka  (independence)  fourteen  pieces  of  federal  and  state  legislation  have  been   declared  unconstitutional  by  the  superior  courts,  some  on  the  ground  of  human  rights   violations.  Ouster clauses are disregarded by the courts in most areas of public law.   

 Constitutional  jurisprudence  on  substantive  due  process  is  still  in  its  infancy.   But  the   courts  are  vigorous  in  enforcing  the  procedural requirements  of  the  law  in  most  areas   involving personal liberty.  For instance, a very large number of appeals succeed under the  Dangerous Drugs Special Preventive Measures Act on the slightest procedural error.   

 A Human Rights Commission has recently been set up.   

 Despite  its  limitations  and  infancy,  legal  aid  helps  to  improve  access  to  justice  for  the   poor.   

 Sex  equality  is  being  vigorously  promoted  in  Malaysian  society.  The  Constitution  was   recently  amended  to  ban  gender  discrimination.   In  the  work  place,  in  schools,  in   universities, women are easily outnumbering men.  Malaysia was one of the earliest in this  region to enact laws like the Domestic Violence Act.   

 Workers’  rights  are  protected  by  an  enlightened  set  of  legal  and  administrative  policies   and devices.  Social security measures, disablement benefits, pensions, medical facilities,  scholarships,  car  and  housing  loans  are  made  available  to  workers.   An  Industrial  Court   and a full-fledged Ministry guard workers’ rights and maintain industrial peace.   

 Legislation exists to safeguard the rights and interests of consumers, the aged, the disabled  and the retired.  The government spends millions of ringgit to provide pensions to retired  public servants.   

 Malaysia  is  an  excellent  example  of  religious  and  cultural  tolerance.   At  the  time  of   independence,  citizenship  rights  were  granted  to  millions  of  applicants  from  migrant   communities.   The  Chinese  and  the  Tamils  were  allowed  to  preserve  their  culture,   language  and  religion.   Chinese  and  Tamil  schools  exist  with  government  support.    Mosques,  temples,  churches  and  gurdwaras  dot  the  Malaysian  landscape.   Citizens   celebrate  each  others’  religious  and  cultural  festivals.   Unlike  in  some  neighbouring   countries,  minorities  are  not  required  to  adopt  the  culture  and  names  of  the  majority   community.   Hate  crimes  against  minority  groups  are  unknown.   No  minority  group  or   region  is  up  in  arms  against  the  established  order.   Instead  of  creating  a  “melting  pot”,   Malaysia has painstakingly weaved a rich cultural mosaic.  The plurality of lifestyles this  engenders has given rise to an extraordinarily multi-faceted society.   

 There is legal pluralism in that civil courts exist side by side with syariah and customary  courts. 

  21

 

 Constitutional guarantees of the rights of the States, especially Sabah and Sarawak, have  given  to  pluralism  a  territorial  dimension.   Despite  many  restraints  on  freedom  of   association,  a  large  number  of  political  parties  survive  and  thrive  and  contest  periodic   elections  at  federal  and  state  levels.   Out  of  35  political  parties  nationwide,  25  are   opposition groups.  Four of them are represented in the federal Parliament.   

 General Elections have been held ten times at regular intervals.  The electoral process has  resulted in peaceful change of power at the state level several times.  This points to the  integrity of the electoral process.  Elections are free though they have been criticized as  not fair.  No one is coerced to vote in any particular way. There is no election violence as  in many neighbouring countries.   

 The  rainbow  coalition  that  has  ruled  the  country  for  the  last  45  years  is  built  on  an   overwhelming  spirit  of  accommodation  between  the  races,  a  moderateness  of  spirit,  an   absence  of  the  kind  of  passion,  zeal  and  ideological  convictions  that  in  other  multi-religious  and  multi-racial  countries  like  India,  Sri  Lanka,  (former)  Yugoslavia,  Greece,   Northern  Ireland  and  Lebanon  have  left  a  heritage  of  bitterness.   Except  for  1969,  there   has been no serious racial or religious violence.   

 The law and order situation is favourable for the enjoyment of life, liberty and the pursuit  of  happiness.   People  live  and  move  about  without  fear.   They  have  security  of   expectations.  This is in contrast with many liberal societies where there is unlimited free  speech but no “freedom to live without fear”.   

 Unlike many other Asian and African societies, the army and the police are under civilian  control.  There is no compulsory draft.   

 A very large number of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) exist and some of them  have  a  tremendous  impact  on  the  course  of  legislation  and  policy  formulation.   Many   register  under  the  Companies  Act  to  avoid  controls  under  the  Societies  Act.   The   effectiveness  of  many  NGOs  like  the  Bar  Council  of  Malaya  rebuts  the  allegation  that   Malaysian society lives by government or politics alone.  As an integral whole it brings  about many important developments on its own.   

 Though  the  mainstream  press  and  the  government-owned  or  licensed  TV  channels  are   restrained  in  matters  of  political  and  economic  reporting,  alternative  sources  of   information  do  exist.   In  particular,  books,  journals  and  magazines  print  a  great  deal  of   critical  material.   Unlike  newspapers  and  TV,  books  are  not  subject  to  a  licensing   requirement.   The  increasing  sophistication  of  information  technology  and  the  advent  of   fax  machines,  e-mail,  internet  and  foreign  TV  channels  have  made  the  dissemination  of   information  virtually  uncontrollable.   Private  radio  and  TV  stations  are  now  permitted.    CNN reaches into many homes.   

 The country’s efforts at “social engineering”  have  had  a  clear  impact.   At  the  economic   level, there is poverty but no absolute poverty.  A welfare net exists for the hard core poor.  

  22

 Scholarships, loans, low-cost housing, free medical care, price subsidies and price control  of  essential  commodities  help  to  ensure  that  the  basic  necessities  of  the  population  are   met.   Poverty  has  been  greatly  reduced.   This  has  positive  human  rights  implications   because  formal  rights  are  not  enough.   Rights  must  function  as  well;  they  must  find   correspondence in social and economic reality.  More than most Asian societies, Malaysia  corresponds  with  the  ideals  of  the  International  Covenant  on  Economic,  Social  and   Cultural Rights (1976).   

 Education  up  to  secondary  level  is  absolutely  free  and  this  has  obvious  implications  for   upward mobility for the disadvantaged.  The literacy rate is about 83 per cent.   

 Despite  recent  economic  control  on  capital  flights,  the  country  permits  economic   freedoms of the widest latitude.  There is unlimited opportunity for trade and commerce,  for  career  choices,  for  foreign  travel  and  for  owning  property  in  Malaysia  or  abroad.    Malaysia  has  a  large  self-confident  middle  class  that  is  enjoying  the  fruits  of  peace,   prosperity and a relatively open society.   

 After about forty years of judicial conservatism (save for a short-lived period of judicial  activism in the mid-eighties) winds of change are blowing in the arena of public law.  A  stirring  of  new  constitutional  jurisprudence  is  clearly  evident  in  Malaysia’s  superior   courts.     

 Up  to  the  mid-nineties  the  tendency  was  to  reduce  constitutional  law  issues  to  issues  of   ultra vires and natural justice. Now ultra vires and natural justice are being anchored in the  constitutional promise of liberty and equality.    

 A few weeks ago the highest court, in granting habeas corpus to a number of preventive  detainees,  broke  new  ground  by  asserting  that  the  ministerial  satisfaction  to  order   detention  can,  in  some  circumstances,  be  subjected  to  an  objective  test.  The  era  of   Liversidge v Anderson  may finally be coming to an end in Malaysia.     

 The Constitution is moving from the peripheries to the center.  Whether, in the years to  come, the Constitution’s  imperatives will become the aspirations of the people; whether  the nation’s document of destiny will become its chart and compass, its sail and anchor -  that remains to be seen.    

 All  in  all  Malaysia  offers  a  good  example  of  an  Asian  and  a  Muslim  society  that  can   preserve the best of its religious, cultural and moral traditions and yet keep its windows  open to the world.   

 Lately, the demand for an Islamic state has raised concerns among the non-Muslims.  But  there is no reason to believe that any radical shift to the right is going to take place.   

 Conclusion 

 

  23

 1.    Despite  many  differences  between  Islam  and  prevailing  Western  ideologies,  it  is   submitted that Islamic law is replete with principles that are quite consistent with modern  notions of constitutionalism. The ideal of a limited government and the quest for openness  and accountability, trust and transparency in public life are important elements in Islamic  public law. Students of law, who are steeped in the tradition of British common law can  pick up a lesson or two from the theory of Islamic constitutional and administrative law.  The great task of reviving and giving effect to the doctrines, mechanisms and institutions  of Islamic public law falls on the shoulders of  Muslim jurists.  

 

 2.  It is also submitted that the principles of tolerance, pluralism and justice as  espoused  by  Islam  (as  well  as  by  other  religions)  are  in  harmony  with  modern  theories  of  good   governance.  Islam’s  de-emphasis  on  national  or  racial  factors  and  its  concept  of  the   universal ummah are quite in line with the processes of globalization and modernisation.   

 3.  The wide chasm between the glorious precepts of the religion and the practices of 57 or  so  Muslim  societies  is,  indeed,  troubling  and  a  cause  of  shame.  But  it  must  be   remembered  that  such  a  gap  exists  in  most  Western  or  Christian  societies.  Let  us  not   forget  the  brutal  manner  in  which  Europe  ruled  (and  America  is  now  ruling)  the  world.   Many  Latin  American  countries  with  Christian  populations  are  or  have  been  military   dictatorships.   Many  African  countries  consumed  by  tribal  violence  and  genocide  and   suffering from economic deprivation are Christian majority countries.   Muslim societies  were  not  always  backward.  Today  they  lag  by  a  few  decades  behind  socially  and   technologically advanced Western ones.     

 4.   Some  areas  pose  special  challenges  for  the  Muslim  jurist.  Foremost  is  the  area  of   women’s rights in such matters as polygamy, male right to pronounce unilateral divorce  and distribution of property. It is submitted that juristic approaches are available in these  areas to harmonise Islamic law with contemporary notions of justice and gender equality.  Unfortunately these approaches are not given the attention they deserve.   

 It must be remembered that Islam liberated women long before they were recognised as  legal  entities  in  European  civilizations.  Islam  gave  women  a  personality  separate  from   their husbands, a right to divorce their spouses, a right to own property, a right to maintain  their  identity  after  marriage.  It  sought  to  minimize  their  sexual  exploitation  by   recommending  (to  both  sexes)  modesty  in  manner  of  dressing  and  caution  in  matters  of   socialization. Admittedly this is antithetical to the modern trend of empowering women by  encouraging  their  autonomy  in  all  matters  including  manner  of  dress,  choice  of   professions,  careers  as  models,  beauty  contestants,  film  actresses,  night  club  performers   and.sex workers. The darker side of this liberation is that it accentuates women’s sexuality  and perpetuates their exploitation by drawing them into industries that bring income but  cause  loss  of  dignity.  The  media  exploits  women.  Pornography  demeans  them.    Advertisements depict them as sex objects. The consumer and fashion culture imposes on  women subtle pressures to keep up with the latest bizarre fashions, cover themselves with  cosmetics,  starve  themselves  to  emulate  the  media’s  Barbie  Doll  concept  of  beauty,   consume  slimming  tablets  and  adopt  expensive  diets.  Islam  guards  against  these   possibilities  by  de-emphasising  sexual  attributes.  It  requires  modesty  in  dressing  from  

  24

 both sexes. Unfortunately this has been overzealously interpreted by many  to include the  veil and the purdah.    

 5. Issues of apostasy and the imposition of penalties like cutting of hands and stoning to  death  for  hudud offences  pose  severe  problems  for  a  modern  and  just  theory  of  Islamic   criminal  law.  It  is  submitted  that  in  this  area  juristic  opinion  and  interpretations  are   available  to  reconcile  the  sacred  injunctions  with  secular  understandings  of  justice  and   proportionality.  These  interpretations  are  marginalized  and  mocked  by  the  arch-conservative elements in Islamic societies.   

 6.  Muslim-baiting  and  demonisation  of  Islam  are  fashionable  and  growing  industries  in   the  West.  Even  before  September  11,  American,  European  and  the  Philippines’  media   portrayed  Islam  and  Muslims  in  the  most  negative  light.  Anyone  who  attacks  Islam  is   immediately lionized and rewarded. Blasphemous publications against  Islam are regarded  as expressions of free speech. But the principle of free speech is forgotten if a publication  dares to attack Jewish brutalities in Palestine or vilifies other religions.         

 Many  of  the  prejudices  against  Islam  are  grounded  in  ignorance.  Muslims  must  engage   their  critics  and  articulate  the  Muslim  point  of  view  rationally.   In  this  age  of  media   technology this is a challenge that can be met.    

 What  is  a  much  more  difficult  task  is  to  defeat  the  purveyor  of  deliberate  and  vicious   fabrications.  There  are  a  number  of  internet  sites  totally  dedicated  to  demonizing  Islam.   Who owns and operates these sites can be guessed. What is more difficult to understand is  what  they  seek  to  achieve  with  such  vilification.  Many  observers  like  the  Canadian   Islamic Congress are drawing analogies to the misrepresentations about Jews in such early  twentieth century literature as Mein Kampf where gross exaggeration and dehumanization  proved to be fatally dangerous for six million Jews: cic@canadianislamic congress.com.    German academic Gunther Grass says that beliefs about Islam in the West and the current  climate  of  hate  bring  us  very  close  to  a  situation  not  unlike  that  which  prompted   Germany’s infamous “kristallnacht” in 1938. Once the enemy has been so dehumanized  and portrayed as demonic and parasitical, what  further justification is needed to persecute  and finally exterminate it?    

 Muslims  must  confront  this  vicious  propaganda  against  Islam  but  in  a  manner  that  is   rational and non-violent. And they must not stoop to the depths of their adversaries.    

 7.  Perhaps the greatest challenge to Islam comes not from without but from within. The  1.2 billion Muslim community has a small but powerful minority that seeks to monopolise  the interpretation of Islam and be the sole and exclusive voice for Muslims.  It seeks to  maintain  power  by  silencing  anyone  who  expresses  opinions  different  from  its   interpretation.  The  voices  of  reconciliation  between  tradition  and  modernity,  between   Islam and democracy, Islamism and nationalism, Islam and the West are often silenced by  self proclaimed ustads, mullahs, and ulemmas who use the threat of declaring dissidents as  murtads to silence all opposition. Some of these ulemmas are learned. But a fair number  are  literate  but  not  broadly  educated.  They  need  to  be  engagaed  and  persuaded.  The  

  25

  26

 greatest  challenge  for  the  Muslim  scholar  is  to  emancipate  Islam  from  the  clutches  of   those who interpret the texts literally and not purposively, mechanically and not morally.   The law is divine, transcendental and infallible. But not its human interpretations.      

 

 _________________________________ 

 

 

 

