---
title: "Opening address [to the] 49th Federal Council of the Liberal Party of Australia."
date: "2002-04-12"
creators:
  - "Stone, Shane"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Mandate"
  - "Media bias"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
  - "Election results"
  - "HOWARD, John, (former PM)"
  - "GORDON, Michael, (os journalist)"
  - "SALUSINSZKY, Imre"
  - "BARKER, Geoffrey"
  - "STEKETEE, Mike"
  - "Election, Federal, 2001"
  - "KINGSTON, Margo"
  - "WALKER, Ron"
  - "COSTELLO, Peter"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "KEATING, Paul"
  - "WALKER, Tony"
  - "BROGDEN, John"
  - "GRATTAN, Michelle"
  - "CROSBY, Lynton"
  - "MILNE, Glenn"
  - "SHERIDAN, Greg"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211236055
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AKC66%22
---

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  HON. SHANE L. STONE

  FEDERAL PRESIDENT

  

  OPENING ADDRESS

  49  TH  FEDERAL COUNCIL OF THE

  LIBERAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA

  

  12 APRIL 2002

  CANBERRA

  

   

 

 Prime Minister, Mrs. Howard, members of the 
Federal Executive, in particular my State and Territory Division Presidents 
and Federal Council delegates.

  

 May I also acknowledge my parliamentary colleagues 
State and Federal. We have a record participation by Parliamentary members 
from the Federal, State and Territory parliaments. 

  

 A special welcome to parliamentary leaders 
John Brogden, Denis Napthine, Rob Kerin, Colin Barnett, Bob Cheek, Bob 
Quinn, Gary Humphries and Denis Burke.

  

 Our business observers are at present attending 
a welcome dinner being hosted by the Industry, Tourism and Resources 
Minister the Honourable Ian Macfarlane. I am very pleased to be able 
to report a record 90 participants in the business program. That in 
itself I take as a vote of continuing confidence in the Howard Government.

  

  Since we last met we have 
won an historic third term at the fe  deral level and have either lost government or failed 
to recapture the treasury benches in every State and Territory.

  

  Whilst we can be justifiably proud of our collective 
success at the federal level we must be concerned at our electoral performance 
elsewhere.  We could simply dismiss such as cyclical or face the stark 
political reality that we have a great deal of work to do to win back 
the confidence of our fellow Australians at a State and Territory level. 
This is a time for renewal and hard work in the electorate.

  

  I want to say to our State and Territory parliamentary 
colleagues that we at the federal level unreservedly commit ourselves 
to the return of Liberal Governments around Australia starting with 
the election of John Brogden as the next Premier of New South Wales.

  

  The complacency and smugness of the Carr Government 
is starting to register loud and clear. The Carr Government is on the 
nose.

  

  

  

  

  2.

  

  To more pleasant matters Prime 
Minister and Mrs. Howard on behalf of all delegates we congratulate   you both on an historic third term. To the Deputy Leader Peter Costello 
and all members of the federal parliamentary team we congratulate you 
on the role that you have played as members of the Liberal team. 

  

  That team encompasses both the parliamentary and 
organisational wings of the Liberal Party and presents as one of the 
most formidable in contemporary Australian history. 

  

  However, permit me to emphasise that we will only 
ever be successful electorally so long as we work together in a complementary 
partnership where the voice and concerns of the ordinary volunteer members 
of the party are heard and heeded.

  

  The great strength of the Liberal Party is that unlike 
our political opponents the Australian Labour Party we are not mendicant 
to any special or privileged interest groups - we belong to the people 
of Australia. The “board Church” of the Liberal Party has room for 
all.

  

  Lynton Crosby and our Federal Secretariat team have 
once again proved that they are simply the best. In 30 years I have 
never worked with such a dedicated and professional team of outstanding 
Australians. Lynton, thank you.

  

  This Federal Council we say farewell and thank you 
to Vice President Gillian Storey and Honorary Treasurer Ron Walker. 
As I have remarked in my printed report and as I said last night at 
a private dinner where I acknowledged Gillian’s contribution she leaves 
behind a legacy of commitment and unfailing dedication to the Liberal 
Party. At the conclusion of this report we will be making a special 
presentation to Gillian to mark her well earned retirement.

  

  Ronald Walker - it will never be the same. The 
outstanding devotion to duty and support for the Liberal Party as federal 
treasurer is the stuff of legends. Ron we will miss you, the states 
will say that they are quietly relieved at your retirement but we all 
agree that you leave behind an enviable standard of financial 

  

  

  3.

  

  accountability, transparency 
and viability. We will have more to say about Ron Walker tomorrow.

  

  Now I want to turn to a serious 
matter. It may h  ave been customary in the past for Federal Presidents 
to confine their Annual Report to mundane matters and pleasantries. 
Not tonight.

  

  I want to take a little of 
your time to canvass an issue that continues to concern me and I suspect 
irritate many Australians - that is, the way some media outlets lecture 
Australians on different issues and the failure of the media to live 
up to the resp  onsibility as an accurate recorder of our nations 
history.

  

  John Howard and our Liberal team won the election 
with the biggest two party preferred swing since 1966. John Howard became 
the fourth Prime Minister in our history to win a third general election. 
He joins Menzies, Fraser and Hawke in an otherwise unique group. 

  

  For Labor it was a defeat with a difference - the 
lowest primary vote since the depression. Swings and roundabouts - 
spin and counter spin, depending on whom you talk to has become the 
order of the day. The losers and their fellow travellers in the media 
are still challenging 6 months on the legitimacy of the Howard Government.

  

  One things for sure. Howard won, and convincingly. 
Howard has a mandate. Put succinctly in his own words emblazoned across   The Australian  the Monday morning after 
the election -   My Right to Govern . He’s 
right. It’s called democracy. 

  

  To quote the Prime Minister   “When you 
go to the people and win ….an emphatic two party preferred portion 
of the vote, you plainly have a mandate to implement policies and approaches 
that are consistent with your philosophy”.

  

  Pick up the papers after the election and you were 
confronted with headlines and commentaries that suggest it was all a 
trick, a race election, a rigged result, and an illegitimate mandate.

  

  

  4.

  

  The problem lies not in the 
contest and the ultimate outcome but rather with those who report the 
event. The commentators who 

  have become participants, 
journalists who are politically compromised and some editors who have   by and large sacrificed their objectivity and duty to report accurately 
and fairly to their own political dispositions. 

  

  A common thread in their collective failings is a 
lack of intellectual rigor combined with a propensity to engage in self-indulgent 
reflection. This cocktail mixed in isolation from the mainstream of 
their fellow Australians and written and spoken in a language that most 
Australians don’t relate to is a recipe for irrelevance.

  

  The ever so self important and introspective “Canberra 
Gallery” runs the risk of becoming irrelevant as a recorder of our 
political history. 

  

  What ever may be said of the “politics” of the 
old stagers such as Laurie Oaks, the Padre, Alan Woods, Terry McCran 
and Frank Devine to name some, one does have a confidence that their 
reporting or commentary is on the whole reasonably fair and balanced.

  

  Many of the others simply 
don’t get it. Apart from their collectively appalling grasp of Australian 
history they have by and large become the purveyors of gossip and rumour,   most of it generated from within. 

  

  I have lost count of the number 
of times in the past 20 years that a journalist has rung me with the 
opening statement -   “There’s 
a rumour going round that…”  . No matter how often you give them short shrift 
they keep coming back - they just don’t get it.

  

  Their most common source of information seems at 
times to be each other. Ever thought how absurd to see a journalist 
interviewing a journalist on an event or issue that the latter is not 
actually involved or part of.

  

  

  

  5.

  

  One of the more telling commentaries 
on the Monday after the election was the article that appeared in the 
Fairfax Press by Imre Salusinszky headed   “A landslide   vote against 
the party of 

  pundits”   (Sydney Morning Herald)  
and   “Of  course, this election was rigged” ,   (The Melbourne Age) . 

  

  During the two years leading into the Federal election 
last year I witnessed, as did many of you the personal diatribe and 
vitriol directed at John Howard. He has put up with this nonsense for 
his entire career of public service.

  

  Let me borrow from the Salusinszky article in revisiting 
some of the year long commentary.

  

  

  

  7.

  

  

  the Governments   “b-y-e   election” , 
and the   Herald’s  Mike Seccombe 
wrote of Howard   “as a man 
falling faster than

  consumer confidence, faster than the dollar.   Faster than 
space junk” . Salusinsinszky noted that if they were all correct 
then we have a bogus election result on our hands, 

  which leaves us to direct a question to the AEC - 
“Please explain”?

  

  

  As for Steketee he tried to 
claw back after the election with a reasonable analytical piece,   “Taking a   swing at history” , but 
couldn’t help himself with a final note   “But Saturdays 
result suggests the underlying dissatisfaction   with the major parties has not 
gone away”.  Come again, didn’t John Howard just gather 
in the largest two party preferred swing since 1966?

  

  But that was mild compared with some of the claptrap 
that has been offered up. Michael Gordon in   The Melbourne Age  wrote   “Another remarkable aspect 
of the Howard victory speech was the failure to mention an agenda for  the coming term” ,

  yet the paper carried headlines   “Howard’s 
agenda for third term” .

  

  8.

  

  But the best came from   The Financial Review  . Let me preface my remarks about Tony Walkers piece 
by saying on a personal level I like Tony but this really takes the 
cake.   “A victory, but at what price” . 
Now cop this nonsense  .“Prime 
Minister John Howard won an emphatic election victory; what he did not 
win was the tussle for the country’s hearts and minds. Howard and 
his 

  supporters 
may be crowing today about a ‘third term’ victory, but this was 
by no means an acclamation, more a qualified,

  even grudging 
acceptance by the electorate of what was perceived to be the lesser 
of two evils. It might be churlish to question the Howard mandate   (now   that’s 
an understatement)  

  after all 
he joins Robert Menzies, Malcolm Fraser and Bob Hawke in the select 
band of prime ministers to win three poles- but a divisive campaign 
over asylum   seekers diminishes 
the  victory”.  
What fanciful poppycock. 

  

  But Tony was not alone. There’ve been at it again. 
Talking to each other and shoring up their selective analysis of an 
otherwise outstanding election victory. Alan Mitchell claimed   “…John 
Howard has emerged from this single issue campaign with a strong mandate 
to restrict the entry of people seeking  refugee status”  
(by the by that’s not what the issue was actually about Alan), and 
later   “The Government 
has been elected with little in the way of a third term agenda”.  
I can only assume Alan Mitchell must have been away for most of the 
campaign.

  

  Geoffrey Barkers comment piece   “Big diplomatic repairs needed 
in Asia   Pacific”  
was equally off the mark. As someone who knows a little of that part 
of the world and spends the better part of my working life in the region 
I can confidently say Geoffrey that your observations that Australia’s 
(quote)   “failure 
to undertake these repairs quickly and professionally could leave Australia 
increasingly isolated from the region, locked out of trade, investment 
and other opportunities and viewed with suspicion, if not outright  hostility, by it’s most important 
neighbours” , (end of quote) is trite nonsense. This same line 
is being pushed enthusiastically by a number of Asia Pacific commentators 
who should know better.

   

  9.

  

  One of those Greg Sheridan, 
yesterday in the Australian launched a scathing attack on what he alleged 
was the Howard Governments foreign affairs policy failure. Apart from 
the fact that the outstanding performance of Howard Government Ministers 
Alexan  der Downer, Mark Vaile and before that Tim Fisher 
were conveniently glossed over I can only appeal to Greg to at least 
get  his facts right. 19 Prime Ministerial visits to Asia suggest 
an entirely different picture than the one he presented.

  

  Also I get ti  red of Paul Keating being eulogised as the architect 
of engagement of the Asia Pacific region - that title based on performance 
belongs to Gareth Evans and to a lesser extent Bob MacMullin. I saw 
it first hand.

  

  As for construing that attending the Queen Mothers 
funeral was somehow evidence of disengagement and disinterest in Asia 
I would have thought the fact that 2.7 million Australians tuned into 
the ceremony was clear evidence that the Prime Minister was very much 
in tune with what was of interest to Australians.

  

  Quite frankly I expect better 
of Greg Sheridan.

  

  I’ll tell you what their 
saying in Asia because I know - Howard vanquished Hanson and has demonstrated 
long term success on the economic front - a strong economy in an every 
increasing fragile an  d economically weakened region. Howard’s economic 
leadership is the talk of the Asia Pacific region.

  

  Of course most of these musings that I have referred 
to are code or euphemisms for “race” based election. The “race 
card” is what you allege when you’re not winning and in your view 
it’s not fair.

  

  Simple facts are that if you condemn John Howard 
then the nation 

  stands condemned because by and large the vast overwhelming 
majority of Australians just happen to agree with him.

  

  I could go on. I haven’t even got to some of the 
other daily’s, magazines or one-liners that oozed forth on election 
night and continue to this day. Some are simply the angry and distraught 
musings of loyal left foot soldiers. Others simply don’t get it.

  

  10.

  

  The usual suspects scramb  led to find a way to discount the Howard victory. If Glen Milne thought 
he was being prophetic with the observation   “Inside 
every sweet victory lie the seeds  of the next 
bitter defeat”  under the by line   “P.M’s 
tainted vindication”  then he’s off the mark. But why should 
I be surprised. Glenn Milne 

  recently wrote a piece about my tenure as Federal 
President but never interviewed me. 

  

  As I worked on the campaign in Liberal CHQ Melbourne 
each day started at 5.00 am with an analysis of the day’s media, trends, 
issues, opinion pieces, editorials and so forth I often left those meetings 
wondering whether I was in the same election as some 

  of the so-called experts. Time and the ultimate result 
confirmed my deepest suspicions. 

  

 I am sure that many Australians will view the 
current negative outpouring against the Howard Government as essentially 
unAustralia. We’re a funny lot. We don’t like being told we got 
it wrong or that we’re a bunch of mugs.

  

 “The Gallery” needs to get out and about 
and engage those Australians who live in the suburbs, regions and provincial 
cities. Most importantly “The Gallery” needs to have an honest look 
at itself or face irrelevancy. 

  

  Even as recently as last month 
in the Sydney Morning Herald Michelle Grattan was putting the case enthus  iastically against John Howard.   “Third Term 
Taint - five months ago he was the master tactician, now his integrity 
is at stake” . The word   taint  
or   tainted  
is obviously in vogue - there they go again, talking to each other.

  

 I can only speculate whether Michelle has ever 
participated in a focus group or whether she and a number of her colleagues 
have any idea what Australians really think about the issues that preoccupy 
the media - they would be sadly disappointed.

  

  Journalists who believe ordinary 
Australia  ns lie awake at night debating issues such as the 
so-called   Children Overboard  
affair just don’t get it.

  

  11.

  

  But this selective and coloured 
reporting does not end there. For example on the Prime Ministers return 
from London last month the ABC led -   “Howard 
returns home to crisis”  . Of course had Beazley been elected Prime Minister 
I can confidently predict the  read line would have been   “Kim returns 
triumphant on Zimbabwe” . 

  

  Media has a responsibility 
to report accurately and fairly. Reporting and commentating are different 
- a distinction not understood by some journalists and their editors.

  

  Lest it be said thay my remarks 
tonight simply amount to an attack on the media I a  m in good company - the majority of Australians.

  

  In major research the Liberal Party commissioned 
after the election 81% of respondents, all voters in the last election 
expressed the view that the Australian media seemed more interested 
in it’s own issues rather than the issues of importance to Australians 
generally. That is an indictment.

  

  My remarks are an argument for balance, fairness 
and accuracy. 

  

  The hypocrisy of those in Australia media who demand 
of their politician’s openness, transparency and honesty is breathtaking. 
A case of do as I say rather than do as I do. Little surprise that Australians 
have diminishing faith and confidence in certain media outlets today.

  

  The media is an important recorder of a nations history. 
The media has a very important role in a liberal democracy. The media 
has a responsibility to get it right. I can only speculate as to what 
Australians will make of contemporary events and the way they have been 
covered 100 years from now.

  

  The people of Australia voted. 
John Howa  rd won and he has a mandate. No number of supposedly 
sage articles or clever commentaries can change that. I have come to 
believe that many journalists simply keep writing and saying the same 
thing over and over again in the vain hope that it will become true 
and self fulfilling, such is the standard of journalism in Australia 
today.

  

  12.

  

  Look for the headlines tomorrow 
- it will in all probability confirm what you all know. Their not 
listening and most of them don’t get it.

  

  Finally, can I say as I enter   my third term as your Federal President how honoured I feel. It is 
a great privilege to head a political party, particularly the Liberal 
Party of Australia. 

  

  My grandparents were rock solid Labor. My late father 
a committed and dedicated member of the Country Party. As I was growing 
up on a housing commission estate in Wodonga I would never for one momement 
have contemplated that the public career I embarked upon was possible. 

  

  But it says a great deal about our Party that a Federal 
President, Prime Minister and Federal Director, all products of the 
state school system and each of very modest origins could achieve their 
respective office.

  

  I am a proud Australian, a 
Territorian. I don’t expect that you will all necessarily agree with 
everything I say and d  o but I thank you for your unfailing support and 
loyalty in my time as Federal President.

  

  Permit me now to call on Gillian 
Storey, our outgoing Vice President so that I may on your behalf thank 
her for her outstanding contribution to the Liberal Party of   Australia. 

  

  My fellow Liberals, Gillian Storey.

  

  

