---
title: "Why is Australia so paranoid about refugees? Public lecture presented by the Hawke Institute and the Freilich Foundation as part of the Fear of Strangers conference, 6 December 2002"
date: "2002-12-06"
creators:
  - "Reynolds, Margaret"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Human rights violations"
  - "International law"
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "Foreign opinion about Australia"
  - "Isolationism"
  - "Pacific Solution"
  - "Opinion shifts"
  - "Asylum"
  - "Children overboard affair"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211250943
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NVG96%22
---

 Public Lecture presented by the Hawke Institute and the Freilich Foundation  as part of the ‘Fear of Strangers’ conference 

 6 December 2002, Elder Hall, Adelaide University 

 Why is Australia so paranoid about refugees? 

 Margaret Reynolds, National President, United Nations Association of Australia 

 Many Europeans would have been puzzled by reports of the Australian government’s  tough arbitrary detention policies which have incarcerated a few thousand asylum  seekers in desert or Pacific Island camps. Australia has enjoyed a reputation for  democratic tradition and egalitarian social policy. As a nation it has played a  constructive role in developing human rights standards through the United Nations  and as a middle power has been well respected for its reasoned approach to  humanitarian aid and conflict resolution. Certainly questions have been raised about  Australia’s dispossession of Aboriginal peoples and there have been some lingering  doubts about the remnants of the White Australia Policy abandoned in the 1960s. But  the vibrant multicultural nation that recently hosted the Olympic Games seemed to  project a confident and tolerant society at ease with its diversity. 

 Behind this seemingly successful facade lies historic paranoia fed by Australia’s  isolation. For ten years now both major political parties have presided over the  mandatory detention of asylum seekers. While the nation welcomed World War II  refugees and successive waves of immigration from around the world, since the early  1990s there has developed a hardening of government policy and community disquiet. 

 Migrant hostels in the cities have been replaced by prison-like detention centres in the  desert. Recent arrivals who used to be free to live in the Australian community are  now held in secure compounds for months at a time. Government employees no 

 longer care for refugees as a subsidiary of an American private prison company has  the contract . Families from war-torn regions of the world are now housed behind razor  wire and bars, guarded by people with more experience of prison culture than an  understanding of traumatised asylum seekers. 

 While this policy has been in place for some time the extremism of its practice was  highlighted in August 2001 when an international distress call from a sinking vessel  in the Indian Ocean south of Indonesia was relayed to the Australian Maritime Safety  Authority. The nearest ship, Norwegian MV Tampa was asked to assist and in doing  so was responding to the Safety of Life at Sea Convention (1954). The captain took  several hundred survivors aboard and advised that he intended landing them in  Australian territory on Christmas Island, a well-known destination of many asylum  seekers. However as the ship approached the island, there were extraordinary events  that have impacted severely on Australia’s international reputation. Firstly a phone  call directed the captain not to land the survivors even though it was obvious his  vessel was ill-prepared to cater for so many people. Secondly the Australian military  boarded MV Tampa to ensure it was not proceeding to Christmas Island. Subsequently  the military brought in supplies but were there to prevent the asylum seekers landing  on Australian soil. 

 This unprecedented breach of international law has led to a major upheaval in  Australia’s domestic politics and has left many European countries deeply concerned 

 about the dangerous precedent set by an affluent developed nation avoiding its  international responsibilities. Within Australia the community is deeply divided, with  more than half accepting the government’s rhetoric about the risk that ‘illegals’  present. The combination of the fear of terrorism in a pre-election climate combined  with gross distortion of the situation by the government successfully led to its re-election. However many believe that the failure of the Opposition party to challenge  the misleading ‘border protection’ campaign was equally at fault. 

 Twelve months on little has been resolved. Both political parties retain their  unwavering support for mandatory detention and border protection. Seven separate  pieces of legislation have formalised government action by ‘removing’ certain islands  from Australia ‘for the purposes of immigration’. The rights of asylum seekers to  appeal to Australian courts for review of administrative decision making have been  curtailed by act of parliament, a decision much criticised by the legal fraternity and  currently being formally argued before the High Court of Australia. 

 Many members of the Australian community have rallied to try to make life more  bearable for detainees. At least a hundred new organisations and advocacy groups  have responded to the shame of being Australian by working to reform the law and  highlight the inhumane conditions of detention. Thousands have ‘adopted’ individuals  or families and write letters and send gifts. One individual, hearing that detained  children thought there were no flowers in Australia, emailed her friends to send  flowers to Woomera. Within days hundred of bunches of flowers were arriving at the  desert camp. This story had a poignant sequel as shortly after young people converged  on the site in solidarity with the detainees and found their new friends eager to return  the friendship by throwing flowers over the razor wire! There have been hunger  strikes, lip sewing and attempted suicide by desperate detainees. Protest rallies outside  remote desert camps have temporarily freed a number of people. Meetings and  marches, exhibitions, performances and film making, all designed to highlight  Australia’s gross breaches of human rights, have been held with increasing frequency  in the last six months. Within the political system there have been enquiries and  investigations by the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission and the  Commonwealth Ombudsman, as well as questions, speeches and allegations in the  Parliament. 

 The media has continually investigated the culture of fear and despair within  detention camps. Professional groups representing doctors, psychiatrists, nurses,  lawyers and teachers have publicly identified the failure of government to meet its  duty of care. Church and human rights groups have approached the United Nations  and have presented their concerns to the senior officers within the Office of the High  Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations High Commission for  Refugees. Mary Robinson sent Special Envoy Justice Bhagawati to investigate  conditions in Australian detention camps. Both he and the Rapporteur on Arbitrary  Detention have been shocked by the situation of asylum seekers in Australia. There  have been calls for a Royal Commission of Enquiry and for an end to the culture of  violence within detention camps. 

 Europeans of course have their own concerns about the numbers of migrants who  cross borders with such relative ease. The comparison with Australia is stark.  Australia has compromised its good name and wasted vast resources on a ‘solution’  for a few thousand vulnerable people the majority of whom can eventually prove their 

 refugee status. To add insult to injury the Australian Immigration Minister now boasts  he is intent on advising European countries to adopt his tough strategies. Fortunately  much of this posturing will fail because so many Europeans can understand what it is  like to be dispossessed by war and conflict. Australia is indeed a lucky country,  having not faced war in its homeland since it invaded Aboriginal land more than two  hundred years ago. Recent events suggest that as a nation we do not value our good  fortune by being willing to share our wellbeing with others. There is no doubt  Australia is an unlikely model for Europe. In fact we would be better placed to adopt 

 the more humane approach to refugees offered by the Europeans. 

 Why is Australia so paranoid about refugees? This is the question asked me by a  senior European diplomat when I attended the United Nations Commission on Human  Rights in Geneva in April. It was a question repeated in different ways on several 

 occasions during two weeks overseas. When visiting the UN High Commission for  Refugees a junior staff member welcoming me suddenly abandoned all protocol to  ask ‘Whatever is happening to all those poor children locked up the desert?’ These  questions show that people in the international diplomatic community are shocked by 

 reports of the Australian government’s treatment of asylum seekers. 

 The unprecedented behaviour of a developed nation refusing to allow shipwrecked  asylum seekers to be landed on Australian territory by the captain of the Tampa last  year has generated a great deal of debate about our government’s refusal to comply  with basic standards of international humanitarian and maritime law. Captain Rinnan,  the determined Norwegian who challenged the government’s gross failure to respond  to people in dire need, has become an international hero and Australia the subject of  bemused analysis. 

 While the captain of the Tampa has collected a large number of international awards  for his commitment to distressed people, Australia is increasingly the subject of open  criticism for selfishness and paranoia. The publicity has continued as images of  distressed hunger strikers and their children behind the razor wire have been beamed  around the world. A hidden camera at Port Hedland revealed the harsh punitive  experience of detention in Australia. Rarely has a week gone by in the last twelve  months when the international media has not reported negatively on Australian  detention policy. 

 It is no exaggeration to say that Australia is now primarily reported in the  international press either for its treatment of asylum seekers or for its sporting  prowess. Yet the wonderful image of successful multiculturalism shown at the 2000  Olympic Games has sadly been shattered by arbitrary detention and the Pacific  ‘solution’. 

 Why has this aspect of Australian immigration policy attracted so much attention  overseas? Is there a serious problem which will affect the way nations view us in the  future? Can we really afford to give such a poor account of our regard for  international human rights standards? Or is the so-called international concern a mere  tool of Australian human rights advocates in attempting to highlight their concern  about immigration policy and practice? 

 I will attempt to answer these questions objectively, recognising that there is almost  consensus in the national parliament about ‘mandatory detention’ and that so over-used descriptive ‘border protection’. Yet while political leaders argue that both are 

 absolutely essential to national security there is vocal professional and community  criticism nationally and indeed at the international level. 

 Australia is well-regarded generally within international diplomatic circles and has a  particularly strong reputation as an effective member of the United Nations. As an  original member since 1948, Australia has been proactive in developing and  promoting international humanitarian law and setting standards of human rights  practice. Therefore within the United Nations there is considerable disquiet that  Australia, an affluent developed country, should be the one to so blatantly challenge  the fundamental principles inherent in the 1951 Refugee Convention and other human  rights conventions relating to fundamental individual rights. 

 Given the scale of the refugee crisis worldwide it is not surprising that many nations  are concerned that such a privileged country should be the one setting such a  precedent in turning away vulnerable people at sea, paying for poor countries to  accept Australia’s responsibility and locking away asylum seekers in desert camps. 

 Arbitrary detention is not generally practised by other countries largely because the  volume of numbers would make such containment virtually impossible. It is true that  certain individuals or groups may be held for specific questioning and may be  ultimately deported, but automatic and lengthy detention of families is not an  internationally accepted practice. 

 The reason for such international awareness and concern about Australia’s punitive  detention policy is that it is seen as an alarming development in an increasingly tense  world of suspicion and extremism. If Australia cannot cope with a few thousand  unexpected arrivals what hope is there for the resettlement or rehabilitation of some  25 million refugees worldwide? 

 The Australian Immigration Minister Phillip Ruddock has further compounded the  situation by challenging aspects of the Refugee Convention as well as the role of the  United Nations High Commission for Refugees. Many refugee professionals resent  this intrusion into an already tenuous area of international humanitarian support which  is already grossly overstretched in meeting human needs as well as struggling for  financial support from wealthy western nations. 

 How then does this period of international isolationism affect the way other nations  view Australia? Many Australians would be unaware of just how protracted is the  legacy of the White Australia Policy. For us it may be a long-forgotten remnant of  previous generations of decision makers. But two features of Australian history  influence international understanding of our society. Firstly a surprising number of  people overseas have a knowledge and concern about the treatment of Australian  Aborigines. Secondly it is known that we used to reject people on the basis of an  arbitrary colour bar. When visiting Johannesburg in 1996 I was asked by a taxi driver  if Australia still had an apartheid state as his application for immigration had been  rejected. 

 The national race debate sparked by Pauline Hanson in the mid 1990s has been  followed with interest especially in Asia and Africa. Therefore our history has already  affected the way other nations regard us, so we need to me assert a more modern  tolerant image of our nation if we are to develop constructive relationships in our own  region and indeed globally. 

 Australia likes to believe it is a defender of human rights and we have contributed to  many important campaigns over a number of years. Our migration settlement  programs, United Nations advocacy as well as multilateral and bilateral relationships  have stressed the value we as a nation place on international humanitarian law. As a  nation we have been active in assisting countries in our region and beyond to establish  national human rights mechanisms and to encourage education and support to  maintain these. 

 Therefore we are totally undermining all this important effort by not scrupulously  practising what we preach. In recent times our Foreign Minister is on the public  record threatening to give the United Nations a bloody nose if it dared to query our  human rights standards! Why then should we be surprised if other recalcitrant leaders  deny the need to uphold international law? 

 But could it be argued that this focus on other ‘international concern’ is in fact merely  a strategy adopted by Australian human rights advocates to promote their agenda for  reform. Indeed I can say that even with my own personal background of concern I  have been overwhelmed by the extent of detailed knowledge and concern expressed in  international fora and by email. 

 We know that the Australian government has been sufficiently concerned itself to  send ministers and public servants on public relations tours of Europe and Canada to  defend government policy in the face of mounting criticism. While this will be  officially denied, government ministers are sensitive to international scrutiny, as  evidenced by their bellicose responses to a number of polite United Nations reports  and visits. 

 This week both Labor and Coalition parties have attempted to modify mandatory  detention and its harsh impact on the human rights of asylum seekers. These efforts  coincide with United Nations Human Rights Day on Tuesday 10 December and must  be considered in terms of international humanitarian law. 

 Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock announced to the Parliament that women and  children would be encouraged to live outside detention and children would attend  local schools. This follows some trial efforts and is a commitment given by the  Opposition Leader Simon Crean in January. While there are obvious benefits in this  policy, the break up of families will in fact create new problems and some women  will be unprepared to leave their partners. Furthermore the assumption that men must  be held to ‘prevent them absconding’ perpetuates the myth that these people have  committed an offence. It also fails to recognise the double standard applied to those  arriving by boat when most asylum seekers arriving by plane are released into the  community. 

 Labor’s plan to remove the management of detention centres from private prison  contractors and to process claims within 90 days are both initiatives in humanising the  detention experience. However neither the opposition nor government have responded  to the fundamental issue of arbitrary detention whether in Australia, Nauru or  Christmas Island. There is no undertaking to repeal draconian legislation relating to  land excisions or the status of temporary protection visa holders. So much of Labor’s  policy merely reinforces current government policy. 

 Both parties have chosen to perpetuate the myths that asylum seekers are ‘illegal’ and  that mandatory detention is justified as necessary ‘border protection’. Now any  intelligent analysis of these claims would reveal that leaking fishing boats crammed  with vulnerable people seeking protection are unlikely security risks. Surely any  serious assault on Australian sovereignty would involve more sophisticated, strategic  planning? 

 In reality the Prime Minister’s cosy relationship with President Bush together with  those clumsy statements about pre-emptive strikes are much more likely to undermine  Australian security. 

 The government’s rhetoric of fear and hyperbole continue to intimidate the  opposition, forcing it to compromise and take only tentative steps forward in charting  a new direction. This means that despite good intentions Labor’s policy is not 

 sufficiently differentiated from the government’s. 

 It is not surprising that a majority of Australians continue to believe that asylum  seekers are ‘illegal’ and a potential threat because both sides of politics hide behind  misleading language and fail to explain the reality of Australia’s international human  rights obligations to people fleeing persecution. This is not an easy message to convey  especially in a climate of fear and extremism, but this is the responsibility of genuine 

 political leaders. 

 Labor does try to be more responsive to the current very punitive detention practices  but there is only limited preparedness to speak out and condemn government policy.  Statements are made with one eye on opinion polls and the other on certain  recalcitrant members of Shadow Cabinet so ultimately the positive messages are lost.  This caution and apparent lack of philosophical conviction leaves the opposition  appearing weak and vacillating whereas a determined alternative advocacy position  would set a reform agenda that would restore the moral high ground to this debate. 

 It is a tough job being in opposition and no one should underestimate the barriers to  introducing new policy, as government and press gallery will always be ready to  launch an attack. But winning political arguments depends on creating a new vision  that contrasts with government policy. Labor has not yet convinced us that it is  prepared to categorically adopt a principled position and argue within an international 

 law framework. 

 There are many volumes of evidence that the government’s policy and practice of  mandatory detention is breaching human rights standards, including reports from  parliamentary committees, the Ombudsman, the Human Rights and Equal  Opportunity Commission… Even the Immigration Minister’s own advisory  committee has expressed strong reservations about conditions of detention. Lawyers,  doctors, teachers, psychiatrists, nurses, psychologists have all produced professional  assessment of the abuse of individual rights. The United Nations has recommended  policy reform and thousands of Australians continue to demand a humanitarian  solution. Even the Treasurer Peter Costello must be frustrated by the waste of billions  of dollars on this economically irrational policy. 

 The ALP has ample backing to advocate an end to mandatory detention. It now just  needs the courage to stand up and say why this must happen. 

 

