---
title: "United Nations Day Oration."
date: "2002-10-24"
creators:
  - "Einfeld, Marcus"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "United Nations"
  - "Human rights"
  - "Pluralism"
  - "International disputes"
  - "Political leadership"
  - "Aboriginal reconciliation"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211249212
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FWP76%22
---

    United Nations Day Oration

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  Former Justice of the Federal Court of Australia 
and of the New South Wales, Western Australian and Australian Capital 
Territory Supreme Courts 

  Justice of the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court

  Officer in the Order of Australia

  AUSTCARE’s Ambassador for Refugees

  UNICEF’s Ambassador for 
Children

  Foundation President, Australian 
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission and Australian Paralympic 
Federation

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  The Cenotaph

  Martin Place Sydney

  AUSTRALIA

  Thursday 24 October 2002

   

 

  

  

  

  

  

  I greatly 
appreciate the honour of speaking here today at this extremely poignant 
and tragic moment in our history when apprehension and fear for our 
and the world’s future has rarely been higher in our time. The commemoration 
of the birth and growth of the United Nations gives the people of the 
world the opportunity to acknowledge and applaud the extraordinary dynamism 
of its founders’ vision and the remarkable co-operative work that 
has been achieved in the half a century since, despite such barriers 
as nuclear confrontation threatening the very existence of the world, 
the Cold and several hot wars, massive poverty, hunger and disease, 
and so many other threats to the peace and tranquility the United Nations 
was established to achieve and ensure.

  

  For all 
the criticisms thrown at the UN over the years, still continuing to 
this very day, it and its many functioning agencies have amassed and 
are still chalking up remarkable achievements, including, in my personal 
own experience in many countries, the fantastic work of its refugee 
agency and of UNICEF (the heroic Childrens’ organisation) for example, 
in actually saving the lives of kids and their mothers.  Whatever one’s 
views of the proposal to invade Iraq, who knows where we might have 
been today if the UN framework had been bypassed?  If the slowing 
down of the process for the purpose of engaging in widespread consultation 
and consideration under the UN umbrella had not happened?

  

  Yet today 
also enables us to contemplate the stark and quite alarming new challenges 
confronting our generation and testing our ingenuity and commitment 
to meet and overcome.  Let me take a moment to set the historical 
context.

  

  54 years 
ago this coming December, a war ravaged and war-weary world ushered 
in a new international order with what was called the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights.  It was a bold and brilliant document full of 
words, phrases and concepts that everyone wanted to hear.  It spoke 
of recognising the inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable rights 
of all members of the human family as the foundation of freedom, justice 
and peace in the world.  It observed that disregard and contempt 
for human rights had resulted in barbarous acts which had outraged the 
conscience of mankind.  It called for the advent of a world in 
which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech and belief, and freedom 
from fear and want, as the highest aspiration of the common people.  
It declared as essential that human rights should be protected by the 
rule of law.

  

  As a consequence, 
a common standard of achievement was declared for all people and all 
nations.  Every individual and every organ of every society was 
required to strive by teaching and education to promote respect for 
these rights and freedoms, and to work to secure their universal recognition 
and effective observance.  

  

  It was 
too late to save the 35 million civilians in Europe who had died as 
the innocent victims of the power-hungry half crazed lunatics of the 
Third Reich and their sympathisers, including the 6 million Jews and 
the hundreds of thousands of Roma, communists, social democrats, Catholics, 
non-Aryans, homosexuals and humanitarian sympathisers - among whom 
were no less than 1  ½   million children - who were subjected to the rifles, the preposterous 
death camps and the Zyklon B Gas of the SS and Einsatzgruppen.

  

  The atrocities 
of the Nazi era and the horrors and devastation of the Second World 
War compelled the international community to unite in a vow to create 
a world free of war, persecution, and injustice and never again to allow 
such horrors to darken the lives of humankind.  And on 10 December 
1948, the General Assembly of the newly created United Nations, under 
the chairmanship of an Australian, proclaimed this extraordinary declaration 
of humanitarian principles.  

  

  The pen 
was almost still writing the Universal Declaration when the Iron Curtain 
descended on Europe.  Behind this almost impenetrable barrier for 
another 40 years, the so-called workers’ revolution against the evils 
of capitalist materialism held sway.  Under the guise of establishing 
an egalitarian proletariat, Soviet and Eastern European communism constructed 
a secret society of repression, fear, inhumanity, and nuclear might.

  

  They built 
the monstrous Berlin Wall, attempted to blockade and perhaps obliterate 
the United States by carpeting Cuba with nuclear missiles, and armed 
ruthless regimes oppressing their own peoples, from North Korea to Angola, 
from the Middle East to South America. They paralyzed the United Nations 
with their infamous veto, and built an environmental legacy from which 
to this very day hundreds, perhaps thousands, die every year just by 
breathing the air and drinking the water.

  

  In response, 
the western world built armies, armaments and armadas of ships, planes, 
bombs and rockets.  Amongst other places, we fought in Korea, Indo 
China and the Persian Gulf, as it turned out, for very elusive results.  
We ignored and not infrequently funded ruthless dictators even when 
they butchered their own people, because they were seen as “friends” 
of the West or at least anti-communist.  Yet when Mikhail Gorbachev 
almost singlehandedly brought the communist house of cards crashing 
down, and then the tragic followers of the evil Saddam Hussein gave 
up their unequal struggle, we cried out victory.

   

  

  40 years 
after the first one was virtually stillborn, the second new world order 
of our era was born - this one was alive, or so the politicians told 
us.  There was no Universal Declaration Mark 2.  We had done 
such a good job ignoring the first version, and it was so well expressed, 
there was no point in trying another exercise in grandiloquence.

  

  The world 
had come a long way in that 40 years - colour television, people on 
the moon, space research and travel, the Salk vaccine and other fantastic 
medical advances prolonging life and alleviating suffering, the end 
of colonialism, the US Civil Rights Act, progress for Aborigines, a 
human rights charter for Canada, and subsequently for the UK and New 
Zealand leaving only Australia of the western industrialised world without 
one, mobile and car phones which can telephone Moscow as easily as Manly, 
and so on.

  

  But while 
all this was happening, people were getting swamped by the tyranny of 
bureaucracy, the politics of the unprincipled or negligent - even 
of the dishonest, and the effects of massive national debt brought about 
in part simply by bad government in many countries.  And millions 
became beset by famine, poverty and persecution by new warlords.

  

  The allies 
spent $150 billion on ousting Saddam Hussein from Kuwait - without 
achieving even a skerrick of democracy in Kuwait where women can still 
not have a driver’s licence let alone a vote.  And then we permitted 
him to murder, starve and freeze to death thousands of his Kurdish and 
Shiite citizens.

  

  And we 
have thus far allowed him to remain in power so that he can go on oppressing 
his own people and doing murderous mischief and mayhem around the world 
- just as we have allowed the Turks to persecute the Kurds from the 
other side of the border while we in Australia gave an AC to a visiting 
former President of Turkey.

  

  The international 
community failed dismally in Somalia; we ignored the warnings about 
Rwanda, and then withdrew UN personnel allowing thousands more to die; 
we set up safe havens in Bosnia and then stood by while the people we 
were supposedly protecting were forcibly uprooted and mercilessly shot; 
we have largely ignored massacres in Algeria and elsewhere, done little 
to assuage or reverse the suppression of the Burmese and the Tibetans, 
and for four decades we Australians virtually made love to the ruthless 
autocrat Soeharto and his voracious family in priority to helping the 
Indonesian poor and seeking justice for the East Timorese.

  

  It was 
no fault of the men and women peacekeepers assembled here today and 
their colleagues elsewhere whose fantastic work in many countries, as 
I have seen for myself, has done all of us Australians proud.  
They did more than their best but they were let down by decisions and 
actions way beyond their control and these happenings represent only 
a tiny part of democracy’s perfidy to the humanitarian principles 
the Universal Declaration was supposed to get us to uphold.

  

  While 
a global economic order now outstrips the Bible and the Koran as the 
guiding faith of today’s world, sadly the remoteness of global   humanitarian  reform is truly great.  
There is simply no sign at all that at last, economic equity and social 
equanimity are about to supplant the essentially selfish and aggressive 
pursuits of most nations.  There is not even a whisper of a world 
united in its commitment, as opposed to its rhetoric, to redirecting 
its abundant skills and resources towards taking up the challenges of 
the real problems of humankind.

  

  These 
challenges include alleviating hunger and disease; confronting, exposing 
and overcoming exploitation and corruption; removing torture and cruelty; 
attacking prejudice and discrimination; and addressing constructively 
the human imbalances and inequities which abound everywhere.

  

  The world 
has been traumatised by the outrageous wicked destruction of human life 
and property in New York and Washington just 13 months ago, and by the 
tragic loss of so many Australian and other lives in Bali just last 
week, and still reels from the economic havoc caused or generated by 
those events.  It faces the realisation that humanity is threatened, 
not so much by superpower rivalry or nuclear confrontation - as we 
have been brainwashed for so long, as by a much more sinister threat 
of chemical and biological attack on such things as our water resources, 
power generation capacity, oil supplies, transportation and communication 
facilities and other fundamentals to our way of life.

  

  We are 
said to be in a war on terrorism though against whom and to achieve 
what we cannot understand but must trust in our leaders to choose wisely 
and execute efficiently, when we generally do not trust them to do much 
simpler things almost every day.  No one even takes a breath at 
the hypocrisies inherent in the fact that American and other western 
money financed terrorism by the IRA against British and Irish civilians 
for decades and longer in a cause they were unwilling to negotiate, 
and by violent groups all over Latin America and beyond so long as they 
were fighting in countries other than ours.  We even armed and 
funded Iraq in its 10 year war against Iran in which 10 year old boys 
fought and died in the front line, and to this very day support the 
autocratic rulers of Saudi Arabia in the cause of oil, while they in 
turn fund too many of the terrorists and oppress their own people.  

  

  And most 
of the world has connived in or applauded these happenings, or have 
not raised a finger in protest. How did the deliberately engineered 
replacement of Salvador Allende by Augusto Pinochet, on of all things 
a different but coincidental September 11, assist the fundamental freedoms 
of the Chilean people? Or reflect their choice as to the people by whom 
and the ideology by which they wished to be ruled?

  

  There 
is, to be sure, not a lot upon which we can be happy and contented at 
this time.  And although geographically remote and politically 
unimportant, Australia and we Australians are going to feel pain, pay 
the cost, and endure the risks that so many others are facing at this 
time.  If nothing else, it should make us take stock and look to 
what we can and should do to address our own weaknesses and faults.

  

  For most 
of these last 54 years since the Universal Declaration, Australia has 
been one of the leaders in implementing the humanitarian standards it 
identifies.  As a middle power with a respected human rights record, 
Australia has been looked to and listened to by the international community 
on human rights issues.  This proud tradition of support for human 
rights and dignity casts upon us a great responsibility.  As the 
largest developed democracy in our region, indeed the sixth oldest democracy 
in the world, Australia not only has an obligation to speak out and 
act against persecution running rampant in other countries; we have 
an obligation to prevent and remedy human rights abuses on our own soil.  
And the standards we must observe are those we set for ourselves, not 
alien credos which we loudly, and rightly, reject.

  

  The driving 
force for the enthusiastic adoption of these inspiring principles of 
human behaviour in Australian terms is the evolution of our nation into 
a society where laws, employment and human relations reflect decency 
and honour; where legitimate controversy is fought and resolved with 
a passion devoid of stereotypes, and of minority, group or racial defamation; 
where a fair sharing of our country’s resources and benefits is open 
to every sector of the community; and perhaps above all, where decisions 
of all kinds stem from considerations of merit and true deserts, free 
from preconceptions, prejudices and prejudgments.

  

  However, 
in my perception, we Australians, together with the peoples of many 
others of the so-called developed countries, are today in serious danger 
of forgetting these goals.  Continuing to recall and nominally 
respect human decency is one thing.  It is quite another to ensure 
that our governments and people actually honour these concepts.  
And as of late our commitment is looking decidedly hollow and the world 
is taking notice.

  

  At present, 
our society represents a mixed bag of the good, the bad and the positively 
ugly.  Whilst we can be justly proud of, amongst other things, 
our scientific, technical, manufacturing and sporting triumphs, our 
insidious treatment of asylum seekers and continuing neglect of our 
Indigenous peoples, children, women especially those in poor circumstances, 
people with disabilities and others require us to examine and prise 
open our consciences as we question both the substance and direction 
of our nation and people today.

  

  Surely 
our generation has a responsibility to ensure that Australia is, and 
continues to be known as, a champion of honourable and humanitarian 
conduct.  Yet because we appear as a nation   not  to be questioning our societal 
constructs today, we are at best wandering aimlessly, permitting our 
development to be steered in many directions, not all of them desirable.

  

  Of all 
our failings - and there are many - there can surely be no doubt 
that the continuing sufferings of Indigenous Australians are our most 
grievous and long-standing shame - and the deprivations endured by 
the children are the very worst aspect of that shame.

  

  It is 
not possible for me today, and it is not my purpose, to attempt to analyse 
and expose the full story of our dishonourable approaches to Aboriginal 
dispossession and disadvantage.  That is another speech altogether. 
It will suffice for now to say that despite advances in some fields 
in some parts of the country, Australia’s Indigenous peoples still 
face gross inequality deeply rooted in history and the prejudiced, intolerant 
or stubborn attitudes of the white community.  Whichever social 
indicator is looked at, whether it is health, education, justice, employment 
or housing, Indigenous Australians are identified as the most disadvantaged 
group in the country.  This situation represents a manifest and 
fundamental breach of Australian and international law.  What it 
says about the morality of our nation I leave you to contemplate.

  

  In short, 
we continue to deny Indigenous people the very equal opportunity to 
a fair chance in life which we Australians like to call a ‘fair go’ 
for all.  Which is not to say that Australia is not a wonderful 
country - I would say the best in the world - and that we are not 
generally a kind and generous people.  It is just that we are not 
as good as we say or think we are.  Indeed, while this situation 
persists, we are engaged in an empty untruthful boast about our allegedly 
superior standards.

  

  The things 
we are still doing to, and not doing for, our Aborigines should not 
be happening.  The things done in the past should not have happened.  
Together they are human wrongs, not for blame in the crude sense, but 
for the deepest regret and for a commitment to put them right as a matter 
of the utmost urgency.  If they represent what some have called 
a black armband view of history, I for one wear it as a mark of sorrow, 
and as a commitment to reconciliation.  Rather a black armband 
than a white blindfold to shut out the truth.

  

  Much has 
also been written and said about our recent and current treatment of 
people seeking asylum, refuge and rescue in our country. My views are 
well known so I will not detail them now.  I say only this. No 
one has ever suggested that anyone and everyone who wants to come here 
should be allowed to do so. Of course countries have to regulate their 
population and migration numbers.  No one has ever suggested that 
anyone but we Australians should determine who should be allowed to 
join what is, I believe, one of the great multicultural societies of 
the world.  

  

  Yet I 
am shocked that we kind generous Australians, living in almost unparalleled 
comfort and tranquility, have been prepared to allow our hard won but 
fully justified reputation for compassion to be demolished at a stroke.  
That so many Australians, including so many who should and do know better, 
have been willing to inject into our everyday language of kindness terms 
like illegal migrants, when asylum seekers are neither illegal nor migrants.  
When we have been prepared to accuse people seeking rescue from torture 
and terror, or allow them to be labelled, as queue jumpers when the 
very concept of queues of people escaping with their own and their terrified 
children’s lives only has to be thought about for a minute to be revealed 
as a canard of gross order.  When a manicured term like mandatory 
detention has been substituted for what it really is - compulsory 
permanent jailing in appalling conditions of cruelty and inhumanity 
without crime, charge, bail or trial.  

  

  But above 
all, and whatever else we do, there is nothing more urgent and more 
fundamental to our own consciences and peace of mind than to deliberately 
and consciously deflect the racial overtones of the asylum seeker debate, 
now reinvigorated by the Bali bombing and the death and suffering of 
its victims, away from vengeance and violence to a search for the ways 
to solve or at least salve as many of the causes of such outrages as 
we can. 

  

  It is 
a tough ask to try to deal with fanatical martyr-driven hatred which 
intentionally seeks to kill children and innocent civilians generally. 
Amongst other problems is the ignorance of each civilisation of the 
other.  There is not even a common language of communication readily 
available.  What do we know of Muslim poetry and literature, of 
its music and art, of its culture and philosophies?  What efforts 
are we making to access these characteristics and outputs of a billion 
people as a means of building understanding and tolerance?

  

  Yet there 
is simply no alternative to a search for peaceful solutions and resolutions. 
We must find ways to get Muslims in our own community and everywhere 
to share with us the rich and beautiful elements of their beliefs and 
aspirations, rather than the ugly and insane manifestations of the few 
amongst them who do not wish to live in peace with the rest of us, with 
all our faults and inadequacies. 

  

  I have 
been in over 20 Muslim countries and have met and talked to hundreds 
and hundreds of their peoples. I have met none who want anyone to be 
killed, still less to kill anyone themselves.  All they want is 
what we want - the opportunity to live peaceful lives with our families, 
to work for fair reward, and to leave a happier and safer world for 
their children that they have had. 

  

  I have 
held in my own arms children and babies dying of simply cured diseases 
like measles and diarrhoea if only we could have got them the fresh 
water we throw away every day just cleaning our teeth. I have looked 
in the eyes of their parents as their lives ebbed away. I have seen 
no different sense of love and loss than would be the case with any 
and every one of us.  If we can do nothing else, can we just tone 
down the arrogance a fraction?

  

  And finally 
a word on leadership at this time.  This is not time for amateurs 
and armchair observers to peddle their theories and parade their prejudices.  
It is a time that our leaders of all political persuasions actually 
lead us in what will be a sophisticated and difficult undertaking.

  

  The portents 
are not good.  For this is the first recorded time that our leaders 
across the board have refused to inform and educate the people with 
the facts.  When trade unions and others objected to Chinese labourers 
being brought here to help find gold in the late 19  th  century, 
the leaders told the people what had to be done.  When 83% of Australians 
told an opinion poll in 1947, that they were against allowing Jewish 
survivors of the Nazi Holocaust to be admitted to Australia, the leaders 
told the people what was right - even if they partly gave in to the 
pressures by limiting the numbers of Jewish passengers on each boat 
to 25% of the total, thereby leaving many of them to rot in Europe while 
they looked elsewhere for somewhere to go.

  

  When people 
objected to workers coming here from Yugoslavia and other parts of southern 
Europe in the early 50s to help build the Snowy Mountains Hydro Electric 
Scheme, with all that that project has meant to the prosperity of Australians, 
the leaders said what the national interest demanded.  When more 
than 60% of people voted in a 1973 opinion poll to reject refugees from 
Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia, whose countries and lives we had helped 
to wreck, in our own not their interests, the leaders decided what our 
national duty was.  

  

  Where 
are the leaders today who will carry out their similar responsibilities 
in relation to those seeking our acceptance and understanding today?  
When will our leaders of both the major political groupings - and 
those in the rest of the developed world - decide to lead, not follow, 
the prejudices and ignorance of those who do not want to know the truth 
lest they be embarrassed by it?  What we are looking for is a noble 
country which upholds human dignity for itself and bestows human dignity 
on everyone in it.  We want, and deserve, leaders committed to 
the achievement of this saintly goal.

  

  There 
is no more fundamental task for honourable people than to uphold the 
sanctity of the human condition.  A truly humane nation treats 
all vulnerable people, whatever their ethnic, racial and cultural origins, 
with dignity, sensitivity and respect, and caters for their physical, 
emotional and welfare needs. Human rights are after all as their most 
famous declaration says, universal.  They are for all of humankind.  
No on person is aware of a human being than another.

  

  We Australians 
are normally generous, kind and honourable people, but we have strayed 
from our path at present in relation to too many people in our midst.

  

  It is 
time for attitudinal change on this issue.  We are no longer cherishing 
the principles we have so enthusiastically promised to uphold for our 
children and for children everywhere.  In the process we are forsaking 
who we are and what we stand for. We must take a step back and remember 
why we made these promises, and what we need to do to keep them.  
After all, if the children are suffering and the children are the future, 
what hope is there for the future?     1


  

  Despite 
its weaknesses, the United Nations is still our best and greatest hope.  
And it can only be as good and successful as its member nations are 
willing to allow it to be. Australia and we Australians have been one 
of its proudest and most loyal flagbearers from the very day of its 
establishment.  Let us commit ourselves to continuing this great 
tradition and not desert the phenomenal principles of its Charter and 
the Universal Declaration now when the need is just as great as it ever 
was.

  

  Nelson 
Mandela said on his last visit to Australia just over 2 years ago :

  

  One of the most difficult things to do is not so much to change society 
as to change ourselves.

  

  This change 
will not just happen.  It is up to us to make it happen.  
Our people and our leaders must be made to realise that it takes a stronger 
nation to admit its errors, and to learn from them, than to pretend 
that nothing went wrong in the first place.  

  

  We must 
reject the inhumanity and loose racism that have sometimes driven our 
policies and reactions in difficult areas.  In their place, let 
us decide with quiet but unflinching determination to treat those who 
ask for our help, and those who need help, in exactly the same way as 
we would ask, and expect, for ourselves in the same situation.

  

  This is 
a fight for rediscovery of our nation’s soul.  We dare not fail.  
In my opinion, we have not a moment to lose.

   

 

  United Nations Day Oration

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  Former Justice of the Federal Court of Australia 
and of the New South Wales, Western Australian and Australian Capital 
Territory Supreme Courts 

  Justice of the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court

  Officer in the Order of Australia

  AUSTCARE’s Ambassador for Refugees

  UNICEF’s Ambassador for Children

  Foundation President, Australian Human Rights and 
Equal Opportunity Commission and Australian Paralympic Federation

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  The Cenotaph

  Martin Place Sydney

  AUSTRALIA

  Thursday 24 October 2002

   

 

  

  

  

  

    1  
Adapted from Maty Phiri editor monthly newsletter for teenaged in Zambia

