---
title: "An even spread: distribution and population. [Panel discussion at the National Population Summit 2003: Towards a greater Australia, Australian Population Institute, \n21 November 2003, Parliament House, Adelaide, South Australia]\n\n"
date: "2003-11-21"
creators:
  - "Kalantzis, Mary"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Skilled migration"
  - "South Australia"
  - "Immigration policy"
  - "Greece"
  - "Conferences"
  - "Unskilled labour"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
  - "Panel discussion at the National Population Summit 2003: Towards a greater Australia"
  - "Australian Population Institute"
  - "\n21 November 2003"
  - "Parliament House"
  - "Adelaide"
  - "South Australia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211261575
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TWOI6%22
---

 AN EVEN SPREAD:  DISTRIBUTION AND POPULATION   

 PROFESSOR MARY KALANTZIS 

 

 Thank you.  Last night I went to another gathering like this in Melbourne at the State Library on Constitutional  change, that hot topic at the moment in the Senate, and all of a dozen people turned up in Melbourne and at  question time it was clear that half of them were stark raving mad, so it is terrific to see so many people here  today wanting to give up a day and discuss this very important issue about population and immigration.  Our  girls have left, I was going to welcome them and suggest that Malcolm was going to urge them to have lots of  babies and you have missed your chance, Malcolm, they have gone.   

 It is important that we keep having these discussions, even though perhaps I suggest we are just rehearsing  things we already know and looking at where the shifts might be in perhaps the facts, perhaps the  economics, perhaps the science of it.  I think more than anything in the emotions and the perceptions around  these issues because so much policy at the moment is being driven by that as much as the science and the  facts around all the issues associated with population and immigration.   

 I must say though that I was a little upset, I think is the right word, when I heard our Premiere - your  Premiere, the South Australian Premiere - make his suggestion today about:  how he might have more  immigrants in this country with his two tier system, and I could just see the headlines:  mandatory detention  for refugees and mandatory regionalism for immigrants in Australia.  I mean, I do not know how that is going  to wash in a democratic country and how it is going to pay out for countries that, say, if I can use a Bush  term, "Lovers of freedom".  It is going to be very hard to run a case like that, forcing people to be permanent  residents before they can go on to being Australian citizens.  I think that is not an answer that is going to be  very easy. 

 

 I felt perhaps maybe there might be a tax on all those people that leave, given that that is a crisis too, but I  do not know whether he wants to take that suggestion up.  Anyway, I am going to start what I am going to  say with two anecdotes around the issue of "skilled" and "unskilled" labour.  The first one is I have just come 

 back, just two days ago from Greece, where I go regularly to work and, as many of you might know, Greece  is facing a similar problem, as is Italy and other parts of the world, of dramatically declining fertility rates.     

 While I was there on the weekends I duck home to my home in the village, and I have been doing that for 20  years and for 20 years we have been wanting to repair our house in the village but it has been impossible  because there is no labour in the village, you cannot get plumbers, you cannot get electricians, you cannot  even get people to do paving and so this little house has sort of lingered there unfinished.  More recently, we  have been able to do these repairs because of the influx of Albanians and other illegal immigrants or  refugees into Greece.  In fact, there are one million - Greece has only 10 million people and currently there  are one million of these people in Greece, and there has been an absolutely remarkable transformation in  what one might call the economy and the social life of the country.     

 Not only in little village homes like mine being repaired, but construction, services, agriculture, the picking of  tomatoes, the picking of olives, whatever it takes to keep a little country like Greece robust, this influx of  these undesirables - and they are undesirables - one of them was on a ladder and one of the Greek bosses  underneath and he was holding that ladder and it looked very precarious, and I said:  you know, this man is  going to kill himself.  He said:  one less Albanian is better for all of us, even though he needed him.     

 My poor mother who, you know, goes backwards and forwards supervising this was so distressed she says:   that is what they said about us when we went to Australia.  She said:  we were the Albanians who went there  and did the paving and the plumbing and picked the fruit and helped make the country it is.  I sort of looked  at her quite fondly because she always talks about Albanians as badly as the rest of the people do, they  commit all the crimes, you know they are terrible people, and it is quite interesting her attitude there too.   

 The point I want to make is about unskilled labour and the effect that unskilled labour has had in Australia in  the past, the effect that it is having in places like Greece and that perhaps we should rethink the way the  categories that we have - and I think somebody has already mentioned that this morning - but in particular I  want to note that South Australia has said that it will take more of the category refugee or humanitarian, and  the first proposition I want to make is, perhaps we should reconsider that 12,000 intake of refugees that we 

 take, skilled or unskilled, and that is a very important policy issue that should perhaps go back on the agenda  at the moment, so that is my first anecdote.   

 My second anecdote, and these pictures are not quite clear, but these are images of Illinois and Fasil Risvey  is there at the moment and his brother is in the room, but Illinois, Urbana, Champagne, there is a university  there, that actively recruits Australians, but Australian academics are being recruited internationally for their  skills and many of us are tempted, not only by the higher salaries that England and America and Canada  might offer us, but the opportunity access research opportunities and other academic qualities that in our  country is shrinking.   

 

 I too was persuaded by Fasil in a moment of weakness to consider such an option and off I went to Illinois  and I went there.  It is wonderful, it is a beautiful campus, but I looked around at the corn fields.  I went and  ate at the best restaurants in Urbana and Champagne.  I listened to the radio and heard Bush all the time tell  us:  how wonderful America is.  I knew I had to be silent and not have opinions about the country if they  looked unpatriotic and I just choked at the thought of moving there, despite the extra income, despite the  opportunities and of course I headed back home, and that is what skilled people do.   

 Skilled people do not go somewhere just because there are job opportunities, they are looking for quality of  life, they are looking at cultural factors, they are much more mobile, they are much more likely to move  around and, again, I think we need to think about who we attract, why we attract them and whether the  category of skill, the right people in the right place at the right time, I think the Minister said, what that actually  means, given the way in which skilled labour operates.   

 What makes a place desirable, what makes a location desirable?  I think some of the issues have already  been discussed but, certainly, lower house prices and rent availability of suitable and attractive jobs, the  recognition of qualification, support for resettlement of family, access to life long education and professional  enhancement, quality health, education, child-care and faith services, quality of life, entertainment, safety,  connections.   

 

 Senses of belonging and participation which are vital, respect for language and culture and, of course, an  aesthetic environment.  I know from the documentation that the South Australians have given us, they are  certainly looking to all those things in trying to attract people, including perhaps regional loadings to attract  people to come to South Australia, perhaps even employment brokers, perhaps even a good neighbour  council that greets people and enables them to belong to a particular place.     

 If your aim is to attract immigrants and particularly skilled immigrants, a sense of belonging and a sense of  connectedness for them is absolutely vital and it is important that in whatever strategies regional Australia  has that they factor that into account also.  This is absolutely vital for all people, I mean, it is not an accident  that our Prime Minister has joined with his brothers, his kith and kin, Blair and Howard, brothers in arms, in  bringing freedom and democracy to the world.  I mean, there is a tug there that means he commits his  people to that particular challenge and for all people that matters, so how do we factor those emotional and  cultural issues into any strategy that we have at trying to attract people to any particular place?   

 What I am going to share with you then is two pieces of research.  One which was done here, I was involved  in this piece of research in 1997 for the Ministry of Education here that was wanting to attract more students,  but the same kind of issues as today, how might they attract a larger population from either immigration or  tourism?  While we were going around asking questions and collecting our data - and this was 1999 - what  was emerging then, which has now become common place because the Premiere referred to it - was that  they were selling Adelaide as, "Clean and green", and, "A place that you could move around easily".     

 At the time I thought, who from any other part of the world would be attracted to come to Adelaide because it  was clean and green and you could move around?  I mean, maybe those people in suburban London where  everything is deteriorating, but I could not imagine how that might be a draw card for people, either unskilled  or skilled, in moving to another city.  As we spoke to very many people what emerged was something quite  different and people were suggesting that how South Australia needed to sell itself if it wanted more  immigrants from the world was as a global community.  There were three sort of propositions that came up,  playing with that idea of what "global community" might mean, if you are going to use that kind of term in 

 terms of economic growth, in terms of cultural vibrancy and, critically now, in terms of social cohesion.  The  case made to us was that these three items were inter-related.     

 If I move very quickly to economic growth, it was very clear that what people were saying to us was that  South Australia - and these are arguments that have been made in this country now for a long time - needed  to use the diversity of its community as a resource for economic growth.  Everything from language skills -  and I think you all know these arguments - the global networks and contacts that South Australians might  make to links with other parts of the world, particularly promoting a globally friendly image in order to attract  investment and tourism and trade, using its multicultural work-force to gain a competitive edge and  developing a competitive advantage in leading industries - and this is important - that require international  cross-cultural and multilingual communication.  How might it niche itself and how might it link its resources to  these outcomes.  Information technology, telecommunications, bank office services, call centre, tourism and  education, all of them rely on culture and sensitivity and language in order to perform what they need to  perform.   

 Also what came out was that perhaps South Australia should not be just pitching what it is doing to the old  Europe, seeing that it is linked either for its wine or other products, was into France or into Britain.  Perhaps it  should be looking into the new Europe, into the Balkans, into the eastern part of Europe, into central Europe,  into the Arab world, into the Pacific and into the region here.  How was it pushing its products and services  into these areas where our migrants might come from, rather than only into the older and more traditional  areas? 

 

 Secondly, of course, is cultural vibrancy.  Again, why do people go to a place?  Why do they want to live  there, and particularly skilled workers do not live only by the kind of employment that they get.  Again, South  Australia is aware of this and has tried to build up its arts and festivals and diversity is central to that and has  been in many of the festivals, but again you need to invest much more heavily in this area and, of course,  Brisbane itself got the bounce after Expo.  If you remember Expo and the fixing up of the river and, you  know, the enormous investment in arts and culture.  People said:  Brisbane is a good place to go, it is a good  place to live.  It is a good place to be a part of and that is important.    

 Secondly, though and this came very strongly through to us, although it is problematic it looks easy put here:   how might South Australia capitalise on its Aboriginal edge?  The Aboriginal history, the Aboriginal culture,  Aboriginal life world, if I might say, is something that is attractive to people outside of Australia and could  make this State particularly unique, and to do so means a very complex engagement with difficult dialogues  with Indigenous people and, finally, to brand how might South Australia brand itself as a global community  and as a State that is at home with the world, rather than just clean, green and a place where you can move  around easily.  This is particularly so after September 11 and October 12, where people are looking for  places where they can go where they can feel safe and secure.   

 Finally, social cohesion which is related to that, and there is a critical yearning to belong to a place that is  diverse, that is vibrant and yet is cohesive and it is important that South Australia is able to promote itself as  a welcome place for migrants and tourists and students and business people and investors who do come  from that diversity and that it is a tolerant and open community and that it optimises the value to the whole  State of its human resources and, of course, its Indigenous heritage.  If you look at that little brochure that we  all got as we came in here that is promoting Adelaide business - you have a look at it, you have got it there  somewhere - if you actually have a look at it, it could be anywhere.  There is nothing particularly unique in  the way that it pitches its services, its businesses and its industry and yet it could do that and attract a global  environment.   

 Now, the policy and orientation of course would have to change in relation to that and I know there is a  Commission of Multicultural Affairs, but I will not go into this area, but when we did our work we tried to  suggest ways in which that might be integrated as a whole of Government strategy, rather than a separate  agency and that the benefits of cultural and linguistic diversity needed to be extended to all South  Australians and that there needed to be an improvement of effectiveness of Government progresses and  services in the area of diversity and, of course, that the programs needed to be coordinated across portfolios.     

 I will leave that there because I want to move to, very quickly, to the second point I want to make.  Is South  Australia ready for such a strategy?  Is our country ready for such a strategy, given that what you might call 

 "cultural wars" or the "rip tide" around identity and cultural issues continues to be among us?  The positive  and the negative case around diversity runs around these issues.  Of course, the very simple ones is that  increased population and migration is a stimulus to economic growth, it makes jobs in the opposite, as the  Minister tells us, is a perception that it takes jobs.  There is a positive argument that immigrants contribute to  taxes which outstrip the benefits that they receive, rather than the opposite agenda, which is that they are a  burden on the social purse and perhaps corruptly access social services.    

 There is a positive argument that immigrants and an increased population produce the taxes and the  investment required to improve the environmental degradation that very few people and a lot of animals an  inappropriate agriculture created, whereas, the other argument of course that the more people we have,  increases the rate of environmental degradation.  There is a case that immigrants under-commit crime until  the third generation, then there is a perception that they over-commit crime and so the litany goes on.   

 More recently, there is an anxiety that with diversity within your country then, perhaps, the anxieties around  security might become greater, rather than less.  The positive argument is with more diversity a movement  towards multiple citizenship, then there is a better chance of moving towards global harmony.  One of the  ironies of September 11 and October 12, is that more people are concerned with those issues and wanting  to understand in a way that they did not before.     

 Directly after September 11, the Koran became the best seller all around the world, it actually sold out all  over the world.  People wanted to understand, wanted to know, so we are in a different moment around that  question of diversity.  Are we to remain shy about it?  Are we to remain antagonistic towards diversity as  being a central part of how we sell ourselves internationally, and is it useful or not useful?   

 Just finally, I want to share with you some data - I will not go through the slides because it will take too long -  from SBS.  SBS did a sample of peoples perception, 3500 was the sample size.  1500 were randomly  selected and 2000 were of non-English speaking background.  What was interesting from that was the shift  that has occurred in our sensibilities and what I put to you, a sensibility, now where we can re-invigorate the  argument about who we are and the way in which culture and diversity might become central as a magnet  and as a way of ensuring that people are interested in particular places.  I mean, the move to Sydney and  Melbourne is not only because they are places of a lot of work, they are cosmopolitan places, places of great  diversity where immigrants and other Australians can be satisfied living there.   

 The SBS results suggest that 94 per cent of all Australians, everyone, migrant and non-migrant, call Australia  home and they seem pretty happy to be here, but fewer of them actually want to consider themselves to be  an Australian, so they feel at home here, but they do not actually consider themselves Australian, and 59 per  cent said they did not actually consider themselves that.  However, when they went on looking at attitudes to  immigration and reconciliation, 38 per cent considered immigration of benefit to Australia and 29 per cent  thought it was some benefit.     

 Only 11 per cent felt it was no benefit and similar kind of results, even better in a sense around reconciliation.   In terms of cultural diversity, 59 per cent of the sample said it was a strength to Australian society, and only  11 per cent said it was not a strength.  In multiculturalism, 52 per cent thought it was important to have a  policy that allowed identity to play a role in our country.  Interestingly - and I think we know all this - is that the 

 younger generation are more likely to be more comfortable with reconciliation and cultural diversity and  multiculturalism.  Their conclusions were that there was a positive attitude towards cultural diversity and a  readiness to embrace a national identity that was confident about being connected with its history and going  forward with an emphasis on the way in which - - -  

 

 END TAPE 2 - SIDE A   

 START TAPE 2 - SIDE B   

 - - - to be the ones that work in attracting immigrants to regional Australia, or in fact other Australians to  move from Sydney and Melbourne to a place like Adelaide.  Thank you.   

