---
title: "Call for Wilkie to give evidence on Iraq to Foreign Affairs Committee: Harradine."
date: "2003-03-12"
creators:
  - "Harradine, Brian"
source: "Office of HARRADINE, SEN BRIAN"
subjects:
  - "Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade"
  - "Iraq"
  - "Resignations"
  - "WILKIE, Andrew, MP"
  - "Office of National Assessments"
  - "Military operations"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211564807
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/37S86%22
---

 Brian Harradine, Senator for Tasmania   

 

 Call for Wilkie to give evidence on Iraq to  Foreign Affairs Committee: Harradine   

 Senator Brian Harradine (Ind, Tas) has called for an urgent meeting of the Joint  Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade to hear evidence from  former Office of National Assessments (ONA) analyst Andrew Wilkie.  Senator  Harradine said he hoped that a meeting could be organised for this Friday, or if not  possible, early next week. 

 

 Senator Harradine said that Mr Wilkie had confirmed this week that Australia would  not be involved in a “just war”, should the Prime Minister decide to commit  Australian forces to an attack on Iraq.   

 “In a statement to the Senate in February, I pointed out that on the information  available to Parliamentarians, an attack on Iraq would not meet the requirements  commonly agreed as necessary for a ‘just war’”, Senator Harradine said. 

 

 “I indicated the elements necessary for a just war in my speech to the Senate.  ‘Firstly,  there must be a just cause; secondly, the decision to go to war must be taken by a  legal authority; thirdly, it must be for the right reason; fourthly, there must be a  reasonable chance of success; fifthly, there must be proportionality; and, sixthly,  every other reasonable method must have been used to try to obtain the eventual end,  which is peace.’  Only sufficient force should be used and non-combatants protected. 

 

 “Mr Wilke, with his years of experience in the intelligence field, has indicated that a  number of these elements would not be present.  In particular, there would not be  ‘proportionality’, because the good obtained by the overthrow of Saddam Hussein  would not surpass the damage that Iraqi forces could inflict on their own people in an 

 attempt to slow an attack.   

 “Mr Wilkie has explained that the Iraqi military ‘…is very weak. It's a fraction of the  size it was when it invaded Kuwait in 1990. Most of what remains is poorly trained,  poorly equipped and of questionable loyalty to the regime. Iraq's weapons of mass  destruction program is, I believe, genuinely contained.’   

 “However Wilkie warned that Saddam Hussein could engineer ‘… a humanitarian  disaster to overwhelm coalition forces. Just totally overwhelm them, with thousands  of casualties, hundreds of thousands of refugees, internally displaced people, trying to  move through their lines.’”   

 

 Hobart, 12 March 2003   

 Senator Brian Harradine, 03 6234 5122, 0418 127 623 

