---
title: "Rebuilding communities post war: address to Engineers Australia, 44th Chapman oration."
date: "2003-12-12"
creators:
  - "Cosgrove, Peter"
source: "COSGROVE, PETER"
subjects:
  - "Postwar reconstruction"
  - "Australian Defence Force"
  - "Engineering industry"
  - "East Timor"
  - "Afghanistan"
  - "Solomon Islands"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211262332
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DT0X6%22
---

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY 

 

 ADDRESS TO ENGINEERS AUSTRALIA 44TH CHAPMAN ORATION 

 by 

 GENERAL PETER COSGROVE, AC, MC 

 REBUILDING COMMUNITIES POST-WAR  12 December 2003 

 Introduction 

 Engineers. Not quite the oldest profession. But since the times of Ancient Rome—with the engineering  marvels of the aqueducts, the Appian Way and the Colosseum—engineers have provided the means for a  society to become civilised.   

 It is my honour to be here tonight to deliver the 44th Chapman Oration.   

 As Jane pointed out in her wonderful presentation on the history of the Chapman Oration, Wilfrid Dinsey  Chapman was an Army engineer. He is one of a number of engineers who have risen to prominence in the  Australian Defence Force.    

 Our greatest commander in the First World War, General Sir John Monash, a Gallipoli veteran and the man  who brilliantly commanded the 1st Australian Corps in France during the last six months of conflict. He was a  first-class engineer who went on to be the first Chairman of the State Electricity Commission of Victoria.    

 And, more recently, Lieutenant General Sanderson commanded a disparate force of 16,000 troops from 34  countries, as the UN force commander in Cambodia in 1993, who later became Chief of Army and is now  Governor of Western Australia.   

 These three men, plus many, many more, epitomise the engineer of the Australian Defence Force:  intelligent, compassionate, and dedicated. 

 East Timor 

 Later on tonight I fly to East Timor. I have been asked to open an English language centre.    

 Engineers built this centre—a team from 19 Chief Engineer Works under Australia’s Defence Cooperation  Team. In less than a year, this dedicated team has constructed a facility that will benefit the local community  for many years to come.   

 The Australian Defence Force engineers have a motto: first in, last out.    

 First in when there is trouble, leading the offensive charge, or backing up the defensive move. And still there  at the end, helping communities rebuild, repairing infrastructure. 

 

 When I first went to East Timor back in 1999, it was a terrible and desperate situation.    

 It shocked and saddened me to witness the level of destruction and the almost total evacuation of the  capital Dili. Militias had devastated towns and villages, civil infrastructure had been destroyed and the  monsoon season had just begun.    

 There was a complete breakdown of law and order, health and public utilities. There was no power, no  running water and no sewerage that worked.   

 It was heart-breaking to see.   

 But since then, East Timor has regained its foothold in the civilised world.   

 This is in no small part due to the work of engineers, particularly the sappers of the Australian Defence  Force and those from many other contributing nations. The engineers and the wider INTERFET team did a  wonderful job to rebuild the infrastructure of East Timor.   

 Freedom of movement, protection from the elements and a comprehensive health infrastructure, particularly  clean drinking water, flushing toilets and hot water were the priority of the engineers. Basic infrastructure  was almost non-existent, and the lack of clean water, shelter and amenities saw an outbreak of  gastrointestinal and other infectious diseases.    

 Routes needed to be cleared of debris and repaired to allow clear progress for our troops and vehicles.  Drainage was improved to stop roads collapsing. Bridges, destroyed by the militia forces, were rebuilt.   The engineers built a new rubbish tip as the existing Dili tip was outside the security cordon. They fixed  pump stations and broken pipes. Sewerage treatment ponds in Dili were constructed, and the drinking wells  were rehabilitated.    

 And the engineers located, cleaned and purified water storage facilities.   

 The work of the engineers contributed directly and indirectly to improve the lives of the Timorese.  The engineers repaired the hospital in Maliana, with new roofing, reconnection of power and re-wiring the  electrical system.   

 They repaired Memo Church, which involved almost a total rebuild of the existing structure. A new concrete  slab was poured, roof trusses built and erected, along with strengthening of the existing walls.   

 This good work continued as part of UNTAET and UNMISET, the current phase of operations in East Timor.  Schools continue to be fitted out, and we have assisted in repairing the damaged airfield in Suai. We have  constructed facilities for Australian peacekeepers, which will transfer to the East Timor Defence Force and  community after we leave.   

 It is important to note that whenever the ADF’s engineers undertake this type of work—of rebuilding  communities—they seek the involvement of the local people, through the philosophy of creating partnership  with the people. This is achieved through direct contracting of work to local organisations and companies.    

 As much as possible, we work with members of the local defence force and community on all tasks. This  ensures the transfer of significant skills and contributes to enhancing the interoperability of our forces and  our relationship with local people. This is in addition to the priority role of the Australian Defence Force— security and defence. 

 Solomon Islands 

 Our good work continues in the region, with Australian troops currently deployed to the Solomon Islands.   

 Differing to East Timor, this is an AFP-led operation. The nature of the Australian assistance to the Solomon  Islands is focussed on law and order and governance. Compared to East Timor, the Solomon Islands were  fortunate that the lawlessness and conflict that occurred there did not result in the destruction or denial of  the limited community resources available to the local people.   

 The engineering effort we have deployed to the Solomon Islands is primarily to provide for the deployed  force and is focussed on the survivability and sustainability of the force. This includes accommodation and  hardstand construction, sanitation, water supply, drainage and some hardening of facilities to provide for  force protection.   The engineer component established a force health facility ashore, utilising a combination of relocatable  buildings, specialised military shelters and local construction.   

 Engineers were instrumental in the destruction of the almost 4000 weapons that have been surrendered to  the Mission to date. They have also been heavily involved in searches for suspected illegal arms and  explosives.   

 The ADF has provided some limited engineering support to the securing of the Rove Prison so that it can be  utilised as an interim facility while a new prison is completed through an AUSAID funded civilian contract.   

 We are supporting the development of police posts and medical aid posts in the provincial areas of the  Solomon Islands. The establishment of the police posts is an essential component of the development of  law and order through a police presence. The primary focus of this work is to provide the design and  supervision of the works that will be carried out by civilian contractors.   

 The contribution that ADF engineers have made in the Solomon Islands stretches back to over half a  century ago. Following World War II, an enormous quantity of stockpiled ammunition remained. Due to the  scale of the combat operations that occurred in the Solomon Islands, unexploded ammunition is routinely  uncovered in all manner of places. The ADF has been involved in the destruction of unexploded ordinance  and in training Solomon Islanders in the correct techniques for the disposal of munitions.   

 Nearby in Bougainville, where we recently concluded a successful peacekeeping operation, our engineers  upgraded the Kieta airfield to international standards and also developed a sewerage treatment plant. 

 Afghanistan 

 Now to the other side of the world—Afghanistan.   

 Although limited in recent years in aiding the redevelopment of Afghanistan, the ADF was previously  involved in the country through our contribution to the United Nations Mine Clearance Training Team  (UNMCTT).   

 This mission was a humanitarian activity. It was mounted under the auspices of the Geneva-based UN  Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Aid to Afghanistan (UNOCHA) under the codename of  Operation Salaam. Salaam is a salutation meaning peace.   The mission was initiated in anticipation of the scheduled withdrawal of Soviet forces from Afghanistan in  December 1989 and the expected return of several million refugees to Afghanistan from neighbouring  Pakistan and Iran.    

 The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 and the subsequent fighting with the Afghan Mujahideen had left  several million mines and unexploded ordnance littering the country. This hazard was a significant barrier to  the repatriation of the millions of displaced Afghan people and denied them access to their basic necessities  such as farm and grazing land, shelter and water. It also prevented the rehabilitation of essential  infrastructure including roads, bridges, and irrigation systems.    

 In July 1989, the Australian Defence Force began providing engineers and later infantry assault pioneers to  the mine clearance training team.     

 The team originally consisted of contingents from nine countries. In addition to Australia, these were New  Zealand, Turkey, France, Norway, Canada, Italy, the United Kingdom and the US. Throughout the mission  the Australian contingents were based in Peshawar in the north-west frontier province of Pakistan.  Peshawar is the city at the eastern end of the famous Khyber Pass—one of the few passageways between  Afghanistan and the Indian plains.  The original purpose of the team was to train Pakistan-based Afghan refugees in mine and unexploded  ordnance recognition and basic mine and unexploded ordnance clearance techniques.   

 The intention was for these trained people to voluntarily repatriate to Afghanistan and undertake mine and  unexploded ordnance clearance on their own initiative. The expectation that the Afghan refugees would  return to Afghanistan en masse, however, proved false with the continuation of the fighting between the  Soviet backed Afghan regime and the factious Afghan Mujahideen.     

 The pressures and demands of the 1990 Gulf War saw the contingents from all the countries other than  Australia and New Zealand withdraw from the mission.     

 By 1991 security conditions in Afghanistan were sufficiently stable for UNOCHA to commence an organised  de-mining effort. This was achieved with the formation of a number of non-government organisations whose  actions were coordinated through regional de-mining offices in Peshawar, Quetta and later Kabul—the  Afghan capital.    

 With the formal establishment of this de-mining program, Australia extended its tour-of-duty to six months.  We also began providing additional officers on 12-month long tours as Technical Advisors with the various  agencies involved in the program.     

 With this program, the training for the Afghans was broadened to include the surveying, planning, conduct  and supervision of mine clearance activities. One of the non-government organisations also specialised in  providing mine and unexploded ordnance awareness training to refugees.    

 The long-term aim for the de-mining program was for it to be run by Afghans with no requirement for  expatriate military assistance. Consequently, Afghans also became de-mining instructors in their own right  and progressively took over the conduct of training.     

 From June 1991 the Australian Government authorised ADF personnel to conduct cross border missions  into Afghanistan and monitor de-mining operations.    

 By early 1992, only the Australian contingent remained in support of the Program.    

 A year later, the de-mining program had achieved a high degree of momentum and self-sufficiency. It was  assessed that the support from military contingents was no longer necessary—although several expatriate  civilians continued to hold some appointments. Consequently, the last Australian contingent was withdrawn  in June 1993.     

 The program continues to be successful over ten years later and at present there are around 7000 Afghans  employed in the successor mine clearance organisations. The current estimate is that about 850 square  kilometres is severely affected by landmines and unexploded ordinance with 150-300 Afghan civilians killed  or injured by the weapons each month.     

 The sustained ADF contribution to the UNMCTT forged the methods for organised de-mining that were  subsequently repeated in UN missions in Cambodia and Mozambique. ADF troops, including engineers,  were also deployed to support these missions.    

 Last month, we deployed a lone engineering officer to Afghanistan for employment in the coalition Mine  Action Co-ordination Centre. While the officer’s efforts will be focussed toward the mine threat facing the  deployed coalition forces, it is expected that there will be some flow-on benefit for the local population.   I want to just very briefly touch on Iraq.   

 Although the ADF is not undertaking any reconstruction projects in Iraq, the Australian Government is  providing $120 million in humanitarian assistance. Australia is providing $45 million for priority  reconstruction projects, in particular Australia has allocated $40 million toward revitalisation of Iraq's  agricultural sector.    

 Australia also has a number of personnel working in key positions in a number of Coalition Provisional  Authority agencies, supporting the establishment of reconstruction and rehabilitation projects for Iraq. The  ADF is also helping with the establishment of a new Iraqi Defence Force, and the Government is  considering further options for support to the development of the Iraqi Defence Force, although no formal  decision on the type of support to be provided has yet been made. 

 AACAP 

 Although not a result of war, I want to highlight the great work the Australian Defence Force is doing as part  of the ATSIC Army Community Assistance Program or AACAP. 

 

 It is probably best known for the work that was done on Palm Island—thanks to publicity generated through  Russell Crowe.   

 The program is not only rebuilding communities through the provision of bricks and mortar, it is also helping  to rebuild the pride and self-esteem of Aboriginal communities.   

 It involves our troops spending several months in remote Indigenous communities rebuilding infrastructure  and passing on skills to locals.   

 The Palm Island Project, undertaken over a five-month period, saw over eight million dollars invested into  the community. This investment included the building of seven houses, the construction of two new roads,  and the development of the foreshore for the kids and families.   

 It is one of those good news stories from which everyone benefits. 

 Conclusion 

 So that’s a snapshot view of engineers in the Australian military and the great work they are doing.   

 We rely on engineers in the ADF. They create order after the chaos of conflict. And they help ensure that  the peace is better than the war.   

 The Australian Defence Force is first and foremost a warfighting organisation.   

 But we also have a proud tradition in helping communities rebuild post-conflict.   

 Whether it’s helping fix broken sewerage pipes, building education centres for kids, or undertaking de-mining training, the engineers of the Australian Defence Force are proud of what they do. Likewise, I am  proud of what they do.   

 I mentioned before that a saying of ADF engineers is first in, last out. Another one is never enough  engineers.   

 So thank you, engineers—whether military or civilian. 

 Societies are built upon your efforts. 

 --ends--   

