---
title: "Congratulations to Young Australian of the Year finalists."
date: "2003-11-26"
creators:
  - "Anthony, Larry"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Youth"
  - "Australian of the Year"
  - "Awards"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211261707
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AC0B6%22
---

 

 Hon. Larry Anthony, MP Minister for Children and Youth Affairs

 Wednesday, 26 November 2003 Congratulations to Young Australian of the Year finalists

 Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Larry Anthony, today congratulated the 31 State and  Territory finalists of the 2004 Young Australian of the Year Award.

 "The Young Australian of the Year Award recognises and celebrates the achievements of  Australia's young people, who through initiative, hard work and persistence achieve  extraordinary results.

 "With a focus on leadership, vision and entrepreneurial flair, the award fosters the pursuit of  excellence. It also highlights to all Australians the success our young people have achieved  through their determination, talent and contribution to their community.

 "This year's nominations increased by more than 200 per cent. The finalist list comprises  voluntary missionaries, young entrepreneurs, scientists, environmentalists, radio broadcasters,  school principals and previous members of the National Indigenous Youth Leadership Group.

 "Previous winners of the award have come from sporting fields, the corporate sector and  science labs and include inspirational people like Lleyton Hewitt, Scott Hocknull,  James Fitzpatrick, Ian Thorpe and Poppy King.

 "By acknowledging young Australians who are excelling, other young people are motivated to  achieve their goals and make their mark on Australia's future," Mr Anthony said.

 The Young Australian of the Year, along with the Senior and Australian of the Year, will be  announced on 25 January 2004 at a gala ceremony.

 Information on the finalists and state events are available from the National Australia Day  Council, phone 02 6273 8666, the awards website www.australianoftheyear.gov.au, or Horizon  Public Relations phone 02 9552 2744.

 YOUNG AUSTRALIAN OF THE YEAR FINALISTS

 New South Wales

 Sarah Dunbar Sarah Dunbar has a passionate intolerance of poverty and injustice, with a mature and tireless  commitment to get involved and become part of the solution. Sarah has been involved in  numerous community service activities, including teaching Sunday School and Youth Groups at  St. Stephens Anglican Church Belrose, and has been a World Vision voluntary worker since  1994. Recently Sarah was a voluntary missionary in Timisoara in Romania where she among  many things, worked with disabled children in an orphanage, ran holiday activity programs and  led adult English classes. Her dedication and commitment to increase the quality of life to those  who need it, both in Australia and abroad, is truly inspiring.

 Vanessa Hughes Vanessa Hughes is not only a dedicated scientific researcher and educator but she is also a  mentor to many younger scientists. She gives up her free time to help tutor students in  biochemistry, haematology and anatomical pathology. Vanessa is currently conducting a  research project that was suggested in 1937 which no one thought was possible. She is finding  a method for the ageing of bruises. Through this, Vanessa aims to assist victims of child abuse.  She has also been involved in many community initiatives including Shine - a program that  encourages young teenage women to reach their full potential by goal setting, evaluating life's  challenges, and developing a sense of responsibility for their actions. Vanessa is a caring friend  to many and a mentor and role model to countless young Australians.

 William Scully-Power An exceptional young entrepreneur, William Scully-Power is currently a director of three  companies, Model Search Australia Pty Ltd, Conceptlabs Pty Ltd, and Marketing FX Pty Ltd.  Founding his first business enterprise at the age of just 17, he has won a host of technology  and business awards, including the 2001 Commonwealth Bank Young Hero Award. Earlier this  year William was selected to sit on the Leadership and Enterprise Development Group of the  Australian Federal Government's National Youth Roundtable. A talented entrepreneur, William  is an excellent and active ambassador for other young Australians. 

 Nikki Williams Diagnosed with leukaemia at the age of 12, Nikki Williams courageously overcame this life-threatening disease. Nikki, now 17, works hard to drive support for organisations such as  Westmead Children's Hospital, Cancer Research Foundations, and the Red Cross which she  believes have given her so much. Nikki uses any occasion to fundraise and create awareness  for cancer. Nikki is an excellent ambassador for our youth. Her courage, compassion and  enthusiasm for life certainly inspires people young and old to take advantage of all opportunities  life presents. 

 Victoria 

 Matthew Albert Matthew Albert is one of the two founding coordinators of the Sudanese Australian Integrated  Learning (SAIL) Program. SAIL is a not-for-profit volunteer-run organisation which provides free  community services to the Sudanese refugee community living in Melbourne's western suburbs.  The program provides services to over 220 Sudanese children and adults, and has over 100  volunteers. He has also founded the Sudanese Online Research Association, which is a centre  for the collection of research about the Sudanese diaspora. Matthew has demonstrated  outstanding character and qualities of the utmost dedication, integrity and honesty. At a young  age, he has an amazing passion to contribute to, and improve, our multicultural community.

 Hugh Evans Since experiencing the squalor of the Manila slums in the Phillippines during a study tour as a  14-year-old boy, Hugh Evans has dedicated his life to helping the poorest people in the world.  He has since established Australia's first youth-run aid organisation, the Oak Tree Foundation,  whose mission is  to empower developing communities through education. In 2002, Hugh spent seven months  working in the impoverished Embo Valley in South Africa, during which time he led the  construction of a sports field and a community library. He also worked in an AIDS orphanage,  where he established a new child sponsorship program through World Vision. Hugh's sincerity,  humility and genuineness are what have inspired so many people, young and old, to work  towards helping those less fortunate.

 James Lee For three and half years, James Lee has been dedicated to assisting and educating refugees  and immigrants and leading large groups of young people in various community service  activities. At the age of eighteen, James set up a voluntary tutoring service which today boasts  more than 45 tutors and assists scores of people in suburban Melbourne. Not only the students  benefit from the program, but their families too. James works hard to ensure the program is  effective and he recently visited the Phillipines to research alternative mentoring programs. His  commitment and self sacrifice is remarkable and truly inspirational for all Australians.

 Sosina Wogahenu A young Ethiopian refugee who became a citizen of Australia in 2002, Sosina Wogahenu was  the first graduate of the National Institute of Circus Arts to be offered a permanent position with  Circus Oz. Even more recently, Sosina was the first Australian performer to be invited to the  international Circus Princess Award in Sweden where she captivated the audience while  representing her new nation. Although her schedule is hectic, Sosina manages to find time to  assist new refugees. In conjunction with Circus Oz, she has helped raise money for refugee  groups throughout Australia. From impoverished beginnings, Sosina believes that life is what  you make of it, and is a true inspiration. 

 Queensland 

 Katherine Allen In 2003 Katherine Allen in conjunction with Telstra undertook a major thesis studying mobile  phone networks. The work undertaken in the project was critical in ensuring that networks can  operate efficiently in the face of increasing phone numbers and applications. This is important  as mobile phone use continues to grow rapidly in Australia. Katherine has recently become a  spokesperson for women in engineering and earlier this year was awarded as the 2003  Australian Broadcasting Corporation's Women in Engineering Scholarship. In addition to her  hectic work schedule, Katherine volunteers her time to the Salvation Army, Brisbane Private  Hospital and Mercy Private Hospital. An inspiration to women of all ages, Katherine has shown  that determination and persistence will enable you to succeed even at the age of 21.

 Paul Booker Paul has demonstrated leadership from the beginning in his role as a Recreational Officer at the  Pine Rivers Community Care Unit. Mental Health Service is an area often filled with despair and  hopelessness but Paul has always showed optimism and understanding. He has been  instrumental to the organisation in obtaining valuable funding for the residents' group and  setting up vocational programs. Paul's commitment to helping those less fortunate than himself  goes beyond his work. As the Youth Leader at Christian City Church Bayside, Paul champions  the youth initiatives. This includes an outreach service for youth experiencing substance and  alcohol abuse, and presenting drug free events. Australia is lucky to have young leader like  Paul Booker.

 Alice Chang  A tireless advocate of positive images of young people, Alice Chang is an exceptional young  Australian. Currently studying medicine in Townsville, she contributes to the community and the  youth of both Queensland and Australia in various forums. Alice has been a participant in the  National Youth Roundtable 2003, member of the State Advisory Council and Queensland  Community Jobs Board, whilst also volunteering for several health-based organisations. Alice,  aged 22 years old, is the youngest person to be appointed to the Queensland Heritage Council  and was recently named 2003 Young Queenslander of the Year. A quiet achiever, humble yet  confident in her community involvement, Alice is an inspired young Australian who leads by  example.

 Marayke Jonkers Paralympian Marayke Jonkers is a 21 year old full time university student who aims to win gold  in swimming for Australia at the Athens 2004 Paralympic Games. Marayke has used a  wheelchair since becoming a paraplegic in a motor vehicle accident as a small child. She has  never believed however that her disability was a barrier to success. Currently she is ranked  second in the world for 50m breaststroke and 150 metres individual medley and holds 56  Australian age records in her classification. Marayke seeks to lead by example in raising  awareness about spinal injuries. She coordinates swimming activities for children with a  disability and gives presentations at primary and high schools. Marayke is an outstanding role  model who greets every challenge in life with a positive attitude and a smile. 

 South Australia 

 Amy Beal Amy Beal is an active young environmentalist seeking to raise community awareness of  important environmental issues. In 2001 Amy was awarded the National Future Leaders of the  Environment Award and announced as one of the four Australian winners. As a member of the  Youth Environment Council, Amy championed the Youth for Environmental Action Conference  in August 2003. As part of her pursuit to educate young Australians about the importance of the  environment, Amy is organising a conference for two hundred South Australian Primary School  children on the Murray River's plight in Term 2 2004.  Amy is determined to make a difference. To assist her in this goal she is currently studying  Environmental Management at Flinders University.

 Matthew Hutchinson Educated at home by his parents, Matthew commenced his Bachelor of Medicine/Surgery at the  University of Adelaide Medical School five years ago. Since then Matthew has been associated  with the Adelaide Medical Students' Society; President in 2002 and currently the Vice-President. Matthew has always been committed to helping those in need in Australia and  overseas. Earlier this year Matthew visited India with Steve Waugh where he distributed  medical aid to children affected by Leprosy. With the support of the Australian Medical Student  Association Matthew is now advocating for a national program for medical students to travel to  the Third World as part of their training. He is also passionate about helping children in  rural/remote areas of Australia and ensuring more doctors take up work in country areas.  Matthew is an outstanding ambassador for the youth of Australia and an  inspiration for all Australians who meet him. 

 Jennifer Schulz Jennifer Schulz is a community minded young Australian. Since a young age Jennifer has been  committed to working with the local service communities including St Johns, UNICEF, Austism  Association and many sporting clubs. For 12 years Jennifer has dedicated her time to St Johns  Ambulance. She is currently training to become a corporal with St Johns and training in  emergency driving of the first aid units. Jennifer is a gold award recipient in the prestigious  Duke of Edinburgh Award scheme. It is the highest award in the scheme, which encourages  and motivates young people to become involved in voluntary self-development activities. Along  with all Jennifer's community participation, she works hard to raise awareness about people  with disabilities by helping the community to learn about all people including those with a  disability. She is currently studying a Bachelor of Applied Science (Special Education) at the  Flinders University of South Australia to assist her with this goal. 

 Nicole Vasilakis

 Nicole Vasilakis, commenced violin studies at the Elder Conservatorium, Adelaide at the age of  12. Over the next four years she won every major state competition including the Elder  Conservatorium Concerto Competition. At 16 Nicole moved to Sydney to pursue her dream of  becoming a concert violinist. Today she is in a final year of Bachelor of Music in Performance  and her academic results are outstanding. Nicole is now fulfilling her dream and this year has  performed with both the Sydney and Melbourne Symphony Orchestras, including the 30th  Anniversary of the Sydney Opera House in October 2003. As the Artist-in-Residence at St  Andrews Cathedral School she is a mentor and inspiration for young students. Suffering  dyslexia, Nicole shows Australians that you can achieve anything with determination and spirit. 

 Western Australia

 Alicia Curtis Since the age of 12 Alicia Curtis has been contributing to the community. Co-founder of 'Kids  Helping Kids' environment conferences and an active member of the National Youth Round  Table and State Youth Environment Council, Alicia is a tireless worker. She strives to promote  young people to be not only the leaders of the future, but the leaders for today. Alicia has also  established her own business 'Speaking of Leadership'. Through this she provides motivational  speeches and workshops, student council training and tailored leadership workshops to suit the  needs of the group. Alicia believes in the beauty of dreams and wants more than anything to  see young people from all walks of life succeed in their endeavours.

 David Faulkner At just 24 years of age David Faulkner is the youngest school principal in Western Australia.  The school is Marvel Loch Primary School, located 370kms east of Perth. Since becoming  principal he has been working with his staff and students to create programs that promote life  long learning and has become heavily involved with promoting the school and community.  Earlier this year David received the Western Australian Young Leader of the Year Award and  was announced as the Western Australian Young Person of the Year. On top of his schooling  commitments David also leads youth groups, runs youth camps and represents young people in  schools and communities. He is passionate about rural Australia and has become a community  leader in rural issues. With an ability to engage, entertain, motivate and inspire the people  around him, David's passion for education and his desire to make a real difference to the young  people of Australia, make him an exceptional Australian.

 Rafael Niesten With Western Australia the only state without a youth radio broadcaster, Rafael Niesten set  about establishing a youth radio station and applied to the Australian Broadcasting Authority for  a license. Rafael's vision was for a station that would inform, empower and entertain young people, and  provide a forum to explore and express opinions and ideas. After many months of fundraising  and working up to seventeen hour days, on July 2, 2002 Groove 101.7 FM was born. Through  Groove FM up to 330  volunteers have had a chance to experience and learn about broadcasting. His commitment,  creativity and hard work has made his dream come true and has given Western Australia's  youth a voice in the media.

 Sandra Spadanuda Sandra Spadanuda's commitment to community service, charity and indigenous and ethnic  services is outstanding. At present she is volunteering between 25-30 hours of her time each  week to community based activities including working with at-risk youth, working full-time as a 

 youth and family support worker with Mission Australia's ON-TRACK program, tutoring young  indigenous people in their homes and assisting them with their schooling. In addition Sandra  voluntarily coordinates the Western Australia branch of the National Youth Initiative and sits on  eight local committees. At just twenty years old, Sandra's achievements are outstanding. Her  commitment and efforts to help those in need is inspirational

 Tasmania 

 Roger Chung Neuroscientist Roger Chung, a junior research fellow within the University of Tasmania's School  of Medicine's Biochemistry Department, led a team of scientists that identified the ability of a  family of naturally occurring proteins, named metallothioneins, to influence brain healing  following injury. His team has published its findings in the respected Journal of Neuroscience to  acclaim from international medical researchers. The breakthrough could lead the world in  treating strokes, Alzheimer's disease and other brain related injuries. The research suggests  that it might be possible in the future to increase the amount of metallothionein produced by the  brain following trauma as a means of promoting recovery. Such a treatment would be highly  beneficial, since it would involve the patient's own body aiding in its recovery. Hailed by  international medical researchers, Roger is an outstanding young Australian.

 Kirsty Dunphey At age 21 Kirsty Dunphey launched her own real estate business, becoming the youngest  licensed real estate manager and owner in Tasmania. In just 18 months M&M Real Estate had  sold close to $20 million in real estate and the company continues to flourish in the Launceston  property market. Since its inception Kirsty has broken records and implemented innovative and  exciting marketing ideas. She was named the National Telstra Young Business Woman of the  Year for 2002. She is currently undertaking a major charity project - the St Giles House of  Dreams. This fundraising project involves the purchase, renovation and auction of a home. Her  business acumen, drive and willingness to assist other young Australians makes Kirsty stand  out from the crowd. She is a role model for all young Australians.

 Ling San Lau Ling San Lau, aged 17, has an enduring love for the environment and its conservation. She is  committed to conservation having researched the environmental factors affecting tadpoles and  the long-term water quality of a local waterway. She is currently studying the innate immune  response of Tasmanian Platypuses at the University of Tasmania. The parasitic fungus of her  study is Mucor Amphibiorum believed to have been introduced from Queensland in the early  1980's. She has received seven national science awards including two prestigious Eureka  Prizes. Her studies, projects, papers and subsequent awards showcase Ling's exceptional  qualities, and determination to succeed. Ling is modest, but her natural enthusiasm and sense  of humour is inspirational to all her peers.

 Kate Talbot  At 23 one of Kate Talbot's career objectives is to 'make a valuable contribution to the lives of  others'. Her commitment and contribution to humanitarian, community service and charities in  Tasmania, nationally and internationally is outstanding. Beginning volunteer work in Year 9,  Kate is currently Deputy Chairperson of the National Youth and Education Services Advisory  Committee of the Australian Red Cross and she has worked as an Australian Youth  Ambassador in Cambodia. Kate is a trained nurse but has taken nursing beyond the individual  patient to care for whole communities. She combines journalism skills with her nursing skills in  broad range of voluntary activities including Amnesty International, National Youth Week, 

 Australian Forum of Youth Organisations, International Law Community Speakers Program, St  Vincent de Paul Society and Talire/Hazelwood Special School. Kate's passionate outgoing  nature makes her a true leader and an inspiration to all those who come in to contact with her.

 Australian Capital Territory 

 Julia Fetherston Year 11 Canberra Girls' Grammar student Julia Fetherston was named the best individual  speaker at this year's World Schools Debating Championships. She was also part of the  winning Australian team in Lima, Peru. Julia is a high achiever in both public speaking and  writing. In 2001 Julia was awarded the Simpson Prize for the Australia Capital Territory for her  essay about her trip to Gallipoli and its relevance to contemporary Australian life. She is also a  student leader, recently establishing a youth working group with Environment Australia. This  group brings young people's ideas and opinions on environmental education to the National  Council for Environmental Education. Julia is an excellent young Ambassador.

 Sara Vassallo Sara Vassallo is a young woman who is actively engaged in many aspects of her community.  She is a leader in the Guiding and Scout movements. In 2002 Sara was presented with the  Queen's Guide Award, the highest achievement as a Girl Guide. She is now a Guide leader and  is starting a new Joey Mob for the Aranda Scout Group and is establishing the Olave Program  in the Australian Capital Territory. This program offers young people the opportunity to further  their personal development through actively engaging in training and activities in a peer  environment. Sara is involved in many community fundraisers including the St Vincent de Paul  Society, 40 Hour Famine, Amnesty International and Daffodil Day. She is also a participant in  her church, public speaking and the arts. Sara is a motivated young Australian who is  committed to making Australia a great place to live.

 Brad Warren Brad Warren is an astronomy Ph.D. student studying gas-rich dwarf galaxies. Brad is based in  Canberra at the Research School of Astronomy and Astrophysics, located at Mount Stromlo  Observatory, part of the Australian National University. Brad led a recent significant study which  changed the way we understand how galaxies are formed in the universe. The breakthrough  discovered that galaxies consist mostly of gas, rather than stars. Most galaxies transform gas  into stars but the galaxies he has discovered have held back, and it is unclear why. Continuing  research into this link will provide valuable insights into how and why galaxies such as our own  are formed. Brad presented his research at the 25th triennial congress of the Astronomical  Union in July 2003 and received international accolades. He is continuing his studies despite  the devastating effects of the January bushfire on the observatory at Mount Stromlo.

 Northern Territory 

 Sarah Chunys Sarah Chunys is committed to building a stronger and more supportive environment in Alice  Springs with focus on the issue of mental health and young people. She has enthusiastically  campaigned for community organisations, schools, parents and families to be more aware of  mental health issues. During Mental Health Week in 2002, Sarah organised and hosted the first  mental health community forum ever in Alice Springs. She has committed many hours  volunteering, including working with the Mental Health Team, Life Promotions Unit and Alice  Springs Youth Accommodation and Support Services. The current Young Territorian of the  Year, she has also published a number of newspaper articles and written a play, which will be  performed during National Youth Week. Sarah is committed to informing and assisting people 

 from all walks of life. She is a highly motivated person and is truly an inspiration.

 Damien Moriarty Damien Moriarty has demonstrated a continued quest for excellence in the areas of business,  academia and community service. Following his extensive involvement in various forums,  Damien was recently elected President of the Ship for World Youth Australia, a unique  international cultural exchange program organised by the Government of Japan. It is the most  prestigious program of its kind bringing together over 250 youth from around the world to build  international cooperation and understanding. Remaining enthusiastic and positive whilst  working full time, studying full time, involving himself in the forefront of Youth Enterprise and  being so committed to community service is an extraordinary effort. Damien is an outstanding,  hard working and highly motivated young Australian.

 John Rawnsley Through his studies and active involvement in indigenous affairs, John Rawnsley is always  looking for ways to empower young indigenous people. This year John has become a member  of the National Indigenous Youth Leadership Group and was a recipient of the Freightlink  Scholarship. In 1999, John successfully completed the Northern Territory University's  Indigenous Pre-Law Program and enrolled in the Bachelor of Laws course. He was heavily  involved in student politics at NTU and was elected the Faculty of Aboriginal and Torres Strait  Islander Studies representative on the student union. Continuing his law studies at the  Australian National University in Canberra, John is now working towards establishing a national  group to represent indigenous law students across the country. His passion and persistence,  striving to achieve, make John an inspiration to all.

 Maria Scaturchio Maria Scaturchio is employed as the Program Development Officer for the Duke of Edinburgh's  Award. Her role is to encourage young people to take on new challenges and to get involved in  their community, to learn new skills and be an active citizen. This job was tailor made for Maria,  as this is what she has been doing her whole life. Maria has been involved in the Chief  Minister's Round Table of Young Territorians and this year was runner up as the Darwin Youth  Citizen of the Year. She also competes at the national level in water polo and royal lifesaving.  Maria is dynamic and full of youthful enthusiasm. She has drive and determination, along with  maturity and excellent sense of social responsibility. 

 For further information or feedback on this site email us at minister.anthony@facs.gov.au

