---
title: "Dept of Immigration forces hospital doctors and nurses to lie about refugee."
date: "2003-08-05"
creators:
  - "Lees, Meg"
source: "Office of LEES, SEN MEG"
subjects:
  - "Dept of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs"
  - "Adelaide"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Hospitals"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211256278
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YN1A6%22
---

  Senator Meg Lees  Australian Progressive Alliance  Senator for South Australia  5 August 2003 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Dept of Immigration forces hospital  doctors and nurses to lie about refugee    

 Against their will, doctors and nurses in Adelaide’s hospitals have been forced to collaborate with  the Department of Immigration in refusing access to a hospitalised refugee, according to Senator  for South Australia, Meg Lees. 

 

 Senator Lees said she was shocked to learn yesterday about the lies and stand-over tactics  employed last week when a group of women tried to visit Roqia Bakhtiyari in the Women's and  Children's hospital in Adelaide.    

 “At first, the women were told by hospital staff that Roqia Bakhtiyari had been airlifted from  Baxter Detention Centre to the hospital because she was in labour. But by the time the women  arrived to visit her they were told different stories,” said Senator Lees.   

 

 “One staff member agreed to allow them in to see Roqia but then security guards intervened and  the women were escorted away. Another staff member on a different floor of the hospital  was  ordered by the hospital’s PR section to tell the women that no such person existed and that the  flowers that had been sent to Roqia were being returned to those who sent them.    

 “It is simply outrageous that our hospital staff should be forced to be party to the Department of  Immigration’s inhumane rules and regulations,” said Senator Lees.    

 “It is bad enough that Australia continues to lock up innocent women and children. To deny Roqia  the support of visitors when she was alone and in labour is simply un-Australian. She can receive  visitors and phone calls in detention, so why not in hospital? 

 

 “Since when did the Department of Immigration run our hospitals? Since when did instructions  issued by a federal department take precedence over the physical and emotional well-being of a  patient in one of our hospitals? This is not the behaviour of the Australia I know.   

 “The whole situation raises serious questions about who directs our medical professionals in this  country.  It is irresponsible and unfair to put Australia’s healthcare workers in such a situation.    

 “The Federal Minister must ensure that his Departmental officers never allow this sort of thing to  happen again,” Senator Lees concluded.    

 Media Requests: 08 8331 8111 or 0438 816 376  For more information visit the Baxter Watch website http://baxterwatch.net/ 

