---
title: "Challenges to sovereignty: migration laws for the 21st century. Paper presented at the 13th Commonwealth Law Conference, Melbourne, 13-17th April 2003"
date: "2003-04-13"
creators:
  - "Dauvergne, Catherine"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Immigration policy"
  - "Sovereignty"
  - "Illegal immigrants"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
  - "Legislation"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211559727
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MVG96%22
---

 Challenges to Sovereignty: Migration Laws for the 21st Century   

 Catherine Dauvergne*   

 

 In this paper, presented at the 13th Commonwealth Law Conference in  Melbourne, Sunday 13th - Thursday 17th April 2003, Catherine Dauvergne  looks at the causes of the ‘moral panic’ associated with refugees and illegal  immigrants   

 

 Stories of migration law phenomena are everywhere. Tracking news around the world  in the first few months of this year yielded more than one story per day, somewhere in  the world, involving legal talk about migration.  On February 23, 2003, for example,  the Guardian reported that women trafficked into Britain to work as sex slaves are to  be promised safe houses and medical care to encourage them to escape and testify  against their pimps;  The New York Times reported (yet again) on increased border  security preventing travel between adjacent towns on the US-Mexican border;  the  Boston Globe told of ships from Spain, France, Italy, Portugal and Britain patrolling  the Mediterranean to fight illegal migration.  In late January this year, the Times of  India, as well as various international press outlets reported on a dispute between  India and Bangladesh about a group of illegal migrants caught between the two states.    Contemporaneously, opposition parties in Botswana urged their president to take  immediate action against an “invasion” of illegal migrants from Zimbabwe;  police in  Moscow threatened deportation against those who did not possess recently introduced  “migration cards;”  the Greek government announced that it had regularized the status  of 650,000 illegal migrants;  and the ABC broadcast (yet again) programming critical  of Australia’s “Pacific Solution.”     

 That’s the news for only three days.  Migration has captured the attention of the  world’s press, and at each instance it is not only migration, but the intertwining of  migration and legal controls which attract attention.  Whether the story is of people  smuggling, trafficking for the sex trade, asylum seeking, border-crossing terror  suspects, or plans to attract sought after IT professionals, the law is involved.  At the  cusp of the 21st century, migration has become an international moral panic.  My  remarks today are directed to why this is so, and what the consequences are for the  present and the future of laws regulating migration.  At the centre of my explanation  is an understanding of how national sovereignty is challenged by contemporary  globalizing forces and of how sovereignty and the rule of law are intertwined.    I begin this story by explaining the relationship between national sovereignty and  migration laws over their reasonably brief history.  I then talk about three intersecting  phenomena which are emblematic of the relationship between migration law and  sovereignty at this point in time: refugee law, illegal migration, and the pursuit of the  best and the brightest.  Finally, I finish by speculating about how the challenges to  sovereignty presented by these phenomena lead to particular types of migration law  responses.  I consider what it might take to view these challenges differently, and how  doing so would contribute to different understandings of sovereignty, and of the  sovereignty and rule of law intertwining.     

 A  Migration  laws  and  national sovereignty 

  1

 Migration laws are a twentieth century invention.  Although it is certainly the case  that passports and border controls emerged at an earlier point in time,  it was not until  the beginning of the twentieth century that the world was firmly and fully divided up  by borders, and the requirement of passports and visas to cross them.  What this  means is that nation states and the system of international law and sovereignty that  developed along with them and helped sustain them, got along for a good three  centuries without migration law.  Despite this, these relatively new laws have been  strongly associated with sovereignty from the outset.  In countries that share the  British legal heritage, migration controls originated as an outgrowth of the Royal  Prerogative.  But this seems to be simply a way in which the power over migration  was expressed in this context.  In the United States, despite its revolutionary rejection  of the Royal Prerogative and all it stood for, and its mythological embrace of  immigration, sovereign power and migration control have also been closely linked.    Control over migration is interpreted, therefore, as being somehow intrinsic to what is  it to be a nation, to ‘stateness’ and to the core of membership and national identity.   Images which convey this run from the Statue of Liberty to crack SAS troops  boarding the MV Tampa.  In the law, the strong links between migration provisions  and the notion of sovereignty have lead to courts showing remarkable deference to  executives in areas of immigration rule making  and to an international definition of a  state which includes a defined population as an essential element.      The advent - or perhaps onslaught - of globalisation  challenges the  relationship between migration control and national sovereignty.  This occurs because  globalisation’s aggregated effects are often read as a challenge to sovereignty.   Two  features of our understanding of globalisation are important to migration law in its  contemporary setting: the challenge to nation states and the way migration laws are  narrated in stories of globalisation.    The first of these is highly contested.  Full legions of scholars have tackled the  question of whether the relevance and capacity of the nation state is being eroded by  globalisation.  The debate covers the spectrum from those who assert that the nation  state has already been eclipsed,   to those claiming it ‘is anything but irrelevant’  to  others who claim it is gaining in importance.   Sovereignty is at the core of this  debate: does the nation still have the capacity to act independently or are its actions  and policy choices determined by developments within the international economic  system?  Most analysts agree, regardless of their assessment of the health of the  nation state, that the nature of sovereignty is changing.  The territorially based  sovereignty that accompanied the rise of the nation state is being replaced by a  sovereignty with a different logic.  While there are many attempts at articulating this  new logic, for some it is can be straightforwardly equated with people.     This brings us directly to the second vital aspect of the globalisation story: how  migration laws fit in to its narrative.   That people are less mobile than money or ideas  is often a factor in assessments of the resilience of the nation state.  For Hirst and  Thompson the fact the people remain ‘nationalized’ is the crucial element ensuring  the continued importance of the nation.  Their analysis focuses on the elements of  migration law - passports, visas, employment authorizations - and  highlights the role  of the nation state as the legitimator of law.  Their conclusion that the nation remains  robust is grounded in the minutiae of migration law and in the ideology of the rule of  law.  All of this is vital to interpreting the strains of migration law at the present moment in  time: migration control has been strongly associated with national sovereignty,  sovereignty is under threat in a variety of ways, the strongest counters to those threats 

  2

 are elements of migration law.  The current era therefore re-emphasizes the pairing of  sovereignty and migration, and in the process brings questions of migration closer to  the core of rule of law ideology.   All of this is easier to see, of course, with some examples.  Refugee law, illegal  migration, and the pursuit of the best and the brightest provide contrasting  illustrations.   

 B Refugees, refugee law and sovereignty  The extent to which refugee law can be understood as a constraint on national  sovereignty is exaggerated by the fact that there are no other international legal  constraints in the migration law realm.  Nations are free to open or close their borders  as they choose, save to their own nationals, and they have concomitant independent  control over who those nationals will be.  Calls to reframe the Refugee Convention or  announcements of upcoming derogations reflect the importance of migration control  to perceptions of national sovereignty.  On consideration, it is apparent that the  Refugee Convention is a minimal constraint which has taken on mythic proportions in  the present political climate, precisely because of the re-interpretation of sovereignty  ushered in by globalising forces.   The Refugee Convention was drafted in the aftermath of World War II and  came into effect in 1954.   It was modified in 1967 to remove its explicit focus on the  events of the war in Europe.   For the most part, the Convention reads like a human  rights document, setting out standards of treatment for refugees by the states that host  them.  These aspects of the Convention receive scant attention, and the Refugee  Convention is not even listed by the UN in its compilation of major human rights  documents.   The aspects which do get attention are the refugee definition and the  article protecting refugees from refoulement.  Refugees are people fleeing persecution  on the basis of one of five grounds (race, religion, nationality, particular social group  or political opinion).   The refoulement provision translates into an effective right to  remain in a host state because signatory nations undertake not to return refugees to  those places where they face, in the words of the Australian High Court, a ‘real  chance’ of persecution.    Because the twinning of sovereignty and migration control  means that nations are not obligated to admit those who are not their nationals, there  is usually no where a refugee can go, and thus protection from refoulement translates  into permission to remain.   The relationship of the Refugee Convention and national sovereignty has  several twists.  But let’s begin at the beginning.  When a nation commits itself to the  Convention, it does so as a sovereign act.  It chooses, voluntarily, to respect its  provision, including where necessary the implication that some refugees will have  permission to remain.  This commitment does not redefine or challenge sovereignty as  traditionally understood and is a commonplace of international law.    A second reason why refugee law does not present a significant challenge to  sovereignty is that nations make efforts, legally and publicly and politically, to limit  the number of refugees who will be protected by this Convention.  These efforts are  evinced in the widespread use of target or quota numbers for domestic refugee  determinations, in safe third country policies, and in all variety of efforts to prevent  and deter refugees from entering in the first place.     A third reason why the Refugee Convention is not a major challenge to  sovereignty is that the non-refoulement provision - the only one which affects the  nation’s sovereign capacity to admit or expel anyone save nationals - constrains the  nations with the most sovereignty the least.  That is, of the approximately 20 million 

  3

 potential candidates for refugee status currently in the world, a comparatively small  number are in prosperous Western nations.   It is primarily in relation to these nations  that refugee status is regarded as a somehow unfair advantage, akin to immigration  status.  It is for these nations that the formally equal notion of national sovereignty is  most powerfully deployed in a globalised world.   For poor nations situated in places  where refugees flow over their borders, the notion of sovereignty is so severely  constrained by the North’s bankers and arrangers that the additional constraint the  Convention might represent is a trifle.    

 Finally, the Refugee Convention is a scant constraint on sovereignty because  prosperous nations like Australia and Canada which have been strongly associated  internationally with the Refugee Convention, have begun backing away from some of  its provisions without consequence.   Examples of this include Australia’s so called  ‘pacific’ solution under which people seeking to make claims were delivered by the  state to non-signatory nations; and Canada’s Immigration and Refugee Protection Act  which includes more stringent exclusions on the basis of criminality  than the  exclusions or reasons for expulsion in the Refugee Convention.   Each chips away at  the scope of what will be considered state practice for signatory nations, and there is  presently no forum for legal, as opposed to political, opposition to this to be heard.   The Refugee Convention also lacks the power to upset the migration law -  sovereignty pairing because it is fundamentally not about immigration.  I cannot fully  address this argument here,  but would note that the pernicious blurring of the line  between immigration control and refugee protection impedes humanitarian refugee  objectives.  I will talk further about this when considering illegal migration.   All these factors add up to a strong case that the Refugee Convention impinges  very little on sovereignty.  What accounts therefore for the role that refugee matters  play in the growing moral panic about migration?  The answer has two parts.  One, is  that in the absence of any other constraints on sovereignty in the migration realm,  potential protection against refoulement stands as a beacon to any destitute or  desperate individuals around the world who might seek to better their life chances.  In  an era of where global inequities are increasingly stark, desperation is on the increase.   The second is that as sovereignty is increasingly being defined as control over  population movements, the movement of refugees is much closer to the core of  nations’ understandings of their own essence and power than ever before.  With the  vast body of human rights norms now articulated and accepted internationally and  arguably shaping or even constraining the actions that nations may take, the  requirement not to refoule refugees still triggers a ‘red-flag-to-a-bull’ type response: it  strikes at the core.   Two recent cases require some attention in this regard because of their  engagement with refugees, sovereignty and the rule of law.  In early 2003, both the  Australian High Court and the English Court of Appeal have required the executive to  meet a higher standard of procedural fairness in issues concerning refugee claimants.    In each case, the respective Court set a standard which left the government with ways  of pursuing its objectives in accordance with the ruling, and thus the victories are  narrow ones.  However, both decisions focus on the fundamental procedural rights  associated with the rule of law (as bolstered a federal constitution and the European  Convention on Human Rights respectively) and represent a counter to the general  trend of leaving the executive a wide discretion in migration matters.  This could  signal a separation of refugee and migration matters or alternatively a potential new  willingness to reign in executive power in this area.  Either would be welcome.  Both 

  4

 decisions are important because the circumstances they address are situated at the  confluence of refugee law and illegal migration.    

 C  Illegal  migration  

 Illegal migration is an affront to sovereignty because it is evidence that a nation is not  in control of its borders.  Globalisation fuels illegal migration in several ways and the  present response is a worldwide ‘crack down’ on illegal migration.  Contempt for  illegal migration also affects refugee law and public and political discussions of  refugees.  These are the aspects of illegal migration that engage the migration law -  sovereignty intertwining.   An important threshold issue for talking about illegal migration is attempting  to define it.   Technically, anyone who is present in a nation state without either  nationality or authorization under law is an illegal migrant.  Most people around the  world who have no legal migration status have overstayed tourist, student or work  visas.  Still, the image conjured by the term ‘illegals’ is of people suffocating in the  backs of lorries, of unseaworthy vessels in the Adriatic, Mediterranean or Timor seas,  of those from the South attempting to evade capture along the US-Mexico border.   The term ‘illegal’ has escaped its legal, and even grammatical, moorings and now  stands alone as a noun.  It does not conjure British backpackers overstaying on  Australia’s Gold Coast, or Kiwi’s working in London’s pubs.  It conjures sweatshops  and sexshops, poverty, and race.  The face of the imaginary illegal is poor and brown  and destitute.  This imagery works against careful attempts to define illegal migrants  as those who transgress migration laws, it complicates attempts to respond  appropriately to the phenomenon and to understand how and why it challenges  sovereignty.   It is difficult to be certain, of course, that illegal migration is on the increase.   In Australia one can observe that since mid-1999 the number of unauthorized boat  arrivals (approximately 9,500) has exceeded those of the previous decade  (approximately 4,000).   While these numbers represent a small fraction of the total  number of migration law transgressors in Australia (an estimated at 60,000  overstayers at the end of June 2002),  this is the number which captures public  attention.  These are the arrivals which threaten the nation by their very existence; that  the army and navy are deployed to meet;  that the government has reframed  Australian sovereignty to thwart.   The national panic triggered in Australia by the  9,500 who have arrived since 1999 is a microcosm of the international politics of  illegal migration.   It is a very ‘micro’ cosm indeed.  Worldwide, the number of ‘illegals’ of any  sort might plausibly be estimated as at least 20 million.  In the United States,  estimates of the size of the illegal population range from 5 million to 15 million.   The  International Organization for Migration estimated the number of unauthorized  migrants in Europe at 3 million in 1998.  In the 1994 one estimate suggested there  were 500,000 illegal migrants in the Philippines.  Reports of the size of the illegal  population of Nigeria have ranged from 300,000 to 2.5 million over the past two  decades.   The best available information suggests that these numbers are on the  increase, although not each year in each region.   What is certain, is that concern about illegal migration is increasing even more  rapidly than the phenomenon itself.  Illegal migration feeds on the communication  and transportation technologies of globalisation.  People smuggling and human  trafficking operations which are part of illegal migration use these technologies to, for  example, present people in China’s Fujian province or in a Pakistani refugee camp, 

  5

 with destination options.  ‘Delivering’ them to the borders of the United States,  Australia or Fortress Europe.   In response to the perceived or real growth of illegal migration, and to the  evident increase in smuggling and trafficking that is intertwined with it, the nations of  the prosperous world are cracking down.  In 1996 the United States introduced its  Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act focusing on measures  such as entry and exit controls, document fraud, people smuggling, and a ratcheting  up of employers sanctions for those who employ extra legal workers.  The United  States has also poured millions of dollars into ‘Operation Gatekeeper’ to bolster  security along its border with Mexico.  The 1999 British Immigration and Asylum Act  targeted unfounded asylum applications, fast tracking ‘out’ of the asylum system but  not into it, reducing rights for asylum seekers and new identity controls.  More  recently, it has stringently curtailed the provision of welfare state benefits for asylum  seekers.  Germany changed the form of its constitutional right to seek asylum in 1993  and in 1998 it introduced new laws reducing benefits for asylum seekers.  France has  reduced asylum seeker benefits within the past decade.  Since 1999 Australia has  removed the possibility of permanent status from some refugees, has declared some of  its own territory to ‘beyond its borders’ for the purpose of asylum claims, and  introduced a comprehensive privative clause into its legislation.   Canada has  introduced a mandatory requirement that its refugee decision-makers take into  account whether a claimant has adequate documentation.   The EU is currently  working on developing a common policy on illegal immigration to give effect to the  Treaty of Amsterdam commitments in this direction.  Illegal migration - impossible  by definition at the outset of the twentieth century - is at the top of the legal agenda  for the twenty-first.     There are two things about this phenomenon which are essential to the story I  am relating of national sovereignty and migration law.  The first is that the legal crack  down needs to be understood in the context of the threats globalization presents to  nation states.  In the face of diminished sovereignty in economic policy and trade  realms, in military matters and corporate management, cracking down on illegal  migration represents a strong assertion of sovereign control.  This may be one reason  why EU cooperation has been slow to develop in this area, because the capacity to  crack down is related to the new last bastion of sovereignty, and is therefore the  hardest to surrender.   Nations assert their ‘nationness’ by cracking down on illegal  migration.   In addition, a rhetorical focus on ‘illegals’ shifts the boundaries of exclusion.   When a part of the population is acknowledged to be ‘illegal’, they are excluded and  erased from within.  Even when sovereignty at the border is breached, labeling people  within one’s territory ‘illegal’ imprints sovereignty.  It effectively shifts argument  about membership and entitlement.  When people are identified as ‘illegal’ it is hard  to argue their membership claim on the basis of their contribution to the economy or  their long term residence.  These contributions are instead counted as evidence of  their transgression.  Sovereignty in this picture is again seen to be about people rather  than territory, as the label ‘illegal’ allows us to shift the US-THEM line from the  border of the nation to within the nation, wherever it is required.     The second aspect of the crack down on illegal migration to consider is its  relationship with refugee law and refugees.  The Refugee Convention provides no  right to enter for those who seek to claim refugee status.  This means that some people  seeking refugee status enter illegally.   The Convention does require that refugees not  be penalized for illegal entry,  but this provision cannot protect refugees from the 

  6

 effects of a moral panic about illegal migration.  It cannot protect them from public  and political disapproval, nor from detention until their status is determined.  It cannot  protect them from the erroneous notion that there is a ‘queue’ to be joined to enter  prosperous nations and the accompanying fiction that ‘waiting it out’ in a refugee  camp, or worse, would eventually achieve a similar outcome while ensuring moral  superiority.  Refugees are caught up in the moral panic about illegal migration  because some refugee claimants enter illegally.  As well,  refugees and illegal  migrants occupy much of the same space in our collective imagination.  They are  envisioned as have nots, hoping to gain from our beneficence.  They are foreign,  other, desperate, brown-skinned.  They are not us.  Thus the current crack down on  illegal migration cracks down on refugees as well.   The problem for refugees is also heightened by the fact that cracking down on  illegal migration increases the incentive for those who are not refugees to attempt to  attain this status.  That is, there is an incentive to lie.  The incentive can be a  sophisticated one, organized with the support of smugglers  or agents.  It can also be  an unsophisticated one, encouraged by the knowledge that such status is available for  some who are vulnerable and desperate, and the certainty that one fits into those  categories.  The picture is further complicated by the fact that we know that refugees  tell lies - some because of their illegal entry, some because of their experiences with  governmental authorities, some because of the increasingly stringent requirements  (for example in regard to identity) which are brought in by crackdown measures.   Telling a lie does not mean one is not a refugee, but it is troubling and confusing to  refugee decision-makers.  In at atmosphere where the incentives to lie are being  increased for non-refugees, credibility is ever harder to establish and suspicion  abounds.      Increased international concern about illegal migration brings increased  problems for refugees.  These in turn contribute to the blurring of immigration and  refugee concerns which are themselves at the root of much of the present hostility  towards refugees.   

 D The Best and the Brightest  But there are some migrants who are sought after.  The worldwide stakes to recruit the  most highly qualified migrants are heating up.  The competition for the world’s best  and brightest also contains a challenge to sovereignty, and reflects a bounded view of  national aspirations.  This area of migration regulation is also poised to shift at the  outset of the twenty-first century.   Canada and Australia have been, with their points systems for identifying and  categorizing economic ‘skilled’ migrants, at the forefront of attempting to recruit  migrants to fuel the national economies.  Both countries have, in the past decade,  made economic category migrants the largest category of annual intake, moving  family migration to second place.  This trend is reflected, though not yet so  dramatically, in other popular destination nations.  Even the United States, where  annual migration intake is presently overwhelmingly weighted in favour of family  reunification migration,  is considering moves in this direction.  This in spite of the  fact that the size of the United States economy is such a significant draw that such  measures are arguably unnecessary.  Nations are increasingly casting themselves as  being in a competition for the world’s most desirable migrants.   This trend means that migration laws at this point in time reflect one of the  paradoxes at the centre of globalization: for those with more, globalization makes 

  7

 more available, for those with less, there is less.  Inequalities are increased, exclusions  are underscored.   The recruitment of economic migrants is premised on a nationalized view of  economies and a dated understanding of migration categories.  Even those most  skeptical about the effects of globalization consider that economic priorities are  increasingly influenced on a global level.   When the nation sets out to bolster its  economy by shifting the location of particular workers and entrepreneurs, it is  attempting to counter this trend.  When a nation awards membership on the basis of  investment, it is seeking to influence what would otherwise be the global distribution  of capital.  Furthermore, competitive recruitment for economic migrants points up the  fact that the current categories of migration are no longer appropriate.  Many  ‘permanent’ migrants stay for several years and then move on.  If they were recruited  by one prosperous nation on the basis of their economic value, they are likely to find  themselves admissible to others as well.  Indeed, they may well return ‘home’  permanently or temporarily.  While it is true that nations such as Canada and  Australia are also ratcheting up their capacity to accommodate temporary workers, it  remains the case that very little effort is made at analyzing whether categories of  permanent and temporary migration are meaningful.  Rules in this category, therefore,  reflect a backward looking view of both economies and migration trends.   Best and brightest migration, which makes for good politics in receiving  states, is a direct cause of brain drain in less prosperous nations.  When the  competition for skilled and wealthy migrants increases, so does the drain away from  sending states.  One important example of this are the parallel policy shifts in  Australia and Canada which make it easier for those who have entered as tertiary  students to remain as workers.  This represents superior economic rationalization for  the host state - the possibility of capturing the elevated foreign student tuition without  the downside of losing someone whose education the state has subsidized and  supported.  In addition, those who have lived in the country as students will  necessarily encounter fewer transition issues than migrants arriving for the first time.    For the receiving state, this makes good sense and is an easy sell.  It ignores the global  implications of migration, and thus, again, merges migration and sovereignty.  There  is no forum for considering issues of global equity in migration policy because  sovereign control over the question is settled.  The challenge that the recruitment of  skilled migrants poses to sovereignty is the structure of the internationalized economy  to which they are recruited and the impermanence with which they remain.    This recruitment of economic migrants also signals a shift in the meaning of  migration for nations.  Prior to the advent of migration laws, and through much of the  twentieth century, migration was twinned with national economic goals.   Hardworking people in search of a better life traveled to the ends of the earth and  made those places their homes.  They came with little or nothing and they made new  lives for themselves.  This is no longer possible.  People with little or nothing, who  want a better life for themselves and who are prepared to risk all and work hard to get  it are now ‘mere economic migrants’ and ‘bogus refugees’.  The very qualities which  make up the mythology of  ‘immigrant nations’ are now migration disqualifiers.  In  this way, the logic of immigration and refugee laws are overlapping.  Those who are  now known for arriving in prosperous nations and turning their family’s fortunes  around within a generation have arrived as refugees.  The Indochinese refugee crisis  of the late 1970s and early 1980s sent individuals around the world who now, a  generation later, are being heralded for their adaptation and achievements, just as 

  8

 earlier migrants have been.  This makes it even harder to keep refugee efforts separate  from immigration issues in political and public minds.   

 E  Conclusions  

 Given contemporary globalising forces, illegal migration, economic migration and  refugee flows overlap and each challenges sovereign control over population.  The  challenges to sovereignty represented here are more important than ever before  because sovereignty is being re-invented with an increasing focus on the elements of  migration law: borders and passports, visas and work permits.  The increasing  importance of migration law to ‘nationness’ helps explain public, political and legal  approaches to these issues.  But these factors, at the same time, make it harder to  envision how migration law provisions might realistically be shaped to deal with the  challenges of the twenty-first century.  Neil MacCormick’s assurances  notwithstanding, most nations, and especially their leaders, are not enthralled by  diminutions of sovereignty.    What might move migration law forward at this juncture? As migration is such  a politicized issue, a key element in altering law and policy in the area has to be an  increased understanding, at a broad public level, of how the changing nature of  migration.  While governments have shifted their policies in recognition of shifting  trends, they have not altered their rhetoric.  The migration mythology which grounds  many new world nations is still engaged at an exhortatory level, without recognition  that its logic no longer applies: there is not a queue, those willing to do backbreaking  labour in service of the nation are no longer welcome, or at least not officially.     An increased understanding of refugee law is equally important to ensure  support for this important international human rights norm.  The Refugee Convention  does not create illegal migration, nor does it draw people to prosperous nations.  The  ‘draw’ such that it is, is created by intense global inequalities.  Prosperous countries  such as the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and  indeed most European nations present themselves internationally as good, rights  respecting, prosperous places to live.  They host the Olympics.  They are symbols  worth attacking.  The technologies of globalization mean that these images are easier  to access, the invitation to a better life is extended to more and more people.  That  there is no access to this better life for most of the people in the world is the truth of  our current structure of international relations.  It is too much to drop this on the  doorstep of the Refugee Convention.  The Refugee Convention contains its own  narrowing mechanisms ensuring that through proper and consistent interpretation it  can alleviate some of the most serious kinds of suffering in the world.  It is important  to keep alive the compromise between sovereignty and human rights that it represents.   Citizenship in a prosperous nation is an immense privilege, but not a naturally  occurring one.  This privilege is a legal construction.  Protected and defended by a  strong and evolving version of sovereignty.  Those of us who can assert this badge of  membership must do so with a rich understanding of the pure good fortune - a simple  accident of birth - by which we possess it.  The legal rights it carries ought not be  accompanied by claims of moral superiority.  They come from a history of conquest  and colony, and from the power of those who controlled the early international law  system.   Strong assertions of sovereignty in migration law are a logical response for  nations facing increasing erosions of capacity in other areas.  But sovereignty also  contorts decision making in this area when considered from a global perspective  because the key migration law issues at this juncture in history are, by definition, 

  9

  10

 beyond the borders of any one nation.  While there are considerable incentives for  similarly situated nations to cooperate (and the European Union is the  principal  example here), the sharpest need for cooperation is between nations which are not  similarly situated.  This is almost impossible without an appreciation of the fiction of  formal sovereign equality. If policy debates about migration law continue to be  framed solely or primarily in terms of national interest, these debates will have  diminishing capacity to address the principle tensions facing migration at this  moment.     One way forward may be by reference to the rule of law.   That is, while  recognizing that the rule of law has strong traditional affinities with sovereignty as a  framing and limiting concept, it also has a traditional content of principles which can  stand apart from a sovereign body such as the state.  Recent decisions of some courts  may be evidence that the traditional deference of the courts towards executive  decision makers in this area is diminishing at precisely the same point where 

 migration and sovereignty are being drawn even more closely together.  This suggests  an understanding of sovereignty which goes beyond ‘mere’ power, and is instead  power appropriately used.  The content of that ‘appropriateness’ may be defined by  the rule of law.  The rule of law has a long history of extending its reach to meet its 

 grasp.  This may yet happen in the migration realm too.  And it would be a good  thing. 

