---
title: "End outsourcing of detention centres."
date: "2003-05-21"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Australasian Correctional Management"
  - "Mismanagement"
  - "Accountability"
  - "Woomera"
  - "Contracting out"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211562541
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/U7E96%22
---

 Peter Andren MP - Independent Member for Calare   

 21 May 2003

 End outsourcing of detention centres - Andren   

 Outsourcing the management of detention centres is a convenient arrangement to absolve the  federal government of responsibility for asylum seekers and other detainees and should be stopped,  according to Peter Andren, Member for Calare.   

 “The allegations of bad management and fraudulent practices raised about Australasian Correctional  Management’s running of the detention centre at Woomera require a judicial inquiry - not only into  ACM but the outsourcing process as a whole,” Mr Andren said.   

 “Outsourcing has failed the inmates of the now closed Woomera centre, but the difficulty will be in  proving who should be accountable.   

 “The care of people in traumatic and stressful circumstances should never be tendered to private  contractors, which removes direct responsibility and therefore accountability from the Immigration  Minister and his department.   

 “If Minister Ruddock maintains full responsibility for the centres, at least the taxpayer knows that  the services for which they are paying are actually being provided.   

 “A judicial inquiry is certainly required into the management of Woomera but must also look at the  implications of outsourcing in regard to accountability and maintaining transparent procedures to  ensure that the job is being done.   

 “It will also ensure the ‘out of sight, out of mind’ remote detention centres including the obnoxious  Pacific Solution camps become the direct responsibility of the Minister.   

 “It is not acceptable that human beings are treated like animals in the saleyards, in numbers more  than double a centre’s capacity with only vague guidelines about delivering ‘humane detention  outcomes’ and ‘appropriate levels of care’.   

 “How can the company be accountable under these circumstances? ACM is not even obliged to  lodge an annual report here because it’s owned by a US security company.   

 “Another company, Group 4 Services, is set to take over the contract to manage onshore detention  and they’re part of a wider international conglomerate, Danish based Group 4 Falck, so where will  their annual report be lodged?    

 “The accountability issues at the heart of the alleged mistreatment of detainees and alleged  fraudulent management practices cannot be solved by outsourcing contracts to private companies,  especially those that are part of huge international corporations.   

 “This privatisation of what should be humane care and processing is another blot on Australia’s  diminishing fair go reputation,” Mr Andren concluded.    

 

 For more information: 02 6332 6229 or 0419 612 891.   

 M  e 

 d 

 i 

 a 

 

 R  e 

 l 

 e 

 a 

 s 

 e 

