---
title: "Why won't the Government raise human rights abuses with President Hu Jintao?"
date: "2003-10-14"
creators:
  - "Harradine, Brian"
source: "Office of HARRADINE, SEN BRIAN"
subjects:
  - "Visits to Australia"
  - "Human rights violations"
  - "HU, Jintao"
  - "China"
  - "State visits"
  - "HILL, Robert"
  - "Capital punishment"
  - "Amnesty International"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211260206
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YZMA6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 Why won’t the Government raise human rights abuses  with President Hu Jintao?   

 Senator Brian Harradine today condemned the Government’s weak approach to human  rights violations in China after the Government failed to commit to raising human rights  issues with Chinese President Hu Jintao during his visit next week.   

 Senator Harradine highlighted in question time the appalling human rights record of China  and asked whether the Government would be taking the opportunity of raising human  rights concerns with President Hu.   

 Senator Harradine cited “the repression of workers’ rights, repression of spiritual and  religious groups, repression of political activists and torture and ill-treatment of prisoners,  forced abortion and sterilisation, continuing persecution of Tibetans and the arrest and  forced repatriation of North Korean asylum seekers.   

 “The Chinese Government’s campaign against crime last year involved 4,000 executions,  often without due process.  Amnesty International reported that China executed more  people than all other countries combined.   

 “Tens of thousands of people continue to be arbitrarily detained or imprisoned for  peacefully exercising their rights to freedom of expression, association or belief.   

 “Has the Minister forgotten that an eight-months pregnant Chinese woman, deported from  Australia, was forcibly aborted by Chinese authorities?”   

 When Senator Hill, representing the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, suggested  that the human rights situation in China was improving, Senator Harradine pointed out  that Amnesty International’s report on China for 2003 stated that “serious human rights  violations continued and in some respects the situation deteriorated.” 

 

 

 14 October 2003   

 Senator Brian Harradine, Tel. 02 6277 3735 

