---
title: "Belonging and exclusion: national identity and citizenship, immigration and multiculturalism: paper presented at 'Our population, our future: what sort of country do we aspire to be? Conference organised by Manning Clark House, 2003"
date: "2003-10-09"
creators:
  - "Jordens, Ann-Mari"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "National identity"
  - "Citizenship"
  - "Australian Citizenship Act 1948"
  - "Multiculturalism"
  - "Legislation"
  - "Constitution"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211260040
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RISA6%22
---

  Our Population, Our Future 

  elonging an exclusion: 

  national identity and citizenship, 

  immigr ation  and multiculturalism. 

  ArmMari Jordens 

  Synopsis 

  Australia has always been an ethnically and culturally diverse society, but prevailing 

  conceptions of Australian national identity have in the past marginalised and 

  disadvantaged minorities. Powe$ul institutions such as our Constitution and 

  immigration and citizenship legislation, have both reflected a n  understanding of, and 

  worked to achieve, U society which is essentially British in culture and ethnicity. This 

  paper explains why the Constitution and Australia's citizenship legislation offer no 

  guidance to Australians seeking to understand what it means to be a n  Australian 

  citizen, and what their rights and responsibilities as citizens are, Cultural diversity was 

  first recognised as a result of postwar m a s s  mipation. It was not until 1973 thut the 

  Australian government abandoned the assertion that Australia was a homogeneous 

  society, and began to promote a new conception of Australian national identity as a 

  multicultural society. Subsequent multicultural policies were designed to acliieve social 

  harmony by ensuring equality and removing discrimination. "'his paper concludes by 

  suggesting measures essential for achieving social harmony and inclusion in the twenty. 

  first century, 

  Australia has never known cultural and ethnic homogeneity, although many powerful 

  institutions have worked to project an image of Australia as a white, Anglo-Celtic and 

  Christian nation. Throughout the twentieth century the Constitution, and much of the 

  legislation which flowed from it, have attempted to make this image the reality by 

  determining who belonged and who should be excluded from the community of the 

  nation. 

  Page 65 

  Our Population, Our Future 

  In 1788, the First Fleet arrived in a country where the population comprised about 600 

  different social groups speaking about 200 distinct languages. The new arrivals themselves 

  were far from homogeneous. Over 4,000 of the convicts sent to NSW were not Anglo- 

  Celtic, 900 of them were non-whites and about a thousand were Jews. The Gold Rushes of 

  the 1850s attracted about 117,000 immigrants from Europe, China, the USA, Canada, 

  New Zealand and the South Pacific. Add to these the 62,000 Pacific Islanders brought to 

  Queensland between 1863 and 1904 and it becomes clear that Australia a t  Federation was 

  far from being a homogeneous society.2 

  Federation was, to a considerable extent, designed to correct this situation and to ensure 

  that future Australians would be white and Anglo-Celtic. The Commonwealth Parliament 

  moved swiftly to prevent the further entry of non-Europeans (even those who were fellow 

  British subjects)  by means of the Immigration Restriction Act 190 1 with its South African-  inspired dictation test. The Pacific Island Labourers Act 190 1 successfully removed most 

  of the Pacific Islanders, and Aborigines were excluded from the Commonwealth's 

  responsibility by Section 5 l(xxvi) of the Constitution, until its amendment following the 

  1967 Referendum. 

  All Australia's attempts to recruit immigrants before 1947 targeted British migrants only, as 

  only they could reinforce our conception of our identity as a nation of essentially British 

  culture and ethnicity. 

  National Identity 

  National identity can most usefully thought about as the 'imagined community' of the 

  n a t i ~ n . ~  Australians have long attempted to imagine what it was to be an Australian as 

  'Of the convicts sent to NSW between 181 7 and 1840, 2.6% (4,230) were not AnglwCelts. The Gold Rushes brought 

  approximately 60,000 people from continental Europe, 42,000 from China, 10,000 from the US and Canada and over 

  5,000 from New Zealand and the South Pacific. James Jupp (ed), The Australian People. An Encyclopaedia of the 

  Nation, Its People and Their Origins, Cambridge University Press, 2001, pp. 7, 22, 35, 61 0. 

  Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism, Verso, 

  London, 1991. 

  Page 66 

  Our Population, Our Future 

  opposed to a transplanted Briton. Most of the images of 'the typical Australian' have been 

  male, white and able bodied - for example the bushman image promoted by the Bulletin 

  from the late nineteenth century; the ANZAC soldier as conceived by the First World War 

  historian C.E.W. Bean and subsequently preserved and promoted by the Australian War 

  Memorial which he founded. Posters depicting the Bondi lifesaver were later used to lure 

  tourists and immigrants to Australia. These images became rooted in Australian popular 

  literature and were preserved and promoted by powerful community organisations. 

  Australian national identity was conceived of in a way which presumed a shared culture 

  and common political interests. This marginalised sections of society which did not fit into 

  this imagined community. Some groups - women, Aboriginal Australians, the aged and 

  people with a disability - were regarded as dependent members of society whose interests 

  were seen to be best represented by those on whom they depended. Non-European 

  residents were considered unworthy by reason of their race, to ever become citizens. 

  Citizenship 

  Citizenship defines who belongs, and who does not, in our society. Until very recently, 

  however, Australians have not thought much about what it means. This is not surprising 

  as the framers of our Constitution, the foundation of our entire legal and governmental 

  system, chose not to mention citizenship of Australia. Citizenship is not a constitutional 

  concept,  so we get no guidance there. 

  Nor can we look for information on citizenship rights from Australia's citizenship 

  legislation, Until the Nationality and Citizenship Act 1948, Australians were solely British 

  subjects with 'duties and privileges' as subjects of the Queen. The introduction of  a distinct 

  Australian citizenship was not the result of any particular nationalistic pressure. It was 

  imposed on an almost entirely indifferent Australian population from above, as a 

  consequence of Canada's moves to create a separate Canadian citizenship. From 1949  until 1987, Australians were both British subjects and Australian citizens, but the meaning 

  of the latter was unclear. This Act sets out who is entitled to Australian citizenship, gives 

  Page 67 

  Our Population, Our Future 

  the legal definition of who is and is not a citizen, but it does not deal directly with the 

  consequences of citizenship, nor the substantive nature of citizenship. 

  It is not surprising that most Australians regard citizenship as a legal status bestowed on 

  foreigners. This was an almost inevitable result of the Government's giving to the 

  Department of Immigration portfolio responsibility for administering the Nationality and 

  Citizenship Act. Officers in that Department, like their fellow Australians, had no 

  conception of what being an Australian citizen as distinct from a British subject actually 

  meant. For most of the twentieth century the prevailing conception of citizenship was a 

  culturally normative one - it was conceptualised in relation to British culture and ethnicity, 

  not in terms of the rights and responsibilities of the citizens of an autonomous state. The 

  Department saw the attainment of Australian citizenship as the final step in the process of 

  assimilation of alien migrants, and closely monitored citizenship statistics as the only 

  measurable indicators of the success of their settlement programs. None of its many 

  citizenship promotion campaigns targeted the British, who were the least likely group of 

  migrant to apply for Australian citizenship.' 

  It is only fairly recently that thinking on citizenship in Australia has been influenced  by the 

  seminal work of T. H. Marshall, although he first published on the topic in 1950.' He 

  introduced a much broader concept of citizenship than just legal status. He defined 

  'citizenship' as a status bestowed on those who are full members of a community - 

  expanding it to include social rights as well as political and civil rights. For Marshall, social 

  citizenship covered basic living standards such as health care and education. 

  To discover these broader, more practical legal consequences of the status of citizenship, 

  and what they reflect about the meaning of citizenship in Australia, it is not enough to look 

  at the Australian Citizenship Act 1948 and the myriad pieces of legislation that 

  discriminate on the basis of some form of membership. It is also necessary to include the 

  For Department of lmrnigration views on citizenship and its role in changing citizenship policy see Ann-Man lordens, 

  Alien to Citizen. Settling Migrants in Australia 1947-75, Allen and Unwin with Australian Archives , Sydney 

  1997, chapter 8, p p ~  171-1 88. 

  51: Marshall, Citizenship and Social Class, and Other Essays , Cambridge Unioersity Press, 1950. 

  Page 68 

  Our Population, Our Future 

  common law developments that impact upon membership of the community. Kim 

  Rubenstein recently undertook the mammoth task of analysing all High Court judgments 

  with bearing on the rights and responsibilities of Australian citizens, only to find that these 

  issues are still unclear. She found that the High Court did not restrict itself to discussing 

  the rights and responsibilities of common law citizens, but incorporated a notion of the 

  state as responsible for enforcing the rule of law and protecting human rights. This 

  normative view of citizenship is reflected in its use of the word 'citizen' to represent a 

  person deserving the protection of the state and equality of treatment, regardless of 

  whether he or she is a citizen, permanent resident or temporary resident.6 

  The distinction between the legal and social consequences of citizenship is clearly 

  demonstrated by the different treatment of Indigenous and migrant Australians. Prior to 

  1921, Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders who were denied citizenship under colony or 

  State law, had to apply to become naturalised British subjects in Australia in the same way 

  as aliens. Under the Commonwealth Nationality Act 1920, those born after January 1921 

  were declared to be British subjects. Thus they automatically became Australian Citizens in 

  1949. Citizenship, however, was a mere formality for them as they did not have access to 

  any of the rights and responsibilities granted to other Australian citizens by 

  Commonwealth legi~lation,~ 

  On the other hand, the Commonwealth wanted alien migrants to become absorbed into 

  Australian society and its economy. They were regarded as protocitizens and granted 

  access to most of the social benefits available to Australian citizens. Thus immigrants 

  without formal citizenship were not socially disadvantaged. 

  6Kirn Rubenstein, Australian Citizenship Law in Context, Lawbook Co., Sydney 2002. 

  7Ann-Man Jordens, Redefining Australia. Immigration, Citizenship and National Identity, Hale und Iremonger, 

  Sydney 1995, pp. 10.13. 

  Our Population, Our Future 

  Multiculturalism 

  Multiculturalism reflects a new way of imagining the community of the nation. It redefines 

  our national identity to reflect the diversity of those who make up our society. It developed 

  in response to the diversity of immigrants, not to the existing diversity of our population 

  which was, for most of the twentieth century, successfully ignored and repressed, 

  From 1947 to 1952, Australia accepted large numbers of refugees from many parts of 

  Europe, then added to this diversity through a series of migration agreements with a range 

  of other countries. At first aliens were expected to assimilate - to conform to our British 

  culture, By 1962, the Department of Immigration accepted that this was an unrealistic 

  expectation and dropped the term 'assimilation' in favour of 'integration'. 

  The Australian government was determined that these newcomers settle permanently in 

  Australia and become Australian citizens,  It recognised their differences and special needs 

  much more clearly and quickly than those of native-born Australians. For example the 

  telephone interpreter service introduced in 1973 to help non-English speaking migrants 

  access services to which they were entitled, was not extended to non-English speaking 

  Aborigines until the 1990s. 

  Although, until 1972, the government always officially referred to Australia as a 

  'homogeneous society', by the 1960s this conception was becoming increasingly 

  inappropriate with the gradual erosion of the 'White Australia' policy during the 1960s. In 

  1964 the government began admitting 'mixed race' immigrants, from 1966 it offered 

  permanent residence to skilled non-Europeans, and following a migration agreement with 

  Turkey in 1967, it admitted large numbers of non-Christian migrants for the first time. 

  When the Whitlam government redefined Australia as a 'multicultural' society' in 1973, it 

  borrowed the term from Canada but interpreted it in a very different way. In Canada 

  multiculturalism was intended to preserve and promote the separate cultures and rights of 

  its distinct cultural groups. In Australia the term served to acknowledge the irreversible 

  Page 70 

  Our Population, Our Future 

  cultural pluralism brought to Australia by thirty years of migration, and to ensure equality. 

  In December 1973 the Minister for Immigration, A.J. Grassby, described Australian society 

  as one 'in which equal opportunity is accompanied by cultural diversity in an atmosphere 

  of acceptance and tolerance'.8 The multicultural policies developed under the Fraser and 

  subsequent governments, aimed to ensure the equal participation of migrants in society, 

  while acknowledging their right to preserve their cultural differences. In 1989, the 

  National Agenda for a Multicultural Australia provided the first authoritative statement of 

  the rights and responsibilities of Australians in a multicultural society. 

  Belonging and exclusion in the tweniyfirst century, 

  What sort of country do we want to be in the twenty-first century? 

  Firstly, one which acknowledges and celebrates the fact that it has a culturally and 

  ethnically diverse population. 

  Secondly, one in which government policies are designed to preserve and maintain social 

  harmony - policies that are designed to achieve equality and social justice, and to avoid the 

  creation of disadvantaged and marginalised minorities. It is of considerable concern to 

  many Australians that current policies granting only temporary residence to those found to 

  be genuine refugees are creating quite the opposite effect. Refugee families granted only 

  temporary protection are denied the opportunity to reconstruct their shattered lives in our 

  community, are denied all but minimal social services, are living under the constant threat 

  of deportation, and are forever denied the possibility of citizenship, 

  Thirdly, Australians should understand their citizenship rights and obligations.  A bill of 

  rights entrenched in the Constitution would be the most appropriate framework for this. 

  However, the existing rights of non-citizens living in our community should not be negated 

  by such a bill. 

  SA. J. Grassby, 'Objectives ~ Citizenship and Settlement Policy', statement tabled in the House of Representatives, 6 

  December, 1973, Jordens (19971, p p .  230-3 1. 

  Our Popukztion, Our Future 

  Fourthly, Australia in the twenty-first century should be a country which respects human 

  rights as defined by international law. International law provides a framework in which we 

  can assess legislation that discriminates on the basis of citizenship. The various 

  international conventions to which we are a signatory, permit discrimination between 

  nationals and non-nationals in relation to democratic rights, such as the right to vote, to 

  stand for Parliament or to be employed in various government positions. They do not 

  permit discrimination in relation to fundamental human rights,9 The treatment of asylum 

  seekers in Australian detention centres is clearly contrary to a number of these 

  conventions. 

  Current trends suggest that none of these goals will be attained easily. 

  Bibliography. 

  Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of 

  Nationalism, Verso, London, 1991. 

  Ann-Mari Jordens, Redefining Australia. Immigration, Citizenship and National Identity, 

  Hale and Iremonger, Sydney 1995. 

  Ann-Mari Jordens, Alien to Citizen. Settling Migrants in Australia 1947-75, Allen and 

  Unwin with Australian Archives , Sydney 1997. 

  James Jupp (ed), The Australian People. An Encyclopaedia of the Nation, Its People and 

  Their Origins, Cambridge University Press, 2001. 

  T. Marshall, Citizenship and Social Class, and Other Essays , Cambridge University Press, 

  1950. 

  Kim Rubenstein, Australian Citizenship Law in Context, Lawbook Co., Sydney 2002. 

  9Rubenstein, pp 179-80. 

  Page 72 

