---
title: "The state of the judicature. Address to the 13th Commonwealth Law Conference, Melbourne, 17 April 2003"
date: "2003-04-17"
creators:
  - "Gleeson, Murray"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Judiciary"
  - "High Court of Australia"
  - "Separation of powers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211560988
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/12896%22
---

 Speeches 

 13th COMMONWEALTH LAW CONFERENCE

 MELBOURNE 17 APRIL 2003

 THE STATE OF THE JUDICATURE

 MURRAY GLEESON*

 

     In 1977, Chief Justice Barwick delivered the first address on the State  of the Judicature in Australia.  Since then, his successors have followed  his example, usually at intervals of two years.  In recent times, the  address has been given to the Australian Legal Convention.  The  present occasion is a gathering of lawyers from all parts of the  Commonwealth of Nations.  On behalf of the Australian judiciary, I add  my welcome to all our visitors, who include some of the most senior and  distinguished judges in the Commonwealth.  We are delighted and  honoured by their presence.  There is another significant feature of the  occasion.  This year, the High Court of Australia celebrates its  Centenary.  The Court first sat in Melbourne on 6 October 1903.  It  seems appropriate that I should explain to our guests something of the  structure of the Australian judicature, and that I should give particular  emphasis to the role of the High Court.

 

 The Australian Federal Union

 

           The Australian Constitution, which took effect in 1901, brought into  a federal union the people of a number of self-governing British  colonies.  The former colonies became States of the new Federal  Commonwealth.

 

           The first colonies established following European settlement were  New South Wales and Tasmania.  New South Wales originally  comprised the whole of the eastern part of mainland Australia.  In 1851,  what had earlier been the Port Phillip District of New South Wales  separated, and became the colony of Victoria.  In 1859, the colony of  Queensland separated from New South Wales.  South Australia and  Western Australia had distinctive histories. South Australia was founded  in 1836, and was settled by private initiative fostered by the British  Colonial Office.  Western Australia was first settled in 1826, and a colony  was proclaimed in 1829.  What is now Australia was, at the time, the  subject of exploration, and possible colonial attention, by other powers.   It was considered important to inform the world, and in particular the  French, that the entire continent was under British occupation[1].  The  Northern Territory was at first a part of New South Wales, and later of 

 South Australia.  It became a Federal Territory in 1911[2].  The  Australian Capital Territory, which contains the seat of government, was  formerly a part of New South Wales, required by the Constitution to be  distant not less than 100 miles from Sydney.

 

           The desire for federation reflected a number of forces, including  considerations of defence and national security.  The Imperial  government fostered the move, but, subject to a couple of notable  qualifications, left it to the colonists to work out the terms on which they  would unite.  Those terms were established through Constitutional  Conventions, resolutions of the colonial parliaments, and referenda, over  a period between 1891 and 1900.  A draft constitution was submitted to  the Imperial Parliament and, after certain amendments, was given legal  effect by an Act of the Imperial Parliament.  Since then, relations  between Australia and the United Kingdom have altered, and the  Australia Act of 1986 recognised that the United Kingdom Parliament  has no capacity to make law for Australia.  In 1999, the High Court held  that, for the purposes of the Constitution, the United Kingdom is a foreign  power[3].  Even so, we inherited our law, our judicial system, and our  legal profession from the United Kingdom.  That inheritance continues to  have a profound influence in the life of our nation.

 

 The Australian Judiciary

 

           One of the defining characteristics of all aspects of Australian  government, including the judiciary, is federalism.

 

           At the end of the nineteenth century, each Australian colony had  its own Supreme Court.  The Supreme Courts of Tasmania and New  South Wales were both established in 1824; those of the other colonies  were established later.  Each colony had its own judicial system, and a  legal profession organised under the control of the Supreme Court.  At  the time of Federation, and for most of the twentieth century, appeals lay  from colonial, later State, Supreme Courts to the Privy Council in  London.  Those appeals finally ended during the 1980s. 

 

           Section 71 of the Constitution vested the judicial power of the  Commonwealth in a Federal Supreme Court, to be called the High Court  of Australia, and in such other federal courts as the Parliament should  create.  Further, and importantly, the Constitution provided for the  Parliament to invest State Courts with federal jurisdiction.

 

           For the greater part of the twentieth century, the Federal  Parliament took advantage of the expedient of investing State courts with  federal jurisdiction as the principal method of providing for the exercise  of federal judicial power other than by the High Court.  Until the 1970s,  there were relatively few federal judges.  This may have been not 

 unrelated to the fact that, until a constitutional amendment in 1977,  federal judges had to be appointed for life.  (In Australia, unlike Canada,  all State judges are appointed by State governments).  Two important  new federal courts, the Federal Court of Australia, and the Family Court  of Australia, were created in the 1970s.  Their size has grown rapidly  since then.  In 2000, the Federal Magistrates Service was established.   State courts continue to exercise federal jurisdiction, and three States  have judiciaries larger than the federal judiciary, but the relatively recent  growth in the number of federal judges is an important development.

 

           Following the requirement of the Constitution, in 1903 the Federal  Parliament legislated to set up the High Court of Australia.  In addition to  an original jurisdiction, the High Court was given jurisdiction to hear civil  and criminal appeals from other federal courts, and from State Supreme  Courts.  This general appellate jurisdiction distinguishes the High Court  from the Supreme Court of the United States.  In his speech in support of  the Bill for the Judiciary Act 1903 (Cth), Attorney-General Deakin  described the High Court, in its sphere, and the Federal Parliament, in its  sphere, as expressions of the union of the Australian people[4].  He  stressed the role of the Court as the organ of government entrusted by  the people with deciding issues that would arise under the division of  powers and functions that is of the essence of a federal system.  He  identified three fundamental features of federalism:  a supreme  Constitution; a distribution of powers under the Constitution; and a  judiciary to interpret the Constitution and decide as to the precise  distribution of powers[5].  He pointed out that the Australian colonies had  been accustomed to legislatures with limited powers, and to the need for  courts to resolve issues as to these limits[6].  There has never been, in  Australia, a sovereign Parliament.  The existence of a constitutional court  with the capacity to decide the validity of the laws enacted by the Federal  and State Parliaments, and the legality of executive action, was a  necessity of federalism.  This, in turn, required a separation of powers  along the lines of the United States Constitution.  The Attorney-General  explained that it was not proposed that the High Court should, like the  Supreme Court of Canada, have a jurisdiction to give advisory opinions.   Rather, Australia would follow the United States model, which he  regarded as involving a more strict form of federalism.  He observed that,  in Australia, as in the United States, the central Parliament had  enumerated powers, the residue being with the States.  On the other  hand, in Canada, it was the Provinces whose powers were specified.   Furthermore, at the time, the Federal Executive in Canada could veto  Provincial legislation.  He also noted the power of the Federal  government in Canada to make appointments to the Provincial  judiciary[7].  These considerations, he thought, made our federal system  more like that of the United States.  The great difference, and one which  has always been difficult to accommodate to federalism, is responsible  government.  In that respect, like Canada, we followed the British  precedent.

 

           There are two essential features of the role of the High Court in  the Australian judicature.  First, it acts as the ultimate court of appeal in  civil and criminal cases in federal and state jurisdiction.  Nowadays, such  appeals do not come to the Court as of right, but require a grant of  special leave to appeal.  Secondly, it performs the function described by  Attorney-General Deakin as that of "an impartial independent tribunal to  interpret the Constitution"[8].

 

           Unlike the House of Lords in England, the Supreme Court of  Canada, and the Supreme Court of the United States, at present the  High Court, in addition to receiving written submissions from the parties,  hears oral argument on all applications for special leave to appeal.  Time  for argument is strictly limited.  Even so, the appropriateness of an  inflexible requirement to hear oral argument in all applications is a matter  that is presently under review.  More than one-third of applications are  made by self-represented litigants[9].  Their success rate is very low.   The need to balance the requirements of reasonable access to the Court  with the obligation to make the most efficient use of the Court's limited  resources gives rise to difficulty.  It may be that, at least in the clearest  cases, the Court should have the capacity to dispense with the  requirement of oral argument.

 

           The High Court's original jurisdiction includes, but is not limited to,  constitutional matters.  One of the most important sources of its  jurisdiction is s 75(v) of the Constitution which confers original jurisdiction  in all matters in which a writ of mandamus or prohibition or an injunction  is sought against an officer of the Commonwealth.   This grant of  jurisdiction, unalterable by the Parliament, secures a basic element of  the rule of law.  As in other countries, judicial review of administrative  action in relation to people seeking asylum on the basis of a claim that  they are refugees is a source of much litigation.  The High Court has  recently had occasion to consider, once again, the effect of legislative  provisions which seek to oust or limit the jurisdiction of courts in cases  involving such review[10].

 

           The principal changes affecting the High Court, and its work, over  the last century include the following.

 

           There were three original members of the Court.  In 1906, the  number was increased to five, and in 1913, to seven.  In ordinary civil  and criminal appeals, not involving a constitutional issue, or seeking  departure from existing authority, five Justices sit.  The Justices to sit are  proposed by the Chief Justice.  Any Justice is entitled to sit, even if not  proposed, but the exercise of this entitlement is very rare.  Members of  the profession sometimes ask whether the workload of the Court would  be reduced if the number of Justices were increased to nine.  I believe it  would not.  It would probably mean, in practice, that a Chief Justice,  conscious of the possibility that the outcome of an appeal could be too  heavily influenced by the choice of the five out of nine Justices to sit,  would propose that the Court follow the Canadian and United States  practice of sitting all available Justices on all appeals.  That is what now  happens in the High Court in all constitutional cases, and also in a  substantial number of appeals.  Increasing the number of Justices to sit  on a particular case does not make it easier for any Justice to decide  that case; and, as the profession is aware, Justices take their individual  responsibilities very seriously when it comes to the preparation of  judgments.

 

           Until 1977, members of the Court were appointed for life.  They 

 must now retire at 70.  Sir Owen Dixon and Sir Garfield Barwick both  retired from the office of Chief Justice at the age of 77.  Sir Frank Gavan  Duffy assumed that office at the age of 78.  Sir Edward McTiernan  retired at 84.  Sir Samuel Way, then Chief Justice of South Australia is  said to have declined an offer of appointment to the Court at the age of  70.

 

           Appeals to the Privy Council no longer exist.  The Privy Council  never had a jurisdiction to hear appeals in certain types of constitutional  cases but, subject to that qualification, it was only in the 1980s that the  High Court became the ultimate court of appeal for all Australian matters.

 

           As mentioned above, appeals no longer come to the Court as of  right.  Special leave is required.  The grounds for special leave are set  out in the Judiciary Act.  As a general rule, a grant of leave will be made  where a case involves a question of law of general importance, or where  the Court is called upon to resolve differences between, or within, other  Australian courts.

 

 Judicial Numbers

 

           There are, at present, 939 Australian judges and magistrates, not  including acting judicial officers.  Of these, 283, or approximately one-third, are appointed by the government of New South Wales.  The next  largest jurisdictions are Victoria (193) and Queensland (134).  Then  follows the Federal judiciary, which consists of 118 judges and  magistrates.  These include the seven Justices of the High Court.

 

 The Federal Magistracy

 

           There are now 19 Federal Magistrates.  The Service deals with  shorter and simpler matters in federal jurisdictions, and, in the short time  since it was created, it has become even more apparent that there is a  great deal of work suitable for its attention.  The court now receives 40  per cent of all family law work, and most bankruptcy cases.  It now deals  with migration cases.  In the eight months to the end of February 2003,  688 migration applications were filed in the court, and 410 matters were  transferred from the Federal Court.  The court has recently been  invested with copyright jurisdiction.

 

           I expect that, in time, it will become one of Australia's largest  courts.

 

 National Judicial Associations

 

           The Council of Chief Justices of Australia and New Zealand  continue to meet twice a year.  Its origins and constitution were  described in an earlier address of this kind[11].  The Council's work in  the past year included production of the Guide to Judicial Conduct, and  support for the establishment of the Australian National Judicial College,  both of which are referred to below.

 

           The Australian Institute of Judicial Administration (AIJA),  established in 1986, is actively associated with this Conference.  Its  current President is Justice Underwood of the Supreme Court of  Tasmania, and its Executive Director is Professor Reinhardt.  It is based  in Victoria.  The Institute organised a Technology for Justice Conference  in Sydney in October 2002, attended by 394 delegates including visitors  from Canada, China, Israel, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the  Philippines, Thailand, South Korea and the USA.  In 2002 it also  participated in a Judicial Forum in Beijing, and has been actively  involved in providing training opportunities for Chinese procurators.  Its  work in relation to judicial orientation in Australia will be mentioned  below.  Four times a year the Institute publishes its Journal of Judicial  Administration.  Members of the Institute include judges, court  administrators, government officials, and members of the legal  profession.

 

           The Judicial Conference of Australia (JCA) was established in  1994 with the objects of maintaining in Australia a strong and  independent judiciary and of explaining to the public what judicial  independence means, and why its preservation is essential to the rule of  law. 

 

           The JCA is self-funded.  The 472 members, both judges and  magistrates come from all parts of Australia.  Currently, the JCA is  undertaking a programme designed to correct misinformation and  misunderstandings about the judiciary, and to make better known what  judges and magistrates do.  At last year's Colloquium in Launceston one  topic for discussion was how the courts can work with the media.  That  discussion will continue at the planned Colloquium to be held in Darwin  at the end of May this year.

 

           The JCA has expressed the support of Australian judicial officers  for those Zimbabwean judges who continue to perform their duties  independently and despite persecution.

 

           Since May 2000, the Chairman of the JCA has been Mr Justice  Simon Sheller of the New South Wales Court of Appeal.  Professor  Christopher Roper is its secretary.

 

 Judicial Education 

 

           The most important recent development in this area has been the  establishment of the National Judicial College.

 

           Formal judicial training and continuing education in Australia was  first undertaken by the Judicial Commission of New South Wales, which  was set up as an independent statutory corporation by legislation in  1986[12].  The Commission's six official members are the heads of  jurisdiction of the State's six courts.  Additional members, presently four  in number, are appointed by the Governor.  The President of the  Commission is the Chief Justice of New South Wales.  It has a staff of  35, headed by a Chief Executive.  Its educational programmes are  devised in consultation with the education committee of each of the  State's courts.  They include conferences and seminars which presently  cover 28 programmes, including pre-bench training for newly appointed  magistrates, and information technology training sessions.  The  Commission also publishes bench books, a monthly journal, and a  regular collection of papers delivered at conferences and seminars.

 

           For several years, in cooperation with the AIJA, the NSW Judicial  Commission has devised a National Judicial Orientation Programme for  newly appointed judges from across Australia.  These have also been  attended by judges from other countries.

 

           There is also a Judicial College of Victoria, which was established  as an independent statutory authority in 2002, and has an educational  role similar to that of the Judicial Commission of New South Wales.  Its  chairman is the Chief Justice of Victoria.

 

           In other States and Territories, the courts themselves conduct  regular programmes of orientation and continuing education.

 

           The National Judicial College was established, as a company  limited by guarantee, in 2002.  Its formation was supported by the  Council of Chief Justices, and resulted from the recommendations of a  working group set up by the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General.   The governing body of the College is a Council, chaired by Chief Justice  Doyle of South Australia.  Membership of the Council is representative of  all levels of the Australian judiciary.  There are Regional Convenors for  each State and Territory, whose functions include maintaining  communication with the local judiciary.  The Constitution of the College  also provides for a Consultative Committee, consisting of the Regional  Convenors, representatives of the AIJA, the Judicial Conference of  Australia, the Association of Australian Magistrates, the Law Deans of  Australian Universities, and three persons, not being judicial officers,  appointed by the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General.  In  September 2002, the College appointed its first Director.  In February  2003, the Council conducted a seminar at the Australian National  University, about the future of the College, for members of the Council, 

 the Regional Convenors, and the Co-ordinating Committee.

 

           The Judicial Commission of New South Wales, the Judicial  College of Victoria, and the AIJA have all indicated that they are willing  to co-operate with the National Judicial College, and to assist in its  educational programmes.

 

           The working group that reported to the Standing Committee of  Attorneys-General proposed a modest annual budget of $430,000, to be  shared between the Commonwealth and the States.  After the Standing  Committee gave its approval to the Report, the Attorneys-General of  three States decided that their governments would not provide financial  support to the College.  This has reduced its annual budget to $318,000.   This may be compared with the annual budget of the Judicial  Commission of New South Wales, which is $4.2 million.  It is true that the  Judicial Commission has other functions, but the bulk of its budget is  applied to judicial education and technical support.

 

           I was President of the Judicial Commission of New South Wales  from 1988 to 1998.  I am closely familiar with the work that it performs,  and with the value attached to that work by the judicial officers of the  State.  The same level of professional support should be available to all  Australian judges and magistrates.

 

           I have on other occasions explained the need for properly  organised and funded facilities for judicial professional development. We  now have a National Judicial College.  It has the firm support of the  Commonwealth government.  It should be accepted that judicial training  and education is a matter of both local and national concern.  All judges  and magistrates, and through them the public, throughout Australia will  benefit from an effective and adequately funded National Judicial  College.  The College is headed by a State Chief Justice.  State and  Territory judiciaries are well represented in its structure.  It has the  support of the Judicial Commission of New South Wales which, in the  past, has made its orientation programmes available to judicial officers  from all parts of the nation.  Of Australia's 939 judicial officers, 821 are  appointed by State and Territory governments.  All judicial officers will  benefit from the work of the National Judicial College.  I urge all State  and Territory governments to get behind it.

 

           I should refer also to the recently established Asia Pacific Judicial  Educators Forum, which will have its headquarters in the Philippine  Judiciary Academy in Manila.  Membership is open to judicial education  institutions and organisations in the Asia Pacific region.  The Chief  Executive of the Judicial Commission of New South Wales is a member  of the Executive Committee of that Forum.

 

 Guide to Judicial Conduct

 

           In June 2002, the AIJA published for the Council of Chief Justices  a Guide to Judicial Conduct.  The purpose was to provide members of  the judiciary with some practical guidance about conduct expected of  them as holders of judicial office.  The document was prepared after a  process of consultation with members of the judiciary.  It was originally  drafted by three former senior judges, assisted by an Advisory  Committee of the AIJA.  It was settled by the Council of Chief Justices.

 

           The Guide assumes a high level of understanding of basic  principles of judicial conduct, and a knowledge of the rules of statute and  common law which apply to courts and judges.  It does not set out to  instruct judges in the law; and it was not promulgated by any body which  has law-making authority.  It is not, in any sense of the word, a code.   Rather, it addresses basic principles of judicial behaviour, identifies  issues that, in the experience of members of the Council, are likely to be  of concern to judicial officers, and sets out to give practical guidance in  those areas.

 

           Some members of the judiciary, especially those who work in a  collegial environment, and who have ready access to consultation with  their colleagues, may under-estimate the extent to which others, who are  less experienced, or more isolated, benefit from assistance of this kind.   No doubt, some judges who read the Guide will conclude that it tells  them nothing they did not already know.  But others will find it a useful  source of help, warning, or re-assurance.  The judiciary is increasing in  size and diversity.  Just as it can no longer be assumed that all newly  appointed judicial officers have sufficient practical experience of the  courts to make it unnecessary that they be given educational assistance,  so it cannot be assumed that they will all be fully aware of the issues as  to conduct which they might encounter, and of the appropriate responses  to those issues.

 

 The Courts and Management

 

           Judges accept that governments, and the public, have a legitimate  interest in the efficient use by the courts of the resources made available  to them.  In all Australian jurisdictions, the pressure of business has  made enormous demands upon the skills of judges and court  administrators.  Issues, such as case management, procedural reform,  and the use of information technology, have been the subject of constant  attention during the last 15 years.  In all these areas, Australian courts  have kept in close touch with international practice, and many of their  innovations have been followed in overseas jurisdictions.

 

           In the courts, as in all other aspects of public life, there is  sometimes a tension between the demands of managerial efficiency and  the core purpose of the institution:  in our case, the administration of  justice.  In the long run, better management is only useful to the extent to  which it promotes justice.  Management is a means, not an end.  Judges 

 are sometimes disconcerted by what they regard as an increased  emphasis on means, rather than ends, but necessary improvements in  efficiency do not require us to lose sight of the main reason for our  existence.  In particular, the application of appropriate techniques of  performance analysis does not require that courts should succumb to  what was recently called, in another country, "the commodification of the  national culture"[13].

 

 The Judiciary and Governments

 

           The independence of the judiciary from the legislative and  executive branches of government, important in any political society, and  essential in one organised on federal lines, is largely taken for granted.

 

           The fact that the personal independence of judges, and the  institutional independence of courts, is simply assumed by most  Australians is gratifying; but it is important that those involved in public  life should be aware of the arrangements which secure that  independence.  It is unlikely ever to be the subject of frontal assault, but  encroachments can occur in consequence of lack of knowledge of, or  concern for, basic principles.

 

           Upholding the rule of law involves, where necessary, enforcing  observance of the law by governments.  It involves deciding the limits of  legislative and executive power.  Judicial review of legislative or  administrative action inevitably causes frustration and resentment.   Checks and balances are not always appealing to those whose power is  checked or balanced.  Even so, governments in Australia understand  that their powers are limited by the law and the Constitution, just as  judges understand that judicial power is limited in the same way.  The  Constitution, the basic law, is the ultimate source of, and limitation upon,  all governmental power.  Judicial review is the rule of law in action.

 

           Australian judicial officers have that tenure which is regarded  throughout the common law world as an essential condition of  independence.  In the case of federal judges, the matter is governed by s  72 of the Constitution, which provides that judges shall not be removed  except by the Governor-General, on an address from both Houses of  Parliament, on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.  This is  not a personal privilege conferred upon judges as a beneficial term of  employment.  It is a constitutional guarantee, laid down, in the public  interest, to ensure that the judicial power is exercised independently.   Short of passing a resolution for removal, Parliament cannot punish a  judge; and the Executive Government has no disciplinary power over  judges.  This can be a source of misunderstanding and frustration; but it  is in aid of securing the independence of judges, who have the  constitutional responsibility of declaring the limits of the powers of the  Parliament, and of deciding the lawfulness of actions of the Executive.

 

 The Judiciary and the Community

 

           Relations between the judiciary and the community are healthy.   The area of judicial work that is the most common source of  dissatisfaction is the sentencing of offenders.  Unfortunately, such  dissatisfaction is sometimes based upon an insufficient understanding of  the facts of particular cases, or of the legal principles being applied by  courts.  On occasion, it is exploited for collateral purposes.

 

           It is usually impossible for judges to respond, on a case by case  basis, to criticism of individual sentences.  Judges do not engage in  public controversy about their decisions; to do so would compromise  their impartiality.  Chief Justices, who commonly preside in Courts of  Criminal Appeal, cannot comment on the merits of cases that may come  to them on appeal.  Attorneys-General may find that the criticism comes  from, or is supported by, a political colleague.

 

           Most Australian courts now have Public Information Officers who  seek to inform the public about sentencing practice and principles.   Reasons for sentencing decisions are published, and in most  jurisdictions there is ready electronic access to them.  But judges cannot  compel people to read, or report, their reasons.  In some jurisdictions,  within such limits as are imposed by statute and legal principle, Courts of  Criminal Appeal lay down sentencing guidelines for the benefit of primary  judges.  These also provide useful information to the profession and the  public.

 

           Discretionary sentencing is an important part of our system of  criminal justice.  The punishment should fit both the offence and the  offender.  Complaints of undue leniency are sometimes made, but I  believe that there is a community awareness of the value of judicial  discretion.  Most people find it easier to identify with the victims, rather  than the perpetrators, of crimes, especially when the offences involve  violence or serious dishonesty.  But there are exceptions to that rule.   Driving offences, for example, which may involve death or serious injury,  are often committed by people of otherwise unblemished character.  And  the prevalence of drug abuse means that no family is completely  immune from the risk of a painful encounter with the criminal justice  system.  Everybody is at least indirectly touched by the manner in which  society deals with delinquent behaviour.  Australians value fairness as  well as firmness; and in the administration of criminal justice, fairness  requires a consideration of the circumstances of individual cases.

 

           Historically, one of the means by which the administration of  justice was kept in touch with the community has been trial by jury.  The  jury system has been one of the most important forms of contact  between the justice system and the public it seeks to serve.  In many  Australian jurisdictions, in the interests of cost and efficiency, trial by jury  has practically disappeared from civil justice, and there has been a trend  towards increasing the range of offences that are dealt with summarily.   These developments may be necessary, but they involve a cost.  That 

 cost does not appear in any set of accounts, but it is real and  substantial.  Community participation in the administration of justice is  good for the community, and good for justice.  In Australia, we have  never had the English system of involvement in the administration of  criminal justice by lay magistrates.  Juries are the principal, and in many  parts of Australia, the only, form of lay involvement in the work of the  courts.  Decisions to reduce their role need to take due account of all the  purposes they serve.

 [1]          Quick & Garran, The Annotated C onstitution of the  Australian Commonwealth, 

             67.

 [2]          For a brief history of the Territory's legal status set Kruger  v The Commonwealth

             (1997) 190 CLR 1 at 49-50.

 [3]          Sue v Hill (1999) 199 CLR 462

 [4]          Australia, House of Representatives, Parliamentary  Debates (Hansard), 18 March

             1902, 10964.

 [5]          Ibid at 10966.

 [6]          Ibid at 10969.

 [7]          Ibid at 10971, 10980.

 [8]          Ibid at 10974.

 [9]          In 2001-2002 40 per cent of all applicants for special leave  to appeal were

             self-represented.

 [10]            Plaintiff S157/2002 v The Commonwealth (2003) 77 ALJR  454.

 [11]         State of the Judicature Address, October 1999, 74 ALJ 147 at  150.

 [12]            Judicial Officers Act 1986 (NSW).

 [13]          Protherough and  Pick "Managing Britannia; Culture and  Management in 

             Modern Britain;  p. 19

 

 

 

