---
title: "State functioning and State failure in the South Pacific."
date: "2004-07-05"
creators:
  - "Reilly, Benjamin"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "South Pacific Region"
  - "Ethnic conflict"
  - "Political stability"
  - "Cultural identity"
  - "Economic development"
  - "Failed states"
  - "Reviews of research"
  - "International comparisons"
  - "Coups"
  - "Decolonisation"
  - "Bougainville Island"
  - "Overseas item"
  - "Fiji"
  - "Solomon Islands"
  - "Vanuatu"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211268388
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KB9D6%22
---

 STATE FUNCTIONING AND STATE FAILURE IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC 

 

 Dr Benjamin Reilly  Senior Lecturer 

 Asia Pacific School of Economics and Government  Australian National University  Canberra ACT 0200  AUSTRALIA 

 

 Phone: +61 2 6125 0431  Fax:   +61 2 6125 5570   

 E-mail: Ben.Reilly@anu.edu.au 

  2

 STATE FUNCTIONING AND STATE FAILURE IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC 

 

 ABSTRACT:  The  South  Pacific  region  features  enormous  variation  in  state  

 performance.  While  Polynesian  nations  such  as  Samoa  have  proved  to  be  relatively  

 successful  post-colonial  states,  Melanesian  countries  like  the  Solomon  Islands  are  

 increasingly categorised as ‘weak’, ‘failing’ or ‘failed’ states. Drawing on a range of 

 comparative studies by  economists and political scientists in recent years, this paper 

 argues that cross-country variation in ethnic diversity between much of Polynesia and 

 Melanesia  is  a  key  factor  in  explaining  differences  in  state  performance  across  the  

 South  Pacific.  It  shows  how  different  kinds  of  ethnic  structure  are  associated  with  

 specific  political  and  economic  outcomes,  including  variation  in  political  stability,  

 economic development, and internal conflict from country to country. In so doing, it 

 helps  explain  why  some  parts  of  the  South  Pacific  appear  to  be failing  while  others  

 are  relative  success  stories  -  and  why  this  is  unlikely  to  change  in  the  foreseeable  

 future. 

 

 Introduction 

 

 The South Pacific region is marked by  enormous contrasts in state performance. On 

 the hand, Polynesian countries such as Samoa have proved to be relatively successful 

 post-colonial  states,  providing  stable  government,  policy  continuity  and  steady  if  

 unspectacular  economic  growth,  notwithstanding  an  ongoing  dependence  on  foreign  

 aid.  By  contrast,  much  of  Melanesia  is  plagued  by  poor  state  performance,  with  

 negative  economic  growth,  ethnic  conflict,  weak  governance  and  military  coups  all  

 signalling  the  failure  of  states  to  provide  basic  security  and  public  services  to  their  

 citizens.  Each  of  the  four  independent  Melanesian  states  (Fiji,  Papua  New  Guinea,  

 Solomon Islands and Vanuatu) have suffered army mutinies in recent years; Fiji has 

 experienced  three  coups;  and  Papua  New  Guinea  has  faced  armed  conflict  in  

 Bougainville and, more recently, the Southern Highlands. The most dramatic case of 

 state  failure  in  the  region  is  Solomon  Islands,  the  subject  of  an  Australian-led  

 intervention,  operation  Helpem  Fren,  in  June  2003.  The  Australian  Strategic  Policy  

 Institute  has  categorized  the  Solomons  as  a  “failing  state”,  a  term  also  used  by  the  

 Australian government and academic commentators (ASPI 2002, Wainwright 2003). 

 

  3

 In  parallel  with  this  stark  variation  in  state  performance  across  the  region,  different  

 sub-regions  of  the  South  Pacific  are  characterized  by  enormous  contrasts  in  their  

 internal  social  structure.  On  the  one  hand,  the  independent  Polynesian  states  of  

 Samoa, Tonga and Tuvalu are amongst the most ethnically homogenous societies in 

 the  world  today,  being  composed  of  one  dominant  cultural  group  and  usually  

 speaking one language. By contrast, Melanesia is one of the world’s most fragmented 

 regions, containing roughly a quarter of all the world’s known languages. Papua New 

 Guinea  alone  has  over  800  languages  and  several  thousand  ethno-linguistic  groups,  

 making  it  on  some  indicators  the  most  heterogeneous  state  anywhere  in  the  world.  

 Other parts of the region, such as Fiji or New Caledonia, exhibit more polarized social 

 structures as a result of colonial labour migration. How do these different patterns of 

 societal diversity affect state performance?  

 

 Ethnicity and Development 

 Political  scientists  and  economists  have  been  interested  in  the  effects  of  ethnic  

 structure  on  state  performance  for  decades.  In  one  prominent  case,  a  World  Bank  

 study of Africa found that ethnic diversity was negatively related to economic growth, 

 schooling  attainment,  availability  of  infrastructure  and  sound  government  policies,  

 prompting the authors to identify ethnic fragmentation as the key to Africa’s “growth 

 tragedy”  (Easterly  and  Levine  1997).  Similarly,  Rodrik  (1999)  found  ethnic  

 fragmentation  to  be  associated  with  a  range  of  negative  outcomes,  including  poor  

 economic  growth  and  income  inequality.  Mauro  (1995)  concluded  that  fragmented  

 societies  had  a  strong  tendency  towards  corruption,  because  of  the  tendency  of  

 members of ethnic groups to favour their own kin.  

 In a recent study of this phenomenon in the Pacific region, Reilly and Phillpot (2002) 

 found  that  the  most  important  reason  for  disparities  in  provincial  development  in  

 Papua  New  Guinea  was  differences  in  ethnic  diversity  from  province  to  province.  

 Testing  and  rejecting  a  range  of  alternative  explanations,  they  found  that  higher  

 diversity  levels  in  different  regions  of  Papua  New  Guinea  created  collective  action  

 problems  and  undermined  the  development  of  social  capital,  undermining  

 development  in  more  heterogeneous  areas.  Even  when  alternative  explanations  such  

 as  size,  government  performance  and  land  resources  were  factored  in,  more  diverse  

 provinces had significantly lower development levels than more homogeneous ones. 

  4

 Testing this same proposition in the rest of the Pacific should be relatively easy once a 

 common  measurement  of  ethnic  diversity  is  agreed  upon.  Unfortunately,  the  

 measurement of ethnicity is notoriously difficult. At a minimum, most scholars agree 

 that  ethnicity  is  manifested  as  a  mixture  of  ‘primordial’  and  ‘constructed’  factors,  

 being  based  on  ascriptive  notions  such  as  clan,  tribe,  and  language  as  well  as  more  

 malleable  social  identities  formed  by  colonialism  or  post-colonial  developments.1 

 This means that ethnic identities are never static: indeed, they can be created to serve 

 particular  goals  and  ends.  Recent  landholding  disputes  in  Papua  New  Guinea,  for  

 example, have seen claimants invent clan identities from scratch in order to facilitate 

 collective demands for compensation (Filer 2000).  

 This  dynamic  aspect  of  group  construction  makes  any  reliable  measurement  of  

 ‘ethnicity’  extremely  difficult.  There  is  no  generally  accepted  measure  of  ethnic  

 diversity.2  In  Papua  New  Guinea,  for  example,  estimates  of  the  number  of  ethnic  

 groups  range  from  “more  than  1,000”  (Levine  1997,  479)  to  “more  than  10,000”  

 (Griffin 1974, 143). By contrast, more reliable data is available on a related measure - 

 the extent of linguistic diversity for each country. This information can be captured in 

 a  “diversity  index”  ranging  from 0  (a  completely  homogenous  country  where  every  

 individual speaks the same language) to 1 (a completely heterogenous country where 

 every  individual  speaks  a  different  language).  While  crude,  this  is  easy  to  quantify,  

 and  serves  to  captures  the  relative  degree  of  societal  homogeneity  or  heterogeneity  

 from country to country.  

 Figure One compares the relationship between linguistic fragmentation and per capita 

 income across the seven independent states of Melanesia and Polynesia. Papua New 

 Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu -- all Melanesian states - each have diversity 

 rankings of .97 or higher, while the Polynesian cases of Samoa, Tonga and Tuvalu are 

 at  the  other  extreme,  with  diversity  levels  around  .01.  Overall,  there is  a  strong  and  

 statistically  significant  negative  correlation  between  fragmentation  and  prosperity.  

 The  higher  a  country’s  diversity  levels,  the  lower  its  per  capita  income.  Indeed,  

 according  to  the  regression  co-efficient  measuring  this  relationship,  almost  half  the  

 

 1  The term primordialism is usually associated with Geertz 1963. For a discussion of this typology in the scholarly 

 literature, see Esman 1994, 9-16.  2  The most widely-used measure, the index of ethno-linguistic fragmentation (ELF), suffers from numerous errors 

 of omission and commission, and ignores the Pacific islands region completely. See Reilly 2000. 

  5

 variation  in  per  capita  GDP  from  country  to  country  is  explained  by  linguistic  

 fragmentation.3 Alternative measures of prosperity yield similar patterns: amongst this 

 same  group  of  countries,  linguistic diversity  is  also  negatively  correlated  with  long-run  (1970-2000)  economic  growth  rates  and  with  2002  ‘human  development’  

 rankings.4 

 F i g u r e  O n e : F r a g m e n t a t i o n  a n d  P r o s p e r i t y  i n  M e l a n e s i a  a n d  P o l y n e s i a

 S a m o a

 T o n g a

 T u v a l u

 S o l o m o n  I s l a n d s

 P N G

 V a n u a t u

 F i j i

 R 2  =  0 . 4 7 5 3

 6 0 0

 8 0 0

 1 0 0 0

 1 2 0 0

 1 4 0 0

 1 6 0 0

 1 8 0 0

 2 0 0 0

 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1

 L i n g u i s t i c  f r a g m e n t a t i o n

 GDP per capita

 

 Of  course,  there  are  a  number  of  alternative  explanations  that  could  be  advanced  to  

 explain the performance of the two regions, such as the relative size of states in both 

 population  and  geographic  terms,  the  much  larger  natural  resource  endowments  of  

 Melanesia,  proximity  to  potential  markets,  and  so  on.  However,  on  most  of  these  

 measures  the  larger,  better-resourced  states  of  Melanesia  should  be  at  an  advantage  

 compared  to  their  smaller  and  more  isolated  Polynesian  counterparts.  Yet  despite  

 these  inherent  advantages,  they  have  performed  more  poorly  across  the  board  (with  

 

 3  The regression coefficient is R2=0.48, statistically significant at the .05 level.  4  For  the  first  measure,  see  Hughes  2003;  for  the  second,  see  United  Nations  Development  Program  2002.  

 However, both measures are impacted by missing data, hence my use of per capita GDP figures. 

  6

 the exception of Fiji, with its large Indo-Fijian population). By contrast, Tuvalu -- one 

 of the world’s smallest, most isolated and resource-poor countries -- has been one of 

 the  best  performers  in  the  entire  region  (Finin  2002).  This  flies  in  the  face  of  

 conventional wisdom. How do we account for such a pattern? 

 One explanation is that  the highly-fragmented societies of Melanesia have difficulty  

 in  delivering  public  services  and  infrastructure  in  the  face  of  competing  ethno-linguistic demands. As Easterly (2001, 271) notes, even the delivery of an innocuous 

 public  good  like  a  road  can  have  an  important  ethnic  dimension.  This  is  a  major  

 problem  in  countries  like  Papua  New  Guinea,  where  roads  represent  an  essential  

 lifeline for rural communities. For example, the Highlands Highway - the main artery 

 linking  highlands  towns  with  coastal  ports  and  with  each  other  -  has  deteriorated  

 markedly over the past decade as investment has increasingly been diverted towards 

 local  projects.  In  November  2002,  it  was  revealed  that  a  former  Finance  Minister,  

 Andrew  Kumbakor,  had  as  Minister  granted  approval  to  seven  financially-questionable  new  road  projects,  six  of  which  were  in  his  own  electorate  -  a  move  

 which  benefited  his  own  support  base,  but  did  little  to  promote  development  in  the  

 country as a whole.5 

 In the absence of a strong national identity in post-colonial creations like Papua New 

 Guinea or Solomon Islands, most people’s primary  loyalty is to their clan, tribe and 

 wantok (“one talk”) groups. In competing with each other for resources, these ethno-political units increasingly act like interest groups in developed societies, attempting 

 to  divert  potential  public  goods  towards  the  private  enrichment  of  their  members  

 alone.  Such  ‘rent  seeking’  is  a  pervasive  aspect  of  contemporary  political  and  

 economic  life  in  Melanesia,  precisely  because  of  the  way  societal  fragmentation  

 enables  small  ethnic  collectives  to  be  mobilized,  monitored  and  enforced  to  acquire  

 and  then  monopolize  control  of  actual  and  potential  public  goods.  Micro-ethnic  

 identities  thus  become  the  key  social  structure  for  facilitating  the  formation  of  

 distributive  coalitions,  which  are  then  used  to  divert  potentially  productive  public  

 goods towards the benefit of their group alone (for more on this, see Reilly 2004).  

 Buttressing this is the pervasive problem of representative government and democracy 

 in highly diverse societies. Politics in many parts of Melanesia continues to be more 

 

 5  See ‘Kumbakor gets tongue lashing’, PNG Post-Courier, 15-17 November 2002. 

  7

 about wealth distribution than wealth creation. If politicians see their role not as part 

 of  a  national  government  but  rather  as  delegates  whose  role  is  to  channel  resources  

 back to their own group of tribal supporters (as is the case in many parts of western 

 Melanesia), their focus will be on delivering these goods to their clan voters (which  

 are often a much smaller group than even their electorate) in order to ensure their re-election. In so doing, they will not invest as much in public infrastructure -- which can 

 assist with wealth creation -- as they would in a more homogenous society. The result 

 is  lower  provision  of  many  types  of  public  resources  than  would  otherwise  be  the  

 case, and hence much lower development levels for society at large. 

 Understanding the underlying impact of ethnic fragmentation thus helps explain the 

 poor performance of Melanesia as compared to other parts of the Pacific. As Judith 

 Bennett (2002:1) recently observed, 

 For many outsiders, the accelerating failure of governments in western Melanesia in the 

 last decade has been difficult to understand. At independence, although their resources 

 ranged  from  the  rich  diversity  in  Papua  New  Guinea  to  the  less  abundant,  but  still  

 substantial  in  Solomon  Islands,  it  seemed  that  with  some  temporary  assistance  from  

 developed nations in the region their future would be assured. Yet since independence, 

 overall Melanesian living standards and personal security have declined; and more and 

 more aid is being requested from donors. 

 Focussing on the developmental challenges created by diversity makes this failure of 

 government more understandable. The western Melanesian countries are some of the 

 most ethno-linguistically diverse societies not just in the Pacific, but in the world. It 

 should therefore be no surprise, if one accepts the arguments made in this paper, that 

 it is these same societies that have struggled the most since independence to deliver 

 national development in the face of a multitude of competing ethno-political demands. 

 

 The Political Consequences of Ethnic Fragmentation 

 While  the  consequences  of  ethno-linguistic  fragmentation  are  seen  as  being  almost  

 entirely  detrimental  to  good  economic  performance,  there  are  other  dimensions  of  

 governance. What about the political impacts of heterogeneity? Here, the comparative 

 literature  is  more  nuanced.  According  to  recent  research,  the  relationship  between  

  8

 ethnic  fragmentation  and  democracy  is  essentially  bell-shaped:  both  highly  

 homogeneous and  highly  fragmented  social  structures  bolster  the  likelihood  of  

 democracy,  while  bi-polar  structures  are  inimical  to  democratic  prospects.  Thus  a  

 highly  fragmented  society  (as  in  Papua  New  Guinea)  should  be  better  placed  to  

 maintain  democracy  than  one  split  between  two  similarly-sized  groups,  as  in  Fiji.  

 Such a situation, in which society is polarized and in which one group can potentially 

 control power alone, is empirically one of the most important predictors of civil war 

 (Collier and Hoeffler 1998).  

 As  with  the  literature  on  the  economic  consequences  of  ethnic  fragmentation,  these  

 comparative  findings  have  considerable  relevance  for  understanding  patterns  of  

 politics  and  conflict  in  the  Pacific.  For  one  thing,  they  help  explain  why  Fiji,  the  

 wealthiest  and  most  developed  sovereign  state  in  the  South  Pacific,  has  nonetheless  

 suffered  several  coups  while  Papua  New  Guinea,  with  a  much  poorer  economic  

 record, is nevertheless one of the very few post-colonial states to have maintained an 

 unbroken  record  of  democratic  rule.  As  is  well  known,  in  Fiji  the  dominant  ethnic  

 cleavage  is  a  bi-polar  one  between  indigenous  Fijians  and  Indo-Fijians,  and  in  both  

 1987  and  2000  this  cleavage  was  used  to  mobilize  support  for  an  economically  

 disastrous coup. By contrast, there has been no coup in Papua New Guinea, despite a 

 much larger and poorer population, failing infrastructure, declining investment, falling 

 living standards, and weak economic growth.  

 Comparative statistical models which rely on these very factors to predict coups and 

 other  kinds  of  democratic  breakdowns  have  found  the  continuity  of  democracy  in  

 Papua  New  Guinea  to  be  a  deviant  case  which  defies  explanation  (Londregan  and  

 Poole 1990,  Vanhanen  1997).  Why,  they  ask,  has  democracy  in  Papua  New  Guinea  

 not  broken  down  in  the  face  of  such  unfavourable  facilitating  conditions?  Ethnic  

 structure  provides  one  explanation.  Even  though  there  may  be  widespread  

 dissatisfaction  with  the  way  the  political  system  works  in  Papua  New  Guinea,  it  is  

 nevertheless  extremely  difficult  for  any  one  group  to  amass  sufficient  collective  

 support to overthrow the government in power. The result is that, even though it has 

 not delivered much in the way of development, the existing political system persists in 

 part  through  its  own  inertia.  Thus  Reilly  (2000)  argues  that  Papua  New  Guinea’s  

 extremely  high  levels  of  ethno-linguistic  fragmentation  actually  makes  democracy  

 possible in the face of unfavourable social and economic conditions.  

  9

 So,  while  ethno-linguistic  heterogeneity  is  a  negative  factor  for  economic  

 development, it can be a positive factor for safeguarding formal democracy. However, 

 this  is  not  to  argue  that  a  fragmented  ethnic  structure  is  a  good  thing  for  other  

 dimensions of governance. One clear effect of ethnic fragmentation is the way that it 

 impacts  upon  the  stability  of  executive  government.  Here  the  contrast  between  the  

 more  homogenous  Polynesian  states  and  the  more  fragmented  Melanesian  ones  

 becomes  particularly  acute.  In  Tonga  and  Samoa,  governments  tend  to  be  long-lasting,  and  participation  in  executive  government  is  restricted  to  members  of  the  

 country’s  traditional  aristocracy:  in  Tonga,  to  the  monarchy  alone,  in  Samoa,  to  the  

 matai. This stifles open competition, but it does create a degree of political stability, 

 and  policy  predictability.  Indeed,  comparisons  of  government  tenure  across  the  

 Pacific  show  these  to  be  amongst  the  most  stable  of  all  countries  in  terms  of  

 continuity of office (Larmour 2000).  

 The  stability  of  executive  government  in  these  Polynesian  cases  stands  in  stark  

 contrast  to  the  increasing  use  of  no-confidence  votes  to  bring  down  governments  in  

 other parts of the Pacific, such as western Melanesia. Indeed, the raucous competition 

 for  elected  office  that  is  a  feature  of  politics  in  places  like  Papua  New  Guinea  has  

 been  accompanied  by  enormous  executive  instability.  To  date,  every  government  

 elected  in  Papua  New  Guinea  has  fallen  before  the  expiration  of  the  parliamentary  

 term; in recent years the governments of both Solomon Islands and Vanuatu have also 

 been  overturned  on  the  floor  of  parliament  (under  considerable  duress,  in  the  

 Solomons case).  

 However, the most unstable executive government in the Pacific today is undoubtedly 

 that  of  Nauru,  which  is  in  Micronesia.  Dobell  (2003)  categorises  Nauru  as  the  

 Pacific’s second failed state, along with Solomon Islands. Like the Solomons, Nauru 

 is  now  essentially  bankrupt,  dependent  on  external  aid  from  Australia  in  return  for  

 temporarily  accepting  refugee  claimants.  Nauru’s  social  structure  is  generally  

 considered to be based around 12 traditional clans (Crocombe and Giese 1988), and 

 the  combination  of  clan,  familial  and  personal  rivalries  now  dominate  political  

 competition.  Indeed,  in  recent  years  Nauruan  politics  has  become  increasingly  

 ‘Melanesian’, with fifteen changes of government in the last five years, including five 

 in 2003 alone. However, Nauru’s trajectory towards a failed state is quite different to 

 Solomon  Islands,  as  it  has  squandered  almost  all  of  the  earnings  from  its  near-

  10

 exhausted  phosphate  resources.  As  Dobell  (2003,  8)  notes,  “One  state  has  failed  

 because of its poverty, the other because of its inability to handle riches”. 

 Again,  these  patterns  of  behaviour  have  well-established  impacts  on  developmental  

 variables  such  as  economic  growth.  Successive  comparative  studies  have  confirmed  

 that the worst possible form of governance for economic growth is to have unstable 

 executives,  an  unrepresentative  legislature,  and  a  fragmented  and  personalised  

 political party system which lacks roots in the community (see Powell 1982, Bueno de 

 Mesquita  et  al  2001).  This  is  a  recipe  for  unstable  politics,  unsteady  policy,  and  a  

 serious  weakness  of  governance.  Unfortunately  it  is  also  an  increasingly  accurate  

 description  of  governance  in  much  of  Melanesia  and  also  of  Nauru.  It  is  less  

 applicable  to  most  of  Micronesia  (where  US-inspired  presidential  forms  of  

 government  are  the  norm,  with  consequent  benefits  for  executive  stability)  or  

 Polynesia  (where  politics  continues  to  be  based  around  traditional  chiefly  social  

 structures rather than micro-ethnic loyalties). 

 

 Ethnic Fragmentation and Internal Conflict 

 Another issue that has great relevance to the Pacific is the interplay of ethnic identity 

 and  natural  resource  endowments.  There  is  a  growing  and  influential  scholarly  

 literature on the so-called “resource curse”: the tendency of resource-rich countries to 

 under-perform  economically  and  fall  victim  to  large-scale  internal  violence  (Ross  

 2004).  As  both  ethnic  groups  and  natural  resources  such  as  mines,  gasfields  and  

 forests tend to be geographically concentrated, there is often a clear overlay between 

 ethnic  identity  and  claims  of  group  ownership  to  a  resource,  and  thus  an  interplay  

 between ethnic diversity, natural resources, and internal conflict. 

 Testing a range of “greed versus grievance” explanations for the outbreak of civil war, 

 Collier  and  Hoeffler  (2000)  found  that  primary  commodity  dependence  sharply  

 increases  a  country’s  risk  of  conflict;  indeed,  a  sizeable  resource  endowment  was  

 actually  the  most  important  single  explanator  of  civil  wars.  Again,  however,  the  

 ethnic  dimension  was  also  important:  societies  in  which  one  ethnic  group  could  

 dominate over others were particularly at risk of civil war. Ethnic fragmentation, by 

 contrast, decreased the risk of large-scale conflict, for the same reason it decreased the 

  11

 risk of coups: the problems of organisation posed by  the presence of many different 

 ethnic groups. Collier used the example of West Papua/Irian Jaya as an illustration: 

 This province is dependent upon primary commodity exports and over the past 30 years 

 many small groups have attempted to mount armed opposition to rule from Indonesia. 

 However, none of these groups succeeded in building a viable rebel organization of any 

 scale.  The  likely  reason  for  this  is  that  Irian  Jaya  is  so  astonishingly  ethnically  

 fragmented, with some 450 distinct language groups: the groups simply cannot cohere 

 into a military organization (Collier 2001, 150).  

 In  sum,  coups  and  rebellions  should  thus  be  rare  in  ethnically  fragmented  societies  

 because  of  the  considerable  difficulties  posed  in  maintaining  cross-ethnic  unity  for  

 any political objective, both positive and negative.  

 But  if  this  is  the  case,  how  do  we  explain  the  various  armed  rebellions  that  have  

 occurred in  all four independent Melanesian  states over the past  decade - the Fijian  

 coups,  the  Bougainville  war  in  Papua  New  Guinea,  the  Santo  rebellion  in  Vanuatu,  

 and (most recently) the overthrow of elected government in the Solomon Islands? On 

 the  face  of  it,  these  events  undermine  the  claim  that  ethnic  fragmentation  somehow  

 makes societies safer. However, I argue that upon closer examination, each of these 

 conflicts  can  also  been  seen  as  an  example  of  the  broader  theory  in  action.  In  each  

 case,  the diverse  impacts  of  colonial  rule,  migration  and  post-colonial  state-building  

 led to the growth of new cleavages which served to restructure politics along a more 

 confrontational axis. In all of these cases, the fragmentation of traditional society was 

 overlain  and  sometimes  replaced  by  a  bi-polar,  us-versus-them  form  of  identity  

 construction which served to move ethnic structure away from a dispersed (and thus 

 safer) formation and towards one of polarization.  

 Colonialism has been a crucial factor in this process. In New Caledonia, for example, 

 as  part  of  the  campaign  for  independence  from  France  “the  indigenous  liberation  

 movement  seeks  to  polarize  the  population  into  Kanak/non-Kanak  segments,  and  to  

 establish  an  independent  nation  …  The  French  in  turn  attempt  to  undermine  Kanak  

 unity by appealing to the “true diversity of races” in New Caledonia” (Linnekin 1990, 

 171). The 1988 hostage drama in New Caledonia, in which 28 people died, is a tragic 

 example  of  the  consequences  of  this  kind  of  polarized  identity  creation.  Elsewhere,  

 the  emergence  of  identities  based  around  colonial  constructs  such  as  “Papua”  (in  

 Papua  New  Guinea)  or  “Malaita”  (in  the  Solomon  Islands)  are  examples  of  how  

  12

 simple  administrative  units  of  colonialism  can  nonetheless  assume  prominence  as  

 important  post-colonial  ethnic  identities.6  In  such  cases,  “what  in  pre-colonial  times  

 were politically  fragmented and culturally and linguistically diverse communities … 

 become units locked in  the struggle for power and resources in post-colonial states” 

 (Keesing 1989:26). Contemporary conflicts in Fiji, Bougainville, the Solomon Islands 

 and Vanuatu provide good examples of the way in which this process can occur. 

 

 Fiji 

 Fiji provides perhaps the most obvious example of the dangers of a polarized ethnic 

 formation. The ‘bi-communal’ division between indigenous Fijians and Indo-Fijians, 

 each  comprising  around  half  of  the  population  (50  percent  indigenous  Fijian,  44  

 percent  Indo-Fijian),  is  the  most dangerous  of  all  ethnic  structures  (Milne 1988).  At  

 times of elevated ethnic politics - such as the elections of governments perceived as 

 being controlled by Indo-Fijians in 1987 and 1999 -- this one dimension of cleavage 

 tends to takes precedence over all others. Indeed the superficial Fijian-Indian division 

 has served at various times to maintain a degree of unity within the indigenous Fijian 

 population, which is itself divided along tribal, regional and cultural lines -- especially 

 the  distinction  between  the  dominance  of  Polynesian  chiefly  systems  in  the  east  

 versus  the  more  egalitarian  structures  in  the  western  regions  (Thomas  1990).  The  

 Indo-Fijian  community  is  also  divided  along  various  internal  lines,  and  contains  a  

 significant Muslim minority. 

 These various intra-community divisions, however, quickly become overlain at times 

 of  crisis  with  the  much  blunter  one  of  “Indian”  versus  “Fijian”.  Both  the  1987  and  

 2000  coups  used  the  threat  of  Indo-Fijian  domination  as  a  means  of  unifying  the  

 Fijian  community  along  “us-versus-them”  lines.  There  have  been  varying  academic  

 interpretations of  the 1987  coups,  with  some seeing  them as racially  motivated,  and  

 others  as  more  complex  events  encouraged  by  class  interests,  competition  between  

 chiefly  and  commoner  indigenous  Fijians,  regional  tensions  and  personal  ambition  

 (Scar  1988;  Lal  1988;  Lawson  1991).  Similarly,  some  analyses  of  the  2000  coups  

 argue  that  the  illusion  of  ethnic  unity  was  actually  critical  in  maintaining  a  crude  

 

 6  For  example,  violence  between  'Papuans'  and  'New  Guineans'  following  a  rugby  league  match  in  Papua  New  

 Guinea in June 1968, which was later reported as “one of the worst outbreaks of inter-tribal fighting to occur” in 

 Port Moresby, was structured along these introduced colonial administrative divisions (Nelson 1974, 26). 

  13

 power-grab  that  was  more  about  the  economic  interests  of  George  Speight  and  his  

 backers  than  about  ethnicity  per  se  (Lal  and  Pretes  2001).  In  each  case,  however,  

 there  is  little  argument  that  pan-ethnic  appeals  to  a  unified  Fijian  or  Indo-Fijian  

 identity were a primary means of mobilizing support on both sides. In both 1987 and 

 2000, multiple and often competing identities were replaced, temporarily at least, by a 

 crude dichotomy of indigeneity versus immigrant.  

 

 Bougainville 

 The Bougainville rebellion in Papua New Guinea, the most serious internal conflict in 

 the  Pacific  region  during  the  1990s,  featured  a  different  process  of  identity  

 construction. The island of Bougainville is no more internally homogenous than most 

 other  parts  of  Papua  New  Guinea:  it  features  19  different  language  groups  and  

 associated  clan  and  tribal  rivalries  (Larmour  1992).  Following  the  outbreak  of  full-blown  conflict  between  secessionist  forces  on  Bougainville  and  the  Papua  New  

 Guinea  government  in  1987,  the  pro-independence  forces  also  split  into  several  

 competing  camps  (Regan  1998).  However,  the  independence  movement  needed  to  

 downplay  these  differences  and  emphasise  a  distinctively  pan-Bougainvillean  

 identity.  Emphasis  was  consistently  placed  on  the  supposedly  more  peaceful  

 temperament  and  relative  cultural  advancement  of  Bougainvilleans  compared  to  the  

 more aggressive nature of other Papua New Guineans, a process that became crucial 

 to the creation of a Bougainville ethnic identity (Nash and Ogan 1990). 

 Another way of doing this was by focussing on Bougainville’s putative closeness to 

 Solomon  Islands  and  distinctiveness  from  the  rest  of  Papua  New  Guinea  by  

 emphasising  not  language  or  tribe  as  an  ethnic  marker,  but  skin  colour.  Thus  one  

 rebel, Leo Hannett, claimed that “Ethnically, Bougainvilleans are obviously different 

 from Papuans and New Guineans. We are generally jet black people having common 

 ancestry with more people down West Solomons rather than with any groups in PNG” 

 (quoted  in  Premdas  1977,  71).  As  part  of  the  process  of  identity  construction,  then,  

 some  traditional  forms  of  identity  such  as  linguistic  and  tribal  allegiance  were  

 eclipsed  by  others  which  more  usefully  served  the  purpose  of  projecting  a  unified  

 Bougainvillean  nation.  Since  the  peace  deal  signed  in  2001,  intra-Bougainvillean  

 divisions based around traditional clan ties have become more salient once again. 

  14

 

 Solomon Islands 

 The process of identity construction between the islands of Guadalcanal and Malaita, 

 which precipitated the recent conflict in Solomon Islands, has deeper historical roots. 

 A  country  with  450,000  people,  87  different  indigenous  languages,  and  little  in  the  

 way of national consciousness, tensions between island groups have been a feature of 

 life in Solomon Islands for much of the post-war period. This process was intricately 

 intertwined  with  the  introduction  of  new  administrative  units  by  the  colonial  state,  

 which  precipitated  divisions  between  various  parts  of  the  Solomons.  Following  

 independence,  governments  attempted  to  build  some  kind  of  national  consciousness  

 through the education system and the development of Pigin as a common language of 

 communication, but they made little progress in replacing traditional ethnic identities 

 with non-ethnic ‘civil’ ones (Jourdan 1995).  

 The  1990s  saw  increasing  ‘ethnic  tensions’  between  Malaita,  one  of  the  most  

 ethnically diverse parts of the Solomons, and the neighbouring island of Guadalcanal, 

 to which many Malaitans had migrated. This led to the development of new kind of 

 identity,  as  “the  ethnically  diverse  islands  of  Malaita  and  Guadalcanal  forged  large  

 island-wide  ethno-nationalist  identities  [in  order]  to  dominate  Solomon  Islands  

 national  politics  as  if  they  were  the  only  two  ethnic  groups  in  the  country”  (Fry  

 2000:303). This attempt at identity construction was not an easy process: Kabutaulaka 

 (2001)  notes  that  the  maintenance  of  a  single  ethnic  identity  in  Malaita  proved  so  

 difficult  that  some  enterprising  leaders  claimed  that  Malaitans  were  actually  

 descendents of the lost tribes of Israel. Similar problems afflicted the attempt to create 

 a unified Guadalcanal identity. 

 Despite these difficulties, by 1999 these renewed island-based cleavages had resulted 

 in  the  formation  of  two  armed  groups  -  the  Malaitan  Eagle  Force  and  the  Isatabu  

 Freedom Movement  (‘Isatabu’  being  the claimed  traditional  name  for  Guadalcanal).  

 Rising  conflict  between  these  groups  resulted  in  the  expulsion  of  some  20,000  

 Malatian  settlers  from  Guadalcanal  in  1999,  the  overthrow  of  the  Solomon  Islands  

 government  in  May  2000,  and  a  violent  and  chaotic  internal  war,  with  hundreds  of  

 casualties  on  both  sides.  The  conflict  served  to  reinforce  the  salience  of  what  was  

 effectively  a  bi-polar  cleavage  overlain  on  the  fragmented  cultural  basis  of  the  

  15

 country.  Significantly,  since  the  signing  of  the  Townsville  Peace  Accord,  and  

 particularly since the Helpem Fren intervention, this veneer of island-wide unity has 

 begun  to  splinter,  as  local  clan  identities  have  reasserted  themselves  (Kabutaulaka  

 2002). 

 

 Vanuatu 

 Vanuatu, an Anglo-French condominium prior to independence in 1980, has recently 

 seen  the  mobilization  of  ethnic  identities  work  in  the  other  direction  -  towards  

 conflict  de-escalation.  The  de-politicization  of  Vanuatu’s  Anglophone-Francophone  

 cleavage, and the reassertion of traditional Melanesian politics, is a good illustration 

 of  the  dynamism  and  fluidity  of  ethnic  identities.  Like  Papua  New  Guinea  and  the  

 Solomon  Islands,  Vanuatu  has  a  highly  fragmented  form  of  traditional  society  

 featuring typically Melanesian patterns of clan organization, and some 109 indigenous 

 languages.  But  until  recently,  Vanuatu  politics  was  dominated  by  an  over-arching  

 colonial  cleavage  between  the  country’s  Anglophone  majority  and  the  Francophone  

 minority.  This  bi-polar  linguistic  identity  has  had  a  marked  impact  on  Vanuatu’s  

 political  development.  For  example,  the  Santo  rebellion  in  1980  -  which  featured  a  

 hodge-podge of different actors and interests including disaffected French settlers and 

 French-educated locals, the local chief Jimmy Stevens, and the libertarian U.S.-based 

 Pheonix  Corporation  --  was  mobilized  primarily  around  the  issue  of  Francophone  

 disaffection.  

 Similarly,  Vanuatu’s  post-colonial  party  system  featured  two  dominant  parties,  one  

 Anglophone,  one  Francophone  -  a  system quite  unlike  the  fractionalized  multiparty  

 patterns  of  other  Melanesian  countries.  However,  in  recent  years,  this  cleavage  has  

 gradually  lost  its  salience  and  more  traditionally  Melanesian  patterns  of  political  

 identity seem to be reasserting themselves. For example, the vote share for the major 

 Anglophone  party,  the  Vanua’aku  Pati,  has  declined  steadily  since  independence,  

 from 67 percent in the 1979 elections that brought it to power to 47 percent in 1987, 

 whereupon the party split in two. By the 1990s, the two-party system of the past had 

 been  largely  replaced  by  more  familiar  Melanesian  patterns  of  fragmentation,  while  

 traditional clan and tribal politics had reasserted themselves.  

  16

 It  is  unlikely  today  that  any  secessionist  movement  based  around  the  Anglophone-Francophone  cleavage  would  be  able  succeed  in  mobilizing  significant  support  in  

 Vanuautu.  Rather,  as  traditional  forms  of  ethnic  fragmentation  have  reasserted  

 themselves,  the  danger  of  a  bi-polar  conflict  has  receded,  and  more  familiar  

 governance problems associated with Melanesian politics - such as clan voting, ethnic 

 nepotism and unstable executive government - have become more prominent. As one 

 indication  of  this,  there  were  six  changes  of  government  between  1995  and  2001  

 alone (StÃ¶ver 2001, 835). 

 

 Conclusion 

 The  combined  evidence  presented  in  this  paper  has  important  implications  for  

 discussions  of  state  performance  and  state  failure  in  the  South  Pacific.  Despite  their  

 small  size,  lack  of  natural  resources,  and  distance  from  world  markets,  the  better  

 performers in the South Pacific have, on most indicators of development, come from 

 Polynesia.  By  contrast,  in  the  larger  and  better-endowed  states  of  Melanesia,  the  

 combination  of  ethnic  diversity  and  natural  resource  endowment  appears  to  have  

 generated particular pathologies of governance, with a focus on rent-seeking by ethnic 

 interest  groups  leading  to  collective  action  problems,  the  under-provision  of  public  

 goods, and below-par economic performance. Thus it is these cases, rather than their 

 resource-poor  Polynesian  counterparts,  that  are  increasingly  raised  in  discussions  of  

 state failure in the South Pacific. 

 This  trend  also  has  implications  for  Australia’s  policy  towards  the  South  Pacific  

 region. Due to a combination of geographical proximity and historical circumstance, 

 as well as current policies on asylum seekers, the ‘war on terror’ and state-building, 

 the  Australian  government’s  foremost  preoccupations  in  the  region  are  Papua  New  

 Guinea,  Solomon  Islands,  Nauru,  and  Vanuatu,  in  roughly  that  order  of  importance.  

 With the exception of Nauru, these are the most ethnically diverse states in the South 

 Pacific. They are also, without exception, the worst performed states of the region on 

 most indicators of development. If, as the evidence presented in this paper suggests, 

 these problems are rooted in the very social structure of the countries themselves, this 

 record  of  under-performance  is  unlikely  to  change  any  time  soon,  regardless  of  

  17

 external  efforts.  Deep-rooted  patterns  of  identity  and  culture  are  likely  to  be  

 considerably more resilient than anything Australian policymakers can come up with. 

 However,  there  are  some  positive  effects  of  diversity  too.  Despite  its  deleterious  

 economic  impacts,  ethno-linguistic  diversity  can  promote  democratic  longevity  by  

 making it difficult to overthrow existing regimes. Thus, we are unlikely to see a coup 

 in Papua New Guinea, for example, despite its ongoing difficulties. In addition, ethnic 

 identities  are  not  static.  Existing  patterns  of  ethno-linguistic  fragmentation  are  

 influential  but  not  inviolable.  Indeed,  new  identities  and  cleavages  can  establish  

 themselves  surprisingly  quickly.  Examples  include  contemporary  conflicts  in  

 Bougainville and Solomon Islands, both of which depended on the fashioning of “us-or-them”  post-colonial  identities  from  what  were  highly  fragmented  traditional  

 societies. Patterns of ethno-linguistic identification, influential though they are, should 

 thus be seen as fluid, contextual and dynamic. History is not destiny. 

 By  unifying  explanations  of  both  economic  and  political  outcomes  via  the  common  

 causal  factor  of  ethno-linguistic  structure,  this  paper  helps  to  explain  variations  in  

 state development and performance across the Pacific islands region. Of course, there 

 are  many  other  reasons  for  these  variations  as  well;  social  phenomena  are  never  

 monocausal.  Nonetheless,  the  evidence  does  suggest  that  the  disparate  affects  of  

 ethnic  structure  on  governance,  economic  growth,  political  stability,  democratic  

 continuity, and internal conflict are a key part of the explanation of state success and 

 state failure across the South Pacific. 

  18

 

 References 

 Australian Strategic Policy Institute 2003, Our Failing Neighbour: Australia and the 

 Future of Solomon Islands, Australian Strategic Policy Institute, Canberra. 

 Bennett, Judith 2002. ‘Roots of Conflict in Solomon Islands - Though Much is Taken, 

 Much Abides: Legacies of Tradition and Colonialism’. State, Society and Governance 

 in  Melanesia  Discussion  Paper  2002/5,  Canberra: State,  Society  and  Governance  in  

 Melanesia Project, Australian National University. 

 Bueno  de  Mesquita,  Bruce,  J.  Morrow,  R.  Silverson  and  A.  Smith  2001.  ‘Political  

 Competition and Economic Growth’, Journal of Democracy 12(1):58-72. 

 Collier,  Paul  and  Anke  Hoeffler  1998,  ‘On  the  Economic  Causes  of  Civil  Wars’,  

 Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 50, No. 4, pp. 563-73. 

 Collier,  Paul  and  Anke  Hoeffler  2000,  ‘Greed  and  Grievance  in  Civil  War’,  Policy  

 Research Working Paper 2355. Washington DC: World Bank. 

 Collier,  Paul.  2001.  ‘Ethnic  Diversity:  An  Economic  Analysis’,  Economic  Policy, 

 April, pp. 128-166. 

 Crocombe, R., and Giese, C. 1988. ‘Nauru: The Politics of Phosphate’, in A. Ali and 

 R.  Crocombe  (eds),  Micronesian  Politics.  Suva:  Institute  of  Pacific  Studies,  

 University of the South Pacific. 

 Dobell,  Graeme  2003,  ‘The  South  Pacific  —  Policy  Taboos,  Popular  Amnesia  and  

 Political  Failure’,  Menzies  Research  Centre  seminar  paper:  Canberra,  12  February  

 2003. 

 Easterly, William 2001. The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures and 

 Misadventures in the Tropics. Cambridge MA and London: MIT Press. 

 Easterly,  William  and  Levine,  Ross  1997.  ‘Africa’s  Growth  Tragedy:  Policies  and  

 Ethnic Divisions’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4):1203-1250. 

 Esman, Milton 1994. Ethnic Politics. Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press. 

 Filer, Colin 2000, ‘Compensation, Rent and Power in Papua New Guinea’ in S. Toft 

 (ed), Compensation for Resource Development in Papua New Guinea. Port Moresby 

  19

 and  Canberra:  Law  Reform  Commission  of  Papua  New  Guinea  and  Australian  

 National University. 

 Finin,  Gerard  A.  2002,  ‘Small  is  Viable:  The  Global  Ebbs  and  Flows  of  a  Pacific  

 Atoll Nation’, East-West Center Working Paper No 15, East-West Center, Hawaii. 

 Fry,  Greg  2000.  ‘Political  Legitimacy  and  the  Post-colonial  State  in  the  Pacific:  

 Reflections  on  Some  Common  Threads  in  the  Fiji  and  Solomon  Islands  Coups’,  

 Pacifica Review, 12(3):295-304. 

 Geertz, Clifford 1963. ‘The Integrative Revolution: Primordial Sentiments and Civil 

 Politics in the New States’ in C. Geertz (ed), Old Societies and New States: the Quest 

 for Modernity in Asia and Africa. New York: Free Press. 

 Griffin,  James  1974.  ‘Papua  New  Guinea’  in  R.  Brissenden  and  J.  Griffin  (eds),  

 Modern Asia: Problems and Politics. Milton: Jacaranda Press. 

 Grimes,  Barbara  (ed)  2002.  Ethnologue:  Languages  of  the  World,  14th  Edition, 

 Dallas, TX: SIL International. 

 Hughes, Helen 2003. ‘Aid Has Failed the Pacific’, Issue Analysis No 33. Sydney: The 

 Centre for Independent Studies, 7 May 2003. 

 Jourdan, Christine 1995. ‘Stepping Stones for National Consciousness: The Solomon 

 Islands  Case’  in  Foster,  Robert  J.  (ed),  Nation  Making:  Emergent  Identities  in  

 Postcolonial Melanesia. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 

 Kabutaulaka,  Tarcisius  2001.  ‘Beyond  Ethnicity:  The  Political  Economy  of  the  

 Guadalcanal Crisis in Solomon Islands’. State, Society and Governance in Melanesia 

 Working Paper 01/1. Canberra: State, Society and Governance in Melanesia Project. 

 Kabutaulaka, Tarcisius 2002. ‘A Weak State and the Solomon Islands Peace Process’, 

 East-West Center Working Paper No 14. Hawaii: East-West Center. 

 Keesing,  Roger  M.  1989.  ‘Creating  the  Past:  Custom  and  Diversity  in  the  

 Contemporary Pacific’, The Contemporary Pacific 1(1&2):19-42. 

 Lal, Brij 1988, Power and Prejudice: the Making of the Fiji Crisis. Wellington: New 

 Zealand Institute of International Affairs.  

 Lal, Brij and Michael Pretes (eds) 2001. Coup: Reflections on the Political Crisis in 

 Fiji. Canberra: Pandanus Books. 

  20

 Larmour,  Peter  2000.  ‘Explaining  Institutional  Failure  in  Melanesia’,  Pacific 

 Economic Bulletin 15(2): 143-151. 

 Larmour, Peter 1992. ‘The Politics of Race and Ethnicity: Theoretical Perspectives on 

 Papua New Guinea’, Pacific Studies 15(1): 99-121. 

 Lawson,  Stephanie  1991,  The  Failure  of  Democratic  Politics  in  Fiji.  Oxford:  

 Clarendon Press. 

 Levine,  Stephen.  1997.  ‘Culture  and  Conflict  in  Fiji,  Papua  New  Guinea,  Vanuatu,  

 and  the  Federated  States  of  Micronesia’  in  Michael  E.  Brown  and  Sumit  Ganguly  

 (eds), Government Policies and Ethnic Relations in the Asia-Pacific. Cambridge and 

 London: MIT Press. 

 Linnekin, Jocelyn 1990, ‘The Politics of Culture in the Pacific’ in J. Linnekin and L. 

 Poyer  (eds),  Cultural  Identity  and  Ethnicity  in  the  Pacific.  Honolulu:  University  of  

 Hawaii Press. 

 Londregan,  J.B.  and  Poole,  K.T.  1990,  ‘Poverty,  the  coup  trap,  and  the  seizure  of  

 executive power’, World Politics, 42(2):151-183. 

 Mauro,  Paolo  1995.  ‘Corruption  and  Growth’,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics, 

 110(3), pp. 681-712. 

 Milne,  R.S.  1988,  ‘Bicommunal  Systems:  Guyana,  Malaysia,  Fiji’,  Publius:  The  

 Journal of Federalism, 18:101-113. 

 Nash,  Jill  and  Eugene  Ogan  1990,  ‘The  Red  and  the  Black:  Bougainvillean  

 Perceptions of Other Papua New Guineans’, Pacific Studies 13(2):1-17. 

 Nelson,  Hank  1974.  Papua  New  Guinea:  Black  Unity  or  Black  Chaos?  Ringwood:  

 Penguin. 

 Powell, G. Bingham 1982. Contemporary Democracies: Participation, Stability, and 

 Violence. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.  

 Premdas,  Ralph  1977.  ‘Secessionist  Politics  in  Papua  New  Guinea,’  Pacific  Affairs, 

 Vol. 50, pp. 64-85. 

 Reilly,  Benjamin  2000.  ‘Democracy,  Ethnic  Fragmentation,  and  Internal  Conflict:  

 Confused  Theories,  Faulty  Data,  and  the  ‘Crucial  Case’  of  Papua  New  Guinea’,  

 International Security, 25(3):162-185.  

  21

 Reilly,  Benjamin  and  Robert  Phillpot  2002.  ‘‘Making  Democracy  Work’  in  Papua  

 New Guinea: Social Capital and Provincial Development in an Ethnically Fragmented 

 Society’, Asian Survey, XLII(6), pp. 906-927. 

 Reilly,  Benjamin  2004,  ‘Ethnicity,  Democracy  and  Development  in  Papua  New  

 Guinea’, Pacific Economic Bulletin 19(1), 2004, pp. 46-54. 

 Rodrik, Dani 1999, ‘Where Did All the Growth Go? External Shocks, Social Conflict, 

 and Growth Collapses’, Journal of Economic Growth 4(4): 385-412. 

 Ross, Michael 2004, ‘What Do We Know About Natural Resources and Civil War?’ 

 Journal Of Peace Research 41(3):337-356. 

 StÃ¶ver,  Philip  2001.  ‘Vanuatu’,  in  Dieter  Nohlen,  Florian  Grotz  and  Christof  

 Hartmann  (eds),  Elections  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific:  A  Data  Handbook (Volume  II). 

 New York: Oxford University Press.  

 Thomas,  Nicholas  1990.  ‘Regional  Politics,  Ethnicity  and  Custom  in  Fiji’,  The 

 Contemporary Pacific 2(1):131-146. 

 United Nations Development Program 2002. Human Development Report 2002. New 

 York: United Nations Development Program. 

 Vanhanen,  Tatu  1997,  Prospects  of  Democracy:  A  Study  of  172  Countries.  London  

 and New York: Routledge. 

 Wainwright, Elsina 2003, ‘Responding to state failure -- the case of Australia and the 

 Solomon Islands’, Australian Journal of International Affairs 57(3):485-498. 

