---
title: "A passionate journey from grass roots activism to international governance: Murdoch Lecture 2004"
date: "2004-09-30"
creators:
  - "Mccarthy, Wendy"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Government expenditure"
  - "Feminism"
  - "Poverty"
  - "Nongovernment international agencies"
  - "Children"
  - "International aid"
  - "History"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211271972
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AF3E6%22
---

  THE 2004 MURDOCH LECTURE  PRESENTED BY WENDY MCCARTHY AO,  30 SEPTEMBER, MURDOCH UNIVERSITY 

  ‘A PASSIONATE JOURNEY FROM GRASS ROOTS  ACTIVISM TO INTERNATIONAL GOVERNANCE’ 

  When asked to deliver the Sir Walter Murdoch Lecture for 2004 I found myself  wondering what I could say that would add value to contemporary thought in  Australia and maintain the standard of my distinguished predecessors. As I am most  comfortable speaking of personal and political experience and passion I have chosen  to speak tonight of my journey from grass roots activism to international governance. 

  It allows me to illustrate why the personal is political. It also seems a fitting way to  pay my respect to the work and memory of Sir Walter Murdoch -by all accounts a  man who spoke his mind. 

  It’s been 40 years since I went on my first journey outside Australia and although I  had already been a teacher of History and Geography for three years I saw the globe  as a teachmg tool rather than a place to explore. Fortunately I married a man who was  compelled to travel and in 1964, like many young Australians, we left for London on 

  the required six-week ocean voyage. Most of the passengers were young Australians  like us, newly married and eager to have different lives in places many of our parents  still referred to as home despite having absolutely no tangible connection to it or to  anyone there. 

  Before we disembarked in a predictably grey Portsmouth we had visited Singapore,  Colombo, Aden and Cairo - exotic places with sensory overdrive for the monochrome  Australians we were. But those first experiences in foreign places were powerfkl and  confronting. We were shocked that we were so ignorant about the rest of the world, a  world to which we did not seem to be linked. It was, after all, the time of White  Australia and television was relatively new in the Australian household. I did not own  one. So the global images which today the world receives daily were not part of our  world. Australia was our world and we felt safe and secure and had little commitment  to people in other parts of the world. With the exception of the Colombo Plan  students, few of us would have had opportunities to meet with people from different  cultures. 

  For the next three years we lived and worked in London and Pittsburgh. In my  professional life I was confronted on a daily basis with difference. The  Commonwealth citizens from former British colonies were collecting their dues from  Britain. Families were benefiting from free education and an excellent public health 

  system. When my husband’s peers in the city complained about West Indians and  Cypriots bringing the country to its knees I felt able to retaliate. There had to be a  responsibility that arose from colonisation and repaying it through health and  education was admirable. I doubt that I convinced them but we argued with passion 

  about those interconnected global responsibilities. 

  The 2004 Murdoch Lecture, Wendy McCarthy A 0  1 

  The lives of my students in the secondary school where I taught and the adventure  playground I managed were changed by these opportunities as indeed was I. My new  secondary, comprehensive school in the then unfashionable Fulham flourished under  the benevolent guidance of Michael Stewart, the local Member and Foreign Secretary  in the new Labour Government of Howard Wilson. He and his wife assumed  responsibilities on the school board and ensured that teachers were given  opportunities to express political opinions and use political expression as a means of  driving change. 

  In Pittsburgh in 1966-67, when Lyndon Babes Johnson was President, my secondary  school students were required to do community service as part of their education.  They were encouraged to support Operation Head Start which offered opportunities  for black chldren to have access to a pre-school education so they did not enter the 

  school system at disadvantage. As a teacher of Problems of Democracy and American  History it was thought legitimate to encourage students to be politically thoughtful  and active as that’s what produced effective citizens in a democracy. While  subversive political activism was not explicitly encouraged, it was not seen as a  hanging offence when students and teachers joined marches in Washington as protests  against the War in Vietnam. This was a long way from my experience. 

  When we returned to Australia it did not seem the lotus land we recalled from the  northern hemisphere. The sun was shining as we flew into Sydney. The harbour  sparkled and the Australian light was more magical than I had ever imagined. The  material comforts were there and we could afford to buy a modest house. But we had  new antennae about what mattered. Vietnam did. Speaking out did. Understanding  what you stood for did. 

  As a newly pregnant woman I was confronted almost immediately with the fact that I  could not continue my professional life. Even though I worked casually I would be  paid at a rate that ignored my three years of professional experience abroad. The  rationalisation offered was, ‘We don’t count that experience here.’ Rather a narrow  view, I thought. 

  It seemed that my chances of a career in education were severely compromised by my  foolish decision to become a mother. Yet all the signs of social approval suggested  that this was my destiny and my responsibility. I could not have imagined that  parenthood would disqualify one from being an effective teacher. 

  My choices about birthing were limited and I was advised to let the obstetrician make  the decisions and all would be well. It seemed a long way from the birthing  experiences I’d observed in London - where women had the choice to birth at home  with midwives and support from a Flying Squad. And their families could be a part of  the experience. 

  I decided to find an obstetrician who would support such independence. Fortunately I  found one. We agreed that as I was having the baby, I should and could be an equal  and active participant in the pregnancy and birth. He suggested I join the Childbirth  Education Association (CEA) where I would meet like-minded people. 

  The 2004 Murdoch Lecture, Wendy McCarthy A 0  2 

  This was my first lobby group. Within a short time my husband and I were working  on the committee with our first objective to ensure that husbands could be present at  the births of their babies. Most hospitals refused to allow this. How quaint it seems  now when birth in hospital is about choice of place and method and the extended  family is encouraged to be there. 

  Such success inevitably led to other activities and when the Childbirth Education  Association was invited by the Abortion Law Reform Association to support it, I  became connected to women who were passionate about abortion as a woman’s right.  The whole notion of women having rights was a new idea in Australia. But the  Women’s Liberation Movement and the writings of feminist women around the world 

  framed the new women’s movement in terms of rights. It was underscored by the  desires of women to have control over their major life experiences. 

  Education, travel, parenthood in the company of women led me to found the  Women’s Electoral Lobby in 1972 with a small group of women. We wanted to find  out where we fitted in Australian society. Our poll of political candidates standing for  election in 1972 provided many of the answers and it still resonates. Responses to 

  questions about attitudes and issues of concern to women were often shocking and  demonstrated a lack of understanding of women’s lives and their aspirations to be  responsible citizens and leaders. My favourite response to our poll was that of the  Member for Bennelong, Sir John Cramer, who in answer to the question, ‘What is a  woman’s most valuable attribute?’ said, ‘A woman’s most prized possession is her 

  virginity. ’ 

  It remains a call for action for those of us who have no such residual value. 

  The rise of the Women’s Electoral Lobby and the leadership of government in  women’s affairs ensured that the seventies was a decade of consciousness-raising. The  results were impressive for Australian women. In my two areas of passion, education  and family planning, the achievements were breathtaking. The luxury cosmetics tax  was removed from oral contraceptives, family planning clinics and services were 

  established and primarily managed by community-based groups of women through  the Family Planning Association. Sex became sexuality and a more respectable part of  our social discourse. Teenage pregnancies were reduced, termination of pregnancy  was placed on the Medical Benefits Schedule, if not off the Crimes Act of most states,  and police forces for the most part stopped harassing patients at termination clinics. 

  The government-commissioned report on Girls, School and Society hghlighted the  barriers to the education of girls and offered educational opportunity for mature age  women who enrolled in droves and ensured that their daughters stayed at school. We  continue to see those results in our universities today. 

  For women like myself it demonstrated that grass roots activism could work. We  could make a difference. Working on the assumption that the personal is political, we  understood that it is the internal politics of people’s lives that persuade us to support  some changes and causes more than others. There has to be a personal passion for  most of us to do the things we do. If we are to change the communities we inhabit, we  need to find a space for our leadership. 

  The 2004 Murdoch Lecture, Wendy McCarthy A 0  3 

  We need leadership and good governance from government and institutions for the  changes to be sustainable. The Whitlam government set the example and when the  first UN International Conference on Women was held in Mexico City in 1975 the  Whitlam government sent an Australian delegation. It was a pragmatic and symbolic  recognition of the rights of women and marked the beginning of a broader  understanding of the commonalities of women’s lives around the world. It also  recognised that grass roots action was effective in creating change and was in fact 

  setting the international agenda. 

  Five years later international pressure to think globally about women’s rights resulted  in the UN holding a mid-decade conference in Copenhagen. The Fraser government  sent a large delegation to both the formal UN meeting and the NGO Forum which I  attended. This support and leadership meant that women were being encouraged to  forge relationships on a global level, connect with other women leaders and play our  role in acting globally to improve the lives of women and children. At Copenhagen  the key agenda item which had been rehearsed for a year in Australia prior to the  meeting was the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination  Against Women (CEADAW). Our Australian Minister, Bob Ellicott signed the 

  Convention at the conference, although it was not ratified until some years later by the  Hawke government. 

  At the forum the most powerful debates were around reproductive rights. I was  already involved with the politics of the International Planned Parenthood Federation  (IPPF) through my role as the Executive Director of the Australian Federation of  Family Planning Associations. But even I was not prepared for the stories of female  circumcision (which the conference renamed as female genital mutilation). It was the  beginning of a continuing worldwide campaign to outlaw this practice. 

  At the third UN meeting in Beijing in 1995, the agenda item that dominated was  women in decision-making and leadershp. Women who were engaged in grass roots  activism were looking for leadership spaces in international governance. Gertrude  Mongella, an outstanding African woman, ran the Conference and provided  outstanding leadership. In a sense these three UN meetings demonstrated the shifting  agendas of women across the world. 

  Australians have a proud record of assuming leadershp roles internationally. Jessie  Street, Elizabeth Evatt played significant roles in the United Nations to improve the  status of women. James Wolfensohn, Chef of the World Bank, Anne Summers,  Greenpeace International - all are outstanding people whose lives have been  concerned with humanity across national borders. Esme Odgers, an Australian whose  name is not a household one, was among the founder members of Plan in 1937 when  it was created to care for refugee children of the Spanish Civil War. 

  After delivering this lecture I leave Perth to attend the Executive Committee Meeting  of Plan International, an organisation dedicated to working with poor children, active  in 60 countries around the world. Sharing the responsibility for the governance of one  of the world’s largest non-government organisations (NGOs) is not a task I take 

  lightly. And yet I feel my role in PLAN completes the circle of education and  reproduction, the circle of my passions about the lives of women and chldren. 

  The 2004 Murdoch Lecture, Wendy McCarthy A 0  4 

  PLAN makes long-term commitments to children living in poverty and from its  inception has operated on the belief that one person can make a difference to the life  of a child. It’s a simple proposition and sponsorshp is the financial mechanism of the  relationship. But our organisational aim is to assist as many chddren as possible to 

  realise their potential. And because our primary income comes from sponsors and  these funds are not tied to a particular project or time, we can make long-term  commitments to children and their families. It’s a perfect way to think globally and  act locally. 

  I became involved with Plan when approached to become a director. I had no prior  knowledge of the organisation and was quite surprised to be invited to join.  Somewhere in my consciousness I had imagined I would work globally in family  planning. My passion for women having the opportunity to have choice and success in  managing their fertility still mattered. I expressed an interest and it was made clear  that part of the commitment would be to sponsor a child. 

  I confess I was a reluctant child sponsor, concerned that the relationship was  paternalistic and that one cannot make a difference on the scale of world poverty. I  recited all the cliches about where the money went and not wanting to favour one  child in a family or a village. But I finally faced the proposition that doing nothing  was a poor option. It was difficult to see what else one could do to make a statement  about caring across national borders. My global opportunity had amved. 

  People say that charity begins at home, that we should tackle the problem of poverty  at home before we look abroad. Does that mean that the life of a person from a  different race or nation is of less account than someone from our own? Should that  person have lesser rights? Should we care about the rest of the world? These are  proper questions for Australians to debate. 

  Currently we could interpret that this is the case. The Australian government puts  requirements on overseas agencies such as Plan not to undertake any family planning  components in its activities unless the organisation is accredited by AUSAID to  implement family planning activities. This is hardly an holistic approach. 

  Furthermore the document outlining the guiding principles for Australian assistance  for family planning activities notes that Australian aid h n d s  are not available for  activities that involve abortion training, services, research trials or activities that  directly involve abortion drugs. This denies women in other countries the rights that  Australian women enjoy. We are therefore better served with contraceptive services  than our sisters in other parts of the world. 

  We might argue that those to whom we might give charity are already able to provide  for their basic needs and seem poor only relative to our own high standard of living.  The US demonstrates that that is the case. Within three months of the terrorist attack  on the World Trade Center, the US had a public fund of $1.3 billion available for the  victims. Yet two days later the UNICEF report on the state of the world’s children  was released. There was no public appeal following its publication which detailed the  numbers of children dying daily and at risk around the world. 

  We must draw the conclusion that their lives are seen as of lesser value. 

  The 2004 Murdoch Lecture, Wendy McCarthy A 0  5 

  Should we act if, at a small cost, a person can save a child’s life? 

  The issue of foreign aid is a matter about which all of us in the developed world  should be concerned. Citizens in the United States should be particularly troubled for  among the developed nations of the world ranked according to the proportion of the  gross national product (GNP) that they give as development aid, the US comes  indisputably last. 

  In order to address increasing world poverty, the United Nations, the World Bank and  other major international organisations brought together representatives of 19 1  countries in September 2000 to adopt the Millennium Declaration which set out the  Millennium Development Goals) and targets to achieve them. 

  Do we know as citizens that our government has made a commitment to the  Millennium Development Goals (MDGs 

  The goals were to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger, achieve universal primary  education, promote gender equality and empower women, improve maternal health,  reduce child mortality, combat HIV AIDS, malaria and other diseases, ensure  environmental sustainability and develop a global partnership for development. Even 

  a less feminised reader of this list would concede that it is the lives of women and  children who are most at risk if these goals are not met. 

  Remember of those people defined as living in poverty, 75% are women. We can be  sure that children will be sharing their mothers’ circumstances. 

  We must ask whether Australia is doing its fair share towards the Millennium  Development Goals. The Treasurer, Peter Costello, when speaking at a meeting of the  Australian Council For International Development (ACFID) said, ‘Despite plans to  the contrary by some, the evidence shows that we are well on the way to meeting the  target although progress towards the goals is uneven. 

  ‘The most outstanding success is East Asia and the most disappointing region is sub-  Saharan Africa. Progress has been made towards the goal of acheving universal  primary education with the exception of sub-Saharan Africa. Less progress has been  made towards the goal of reducing child mortality with only 22% of the developing  world’s population currently on track to meet this target. Closer to home a number of 

  countries in the Pacific are unlikely to achieve the Millennium Development Goals  and some are even regressing.’ 

  His strong theme is that it was not aid but trade and economic reform that has  delivered millions from poverty. He concluded, ‘There is a growing consensus that  development cannot happen unless countries can establish progress in areas of  governance, law and order and economic management. Australia is doing its utmost to  help in these areas.’ 

  Leaders in the aid and development community do not deny the power of trade and  economic reform in addressing poverty but question the narrowness of this  prescription, particularly for the poorest countries in Africa. Such countries are denied 

  The 2004 Murdoch Lecture, Wendy McCarthy A 0  6 

  access to trade their way out of problems by the massive trade barriers erected by the  US and EU. It seems hypocritical to preach trade as a solution while at the same time  blocking imports. The truth is aid works and is a powerful adjunct to trade and  economic reform in bringing about broad-based improvement. Trade and economic 

  reform messages should not be used to justify meagre aid levels. 

  There was also no mention in Costello’s speech of progress with programs to promote  gender equality and empower women. It seems we have a leadership deficit and this  would not be difficult to put right as we know what works. 

  For example, Microfinance programs based on the Grameen Bank model demonstrate  daily the effectiveness of providing small home loans and saving facilities to women.  They invariably use the money to improve the lives of their families. Plan works in  partnership with local microfinance organisations to establish and support these  programs as we know that this has a positive impact on the lives of children. AUSAID 

  has only recently had a microfinance desk. 

  The stories are inspiring and on a team visit to the Philippines in 1999 I witnessed the  transformation in the lives of many families who are offered a helping hand. 

  Our Treasurer’s view of Australia’s contribution to meeting the Millennium  Development Goals is not shared by ACFID. In response to the budget papers of  2004-5, while welcoming the increased funding of 10% in real terms and  acknowledging the contribution is now .26% of gross national income (GNI)  expressed its concern that the increase in aid and development budget is focused on  law and order in the region. It warned there can be no durable peace and security in  our region without sustained investments in reducing poverty and social inequity. 

  The Treasurer’s rhetoric is not matched by any real action. Australia is falling far  short of the aid needed to achieve these goals In terms of overseas development  assistance we ranked 14th out of 22 OECD countries in 2003 and by 2006 we are  likely to rank 20th -joining the USA at the bottom of the table. 

  The good news is that last year, over 1.6 million Australians donated $383 million to  overseas aid and development programs that address basic needs and give people  hope and a better life. This reflects the longer term trend of strong growth averaging  11% over the last 5 years in Australian support for community aid and development. 

  So funds from the community continue to provide the largest proportion of money for  overseas work undertaken by Australian NGOs. 

  However, we still spend more on pet food than overseas aid. The Australia Institute  Report on consumption of pet food in Australia published in July 2004 estimated that  Australians spend more than $2.2 billion on their pets compared to foreign aid  spending of less than $2 billion. The report found that pets were increasingly regarded  as family members, often considered as substitutes for children. This certady  presents a challenge. 

  Public ignorance and political misunderstanding remain barriers to official  development assistance (ODA). There’s no evidence that this will change as the  budget line item for development education for AUSAID is $2.8 million. This is to 

  The 2004 Murdoch Lecture, Wendy McCarthy A 0  7 

  cover expenditure on media, outreach publications, Internet and global education  activities. In NGOs such as Plan where we promise to spend no more than 20 cents in  the dollar on administration, there are no hnds to run major public education  programs. We must rely on building relationships through sponsorship and 

  encouraging our sponsors to support our special appeals. 

  At a recent conference on overseas aid, John Langmore - for some years the Labor  member for Canberra - wrote that politicians underestimate the extent of public  support for aid. He highlighted the study of attitudes about foreign policy in 1995 by  the University of Maryland’s Program for International Policy Attitudes (PIPA).  When asked how much the US was spending on foreign aid a strong majority thought  they were spending far too much and it should be cut. The median estimate was  between 10% and 20% when in fact expenditure is less than 1%. When asked what an 

  appropriate percentage would be, the median response was 5%, an increase on the  amount of what is actually spent beyond the wildest hopes of any foreign aid advocate  on Capitol Hill. 

  A few months later the Washington Post decided to run its own survey to see if the  results held up. It got an even higher median estimate - that 20% was spent on foreign  aid. Follow-up surveys with different samples got much the same results. So the US  public’s misconception of foreign aid is consistent. 

  After the setting of the Millennium Goals, a conducted survey showed strong support  for these goals. 75% said they would be willing to pay an extra $50 to help a program  that cut all hunger in half by 2003. It seems that governments are not hearing this or  have decided support should be an individual action. 

  Of course we need to treat some of these survey results with caution. People like to  present themselves as being more fair and generous than they really are but it is clear  that Americans are woehlly ignorant about their foreign aid record. What they would  really want to do if they knew the truth is less clear. 

  The World Bank estimates to achieve the Millennium Goals it would cost $40-60  billion per year in additional aid for the next 15 years. If 75% of Americans over 18  years old contributed $50 more, then US $7.5 billion per year would be raised. Not  quite enough for the American share, for the additional sum needed, but a good start. 

  But if American leaders continue to give attention only to the needs of their own, and  our own leaders adopt the same view, what should citizens of rich countries do? We  are not powerless. We can decide to make a difference by supporting organisations  where aid helps those in need. 

  We have the opportunity to save the lives of children. We can give to organisations  whose track record shows they make a difference. Our major dilemma is to consider  how much we might give to save the life of a child threatened by the cycle of poverty.  The World Bank and our own results tell us that aid works when it is directed to 

  countries with the aim of reducing poverty rather than to countries which would  hrther our strategic cultural and military interests. Also the effectiveness of aid is  enhanced when it is given to countries that are poor but have reasonably good and  stable governments. 

  The 2004 Murdoch Lecture, Wendy McCarthy A 0  8 

  World Bank President, ex-pat James Wolfensohn said in an interview in The  Australian earlier this year, ‘I personally feel the world is out of balance. The way the  world is dealing with problems of poverty and peace seem to be disconnected.  Military spending worldwide is probably now US $1,000 billion. Meanwhile rich 

  countries offer no more than $50-$60 billion in aid to developing countries while  blocking most of their agricultural exports. One of the few ways these countries might  pull themselves out of poverty. 

  ‘The three things are linked - of the five billion people living in the developing world,  three billion earn under US$2 per day and 1.2 billion under US$ 1 per day. If you  cannot give them hope - which comes from getting a job or doing something  productive, giving them their self respect - these people become the basis on which  terrorists or renegades or advocacy groups can flourish. It’s an essentially unstable 

  situation. We now have 1.5 billion children under the age of 15 living in poverty. If  you cannot deal with the question of hope of economic security, there’s no way with  military expenditure you can have peace. 

  ‘My message is a simple one. You cannot take your eye off the ball of poverty. I hope  that’s a view Australia will take.’ 

  It’s a view I want to encourage and there are many Australians who heed that  message. Plan alone has over 33,000 Australians contributing daily to the lives of  children throughout the world and World Vision the market leader has many more. 

  As I acquire grandchildren and compare their life opportunities with my sponsored  children and the children in programs I visit around the world, it seems an even  stronger imperative to increase my capacity for giving. It also ensures that my  governance role is founded in reality. 

  In One World, Peter Singer hypothesises that to eliminate poverty we could distribute  the task amongst all the 600 million adults in high-income countries. The additional  $40-60 billion in aid required to achieve the Millennium Development Goals could be  met by a donation of US $100 per year for the next 15 years. We could eliminate  global poverty faster than the Millennium Development Goals propose by asking  people to give 1% of their annual income. If we can make One World a moral 

  standard that transcends a national state, should we do so or are the benefits of  globalisation to be about trade and not people? 

  Let me end by quoting from a poem by a remarkable woman, Justice Unity Dow, the  first female High Court judge in Botswana who wrote to her children: 

  ‘Trudge not through life, leaving ugly gashes,  Tiptoe not through life, leaving half-formed impressions,  Tread gently, lovingly; leave graceful heart prints,  Love the Earth, for she loves you so.’ 

  Thank you. 

  Copyright 0 Wendy McCnrthy, September 2004 

  The 2004 Murdoch Lecture, Wendy McCarthy A 0  9 

  Bibliography 

  The Asia-Australia Papers - No. 4 November 2001, The Asia-Australia Institute, The  University of New South Wales 

  A Journey of Hope, The History of PLAN International 193 7-1 998, Plan International,  1998 

  For Common Decency, The History ofFoster Parents Plan 1937-1983, Henry D.  Molumphy, 1984 

  Patrick White Speaks, Primavera Press, Sydney 1989 

  One World, The Ethics of Globalisation, Peter Singer, The Text Publishing Company,  2002 

  The 2004 Murdoch Lecture, Wendy McCarthy A 0  10 

