---
title: "Australia's sucessful multicultural mix threatened by terrorism."
date: "2004-09-10"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Terrorist groups"
  - "Social behaviour"
  - "National security"
  - "Counter terrorist measures"
  - "Multiculturalism"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211271081
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/53QD6%22
---

 

 

 senator.bartlett@democrats.org.au     www.democrats.org.au    www.andrewbartlett.com  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list. 

 DEMOCRATS  MEDIA 04/890 FRIDAY 10 SEPTEMBER 2004   SENATOR ANDREW BARTLETT LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS & SPOKESPERSON ON IMMIGRATION EMBARGOED UNTIL 1.30PM Australia's successful multicultural mix threatened by terrorism It is important for Australia to fight the fear of foreigners, Democrats’ Leader, Senator Andrew Bartlett, told a Migration Institute of Australia conference in Brisbane today. "Fear of foreigners has been a strong threat running through Australia's immigration policy and laws for over a century," Senator Bartlett said. "Each new wave of migrants has faced ignorance, suspicion and discrimination, yet Australia has formed one of the most successful multicultural societies in the world." Senator Bartlett said the war against terror presented a new challenge to migration policy, to multiculturalism and to anti-discrimination practices. “Turning outwards, rather than inwards, is the best way to fight the challenge of terrorism and to overcome the fear of it. "In Australia, asylum seekers, Muslims and people of Middle Eastern origin have been the latest to bear the brunt of the fear and anger generated by terrorism and war. "We need to guard against any slackening of our laws that would allow racial profiling under the pretext of security," Senator Bartlett concluded. Senator Bartlett is addressing the Migration Institute of Australia conference at the Greek Club, Edmondstone St West End, South Brisbane. 1.30pm to 2pm, Friday 10 September. Media contact - Daele Healy - 0419 867 649 

