---
title: "'Let the little children come to me': the Catholic church's response to the mandatory detention of child asylum seekers."
date: "2004-09-29"
creators:
  - "Byrne, Moira"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Catholic Church"
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "Pressure groups"
  - "Religion in politics"
  - "Children"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211271887
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JI3F6%22
---

 

 

 

 ‘Let the little children come to me’:   the Catholic church’s response to the   mandatory detention of child asylum seekers 

 Ms Moira Byrne1  Ph.D. Candidate, Political Science,  School of Social Sciences, Faculty of Arts,  The Australian National University 

 Refereed paper presented to the  Australasian Political Studies Association Conference  University of Adelaide  29 September - 1 October 2004 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  2

 The  action  of  the  Catholic  church,  and  its  political  involvement  in  refugee  policy  and   policymaking is widely acknowledged.  In fact, Immigration Minister Amanda Vanstone  (2004, 81) recently recognised church action in this issue, when she asserted that written  work  such  as  Robert  Manne’s  Quarterly  Essay  on  ‘Refugees  and  the  New  Politics  of   Indifference’ (2004), was ‘popular within a small but articulate section of the Australian  community’, and listed church leaders first in this category.   

 While  using  the  term  ‘church’  as  universally  applying  to  all  Christian  churches,  this   paper is primarily concerned with the Catholic Church.2  Its political action in relation to  children  in  immigration  detention  centres  is  significant  and  multifarious.   While  the   church’s motivation to ensure the wellbeing of children in detention as opposed to those  in the care of its institutions would be an interesting digression, my aim in this paper is  to detail the church’s activity in the polity.  This paper forms part of my broader work  towards a Ph.D., which examines the Catholic Church’s political involvement in refugee  policy and policymaking, and therefore some associated issues arising from the central  theme of this paper will be pursued within that thesis.   

 Throughout this paper, I will use examples to illustrate how the church has responded  to detainees’ identified needs with practical support and ministry; registered protest at  perceived injustice; informally represented detainees’ interests by speaking in solidarity  with  them;  possibly  influenced  voter  choice;  and  formally  represented  detainees’   interests  through  fora  such  as  the  Human  Rights  and  Equal  Opportunity  Commission   (HREOC)  inquiry.   It  possibly  mobilised  people  into  pressure  group  style  activity;   contributed to public opinion in gaining more sympathy for detainees; backed escaped  child  detainees  as  they  sought  asylum;  distributed  information  through  social  justice   publications  and  groups;  took  care  of  previously  detained  children  in  the  absence  of   their  parents;  and  participated  in  public  debate  at  large.   Lobbying  of  politicians  and   policymakers  by  the  church,  already  a  function  widely  acknowledged  by  political   scientists, is excluded from this particular paper due to its complexity.   

 The  matter  of  who,  what,  and  who  speaks  for  the  church,  will  also  be  briefly  flagged.    While a plethora of Catholic church groups work with and campaign for refugees, the   focus of this paper is the actions of the Australian Catholic Bishops’ Conference (ACBC),  the highest decision-making body of the Catholic Church in Australia and its members  (the bishops themselves). A secondary focus will be the ACBC’s established Committees  and their agencies, in particular its social justice agency, the Australian Catholic Social  Justice  Council  (ACSJC).  Refer  to  Appendix  I  for  an  illustration  of  the  church   organisation.   

 On  a  practical  level,  church  agencies  were  probably  the  largest  contributors  amongst  the   many  voluntary  charitable  agencies  providing  significant  assistance  to  refugee  and  

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  3

 humanitarian  immigrants  in  the  1990s,  and  perhaps  remain  so  today  (Jupp  1994,  50).   The   current role of the Catholic church and other churches in their ministry to refugees is widely  recognised,  as  several  recent  key  books  on  refugees  have  noted  (for  example,  McCallum   2002, 36; Mares 2001, 40-1,92-3).  In fact, Mares (2001,93) affirmed that ‘[t]ime and again it is  churchgoers  and  clergy  who  step  in  to  provide  support  to  asylum  seekers  and  refugees  -   whether  it  is  through  pastoral  visits  to  detention  centres,  or  advocacy,  accommodation   services or tins of food.’  The sections below outline the various components of the church’s  political activity.   

 Recognition of injustice - early protest against the policy of mandatory detention   

 Beyond  their  sustained  practical  assistance  to  migrants,  refugees  and  asylum  seekers,   the  church  is  a  continuing  voice  of  compassion  to  displaced  persons  and  the  policy   issues surrounding them.  It is this area in which the ACBC take a leading role.   

 When  the  Labor  Government  introduced  mandatory  detention  in  1992  (the  legislation   passing  with  bipartisan  support),  the  Catholic  Church  voiced  its  concern.   A  media   release  from  the  ACBC  in  Refugee  Week  the  following  year  (but  before  the  legislation   came  into  effect  in  1994),  was  entitled,  ‘Don’t  close  our  doors to  asylum  seekers’.   The   release contended  

 While there are strong arguments for short-term detention for undocumented arrivals, long-term detention  continues to be abhorrent and an international embarrassment.  (ACBC 1993, 245-6).  

 

 As questions began to be asked about Australia’s policy of mandatory detention for asylum  seekers,  community  concern  resulted  in  an  inquiry  into  detention  centre  conditions  by  the   Joint  Standing  Committee  on  Migration,  which  delivered  its  report  in  early  1994.   The   Committee  received  over  one  hundred  submissions,  over  85  per  cent  of  which  requested   alternatives  to  the  current  policy.   McMaster  noted  the  Australian  Council  of  Churches   among  them  (2002,  86,  208-9).   Yet  in  addition  another  23  submissions  from  churches  and  

 church agencies (accounting for more than 20 per cent of submissions) were received, and of  these,  14  were  from  Catholic  agencies.   Yet  an other four appear to be from Catholic nuns  (Parliament of Australia 1994, 217-22).   

 McMaster  also  noted  that  after  the  Government  received  some  flak  for  passing  legislation   limiting  compensation  for  some  illegally  detained  refugees,  the  Government  blamed  ‘the   immigration club’ for delaying refugee processing and thereby increasing detention periods.   This ‘immigration club’ was considered to be  advocates of refugees including the  ‘Refugee  Council, church groups and human rights lawyers’ (McMaster 2002, 87).    

 While  the  issue  of  mandatory  detention  of  asylum  seekers  simmered  away  in  the   background  for  a  number  of  years  (gaining  media  attention  only  when  detainees  

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  4

 protested),  the  church  continued  to  speak  periodically.   For  example,  in  May  1999  the   Bishop’s  Committee  for  Family  and  for  Life  issued  a  statement  pertaining  to  the   handling of pregnant refugees, after an episode where a woman, heavily pregnant with  her second child, was sent back to China with its strict one-child policy.  The statement  asked,  

 …why [is] a woman who [was] detained in Australia as a refugee for nearly three years…sent back to China  only  weeks  before  her  baby  was  due  to  be  born?  …  The  disregard  shown  to  this  poor  mother  cannot  go   unnoticed.   We,  as  a  nation  and  as  individuals,  have  responsibilities  not  just  under  human  rights  but  as   human beings to ensure this atrocity does not happen again. (ACBC 1999). 

 

 Although the Coalition won government in 1996, the first few years of its administration  were reasonably quiet on the issue of asylum seekers.  With the Wik native title decision  and the GST gaining a high media profile, the issue of boat people and detainees were  mainly  the  concern  of  Department  of  Immigration  employees,  and  groups  concerned   with human rights.   

 The  issue  of  asylum  seekers  gained  a  higher  mainstream  media  profile  in  the  last  five   years.  The subsequent reasons for this change will be examined later in this paper, but  first was the 1999 announcement of amendments to the Migration Act, as solution to ‘an  unprecedented number of unauthorised arrivals in Australia’ in the 1999-2000 financial  year  (Parliament  of  Australia  2001b,  12).   Until  1999,  unlawfully  arriving  persons   meeting  the  definition  of  a  refugee  could  receive  a  Permanent  Protection  Visa.    However,  the  new  legislation  enshrined  only  a  Temporary  Protection  Visa,  valid  for   three years, without the right to leave and re-enter Australia, and without the ability to  sponsor family members to Australia.  The new legislation also introduced identification  and  authentication  procedures  for  asylum  seekers.   In  addition,  the  Border  Protection   legislation amendments of 1999 gave the Department of Immigration and the Australian  Customs Service increased powers to board and detain boats suspected of participating  in people smuggling (Parliament of Australia 2001b, 10).    

 The second impetus was the announcement of two ‘new’ detention centres ‘in response  to  the  surge  in  unauthorised  arrivals  in  the  latter  half  of  1999’.   The  recommissioned   Curtin RAAF base near Derby in Western Australia, and construction at Woomera based  on  existing  infrastructure,  served  to  increase  Australia’s  capacity  for  detainees,  ‘while   also  providing  flexibility’  (Parliament  of  Australia  2001b,  12).   While  the  changes  to   legislation  brought  commentary  from  so-called  ‘elites’  within  broadsheet  newspapers,   mass  media  coverage  of  asylum  seekers  only  began  with  complaints  that  the  new,   temporary  immigration  detention  centre  being  established  at  Woomera  in  1999-2000   would not be suitable accommodation for detainees.     

 In fact, clergy raised this issue.  Churches acted in relation to detention centre conditions  at  Woomera,  and  those  within  it.   The  local  Catholic  and  Uniting  Church  clerics  

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  5

 appeared  on  television,  voicing  concern  about  the  lack  of  air-conditioning  in  the   barracks, which were otherwise unequipped to combat the stern summer temperatures  of the region.  The public response to these concerns was unsympathetic, but the clerics  continued  to  raise  awareness  of  conditions,  and  after  the  centre  opened,  visited  and   ministered  to  detainees.   As  time  passed,  they  were  less  concerned  about  the  physical   conditions  of  the  centre  and  more  anxious  about  the  mental  and  spiritual  health  of  its   occupants.   This  was  partly  addressed  by  the  clergy’s  hosting  fortnightly  worship   services for non-Muslim detainees, with songs, a reading and a homily, focusing on the  Judeo-Christian themes of prison, exile and refuge (Mares 2001, 40-1).    

 With  disturbing  allegations  regarding  conditions  within  detention  centres,  particularly   or children, came a renewed emphasis on the issue.  In late 2000, parliament established  a committee to examine and report on conditions within detention centres.3  However,  riots at the Port Headland centre in January 2001 did not advance the cause of detained  asylum  seekers,  in  terms  of  public  opinion  and  those  of  politicians  and  policymakers.    The  Minister  for  Immigration  subsequently  announced  legislation  providing  greater   powers  to  search  detainees  and  visitors  to  detention  centres,  including  increased   punishments  for  escape,  new  offences  relating  to  home-made  weapons,  searches   (including  strip  searches)  for  weapons,  and  ‘tougher  security  scrutiny’  (including   searches) of detainees’ visitors (Parliament of Australia 2001b, 10-11).     

 Informal representation of interests - speaking in solidarity   

 Pressure  groups  identification  with  a  minority  group  or  issue  inspires  their  action.    Various  detainee  advocates  became  particularly  concerned  about  a  plan  to  administer   anti-depressants and other forms of ‘chemical restraint’ to asylum seekers in detention  centres.   Catholic  agency  leaders  featured  prominently  in  media  coverage  of  the   proposal  (Australian  24/1/01,  5).   With  contemporaneous  reports  of  detainees  at   Woomera  hunger  striking,  Bishop  Eugene  Hurley,  of  the  Port  Pirie  diocese  (in  which   Woomera  detention  centre  was  situated),  described  them  as  ‘deeply  traumatised  and   dislocated’ and urged the federal government to hear the asylum seekers’ cries for help  and reconsider the policy of detention (Ransom 2002).   

 Meanwhile  federal  government  members  participated  in  the  parliament’s  own   investigations into detention centres.  In June 2001 the Parliament of Australia published  A  Report  on  Visits  to  Immigration  Detention  Centres.   The  report  included  a  number  of   recommendations  of  the  Joint  Standing  Committee  on  Foreign  Affairs,  Defence  and   Trade, to improve conditions for detainees.  This included some specifically directed at  children.  Recommendation 2 advised the Department of Immigration and Multicultural  and Indigenous Affairs (DIMIA) to negotiate with State and Territory governments and  non-government  schools  so  school  age  children  in  detention  centres  could  access  an  

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  6

 education  at  nearby  schools  (Parliament  of  Australia  2001b,  68-9).   In  addition,   Recommendation 9 supported ‘the proposed trial of facilities for women and children in  towns,  with  access  to  nearby  detention  centres’  (Parliament  of  Australia  2001b,  84).     Despite  these  recommendations,  it  was  nearly  18  months  later  when  finally  some   children were released to attend a local primary school.   

 Interestingly,  the  role  of  churches  and  religious  groups  in  the  issue  of  detention  was   formally recognised by the government, with the report drawing attention to the weekly  Catholic  service  in  the  Villawood  centre,  and  Recommendation  14  suggesting   ‘appropriate community organisations, including religious and welfare groups, be given  greater  access  to  the  detention  centres  after  detainees  have  met  initial  processing   requirements’ (Parliament of Australia 2001b, 57,87).   

 In addition, the report recognised Spartan conditions within the  detention centres, and   acknowledged medical and psychological concerns, especially relating to some children;  in fact, the report stated that ‘most Committee members were shocked by what they saw  during  their  visits  to  the  [detention  centres]’  (Parliament  of  Australia  2001b,  65).    However,  Immigration  Minister  Philip  Ruddock  rejected  the  key  recommendations  of  

 the  report.   In  fact,  Ruddock  went  so  far  as  to  describe  some  recommendations  as   ‘extraordinarily naÃ¯ve’, despite five of the twelve sub-committee members being Liberal  Party  MPs.   The  report  was  released  in  June  2001,  along  with  the  Minister’s  response.    Although  Ruddock  rejected  the  report’s  recommendations,  the  report  effectively   confirmed the allegations against the practices of the detention centre, and validated the  concerns of catholic welfare agency Centacare (Cathnews 22/6/2001). 

 The  same  month,  the  ACSJC  compared  elements  of  Australia’s  immigration  detention   regime with torture.  Describing certain detention procedures (such as waking detainees  and  prohibiting  detainees  from  contact  with  their  families),  the  ACSJC  noted  that  ‘[i]n   torture the victim is treated as something less than human’.  Disputing the designation  of  detainees  as  ‘illegals’,  the  ACSJC  drew  attention  to  their  ability  under  international   humanitarian law to seek asylum (Cathnews 27/6/2001).  

 As  foreshadowed  earlier,  the  churches’  concerns  included  the  physical  and   psychological  damage  to  detainees  from  detention.   Considerable  evidence  to  support   such  concern  is  already  detailed  in  various  academic  papers  and  acknowledged  in   mainstream  media  and  publications  (for  example,  Mares,  2001;  McCallum,  2002;   McMaster,  2002;  Manne,  2004).   Even  by  the  parliament’s  own  report  (Parliament  of   Australia  2001b,  69,85,100-2)  this  issue  was  acknowledged,  considering  the   recommendations.   Nevertheless,  reports  of  conditions  within  detention  centres  were   compounded by the apathetic attitude displayed by key players in the government.  A 

 case in point is that of Shayan Badraie, a child detained at Villawood detention centre.     

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  7

 In August  2001, the  Australian Broadcasting Commission’s Four  Corners current affairs   program  reported  on  conditions  within  Villawood,  and  the  effect  of  the  conditions  on   one  of  the  detainee  children.   Shayan,  a  troubled  6-year-old  boy,  suffered  from  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  following  his  escape  from  Iran  and  the  self-harming  and   suicidal  behaviour  he  witnessed  while  in  detention.   Robert  Manne,  academic  and   newspaper  columnist,  followed  up  the  report  in  the  print  media,  ensuring  Shayan   shortly  became  front-page  news  (SMH  13/8/2001,  1).   The  six-year-old’s  poor  physical   and emotional well-being was the product of his ceasing to eat and drink ‘after seeing  blood  pour  from  the  wrists  of  a  detainee  who  tried  to  commit  suicide  …  he  has  not   spoken and remains in a near-catatonic state, severely depressed and withdrawn [since  then]’ (NCCA 2001b).     

 Phillip Ruddock, as a guest on the ABC’s 7:30 report, attributed Shayan’s disturbed and  listless behaviour to his being a stepchild, and took issue with Four Corners for imprecise  usage  of  the  term  ‘refugee’.   Fortunately,  the  Four  Corners  program  showing  how  this   child was traumatised by detention provided the impetus for Shayan being fostered out.    

 Despite  increased  press  coverage  following  the  case  of  Shayan,  disquiet  regarding   detention  centre  conditions  and  particularly  those  of  children  remained  the  stuff  of   refugee  advocates,  societal  ‘elites’,  and  ‘bleeding  hearts’.   The  National  Council  of   Churches  in  Australia  (NCCA)  issued  a  media  release  declaring  that  they  would  be   offering  prayers  for  Shayan  on  Refugee  Sunday  in  August  2001,  and  noted  the   ‘outpouring  of  emotion  from  the  Australian  public’  over  Shayan’s  case.   Father  John   Murphy of the Australian Catholic Migrant and Refugee Office (ACMRO) summed up  the  NCCA’s  position  by  saying  ‘The  churches  have  long  argued  for  the  release  of   children and their parents from detention. Shayan’s case highlights why’ (NCCA 2001b).   

 Yet the general public appeared indifferent to the policy of mandatory detention.  From  the end of 2000 up until the middle of 2001 there appear to be no polls published in any  of the mainstream press.   However, the SBS current affairs telecast, Insight, on 28th June  2001, suggested the reason that both the Labor and the Coalition maintained their policy  position  on  the  issue  of  detention,  was  because  they  both  reflected  prevailing   community opinion in their approach to the issue.   

 Indeed, later that year the government still appeared unmoved by the plight of children  within detention centres.  Another case in point included that of a child alleged to have  been  sexually  abused.   Following  reports  of  this  occurrence,  the  Immigration  Minister   dismissed  the  allegations  as  ‘hearsay’.   A  subsequent  ministerial  investigation   vindicated  the  complainant,  and  demonstrated  that  the  original  complaint  was   mishandled (Parliament of Australia 2001a).   

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  8

 But by that stage the general issue of asylum seekers began to gain prominence after the  first of three key incidents in late 2001.  The Tampa incident of late August crystallised  general  public  sentiment  regarding  refugees  and  asylum  seekers.   ACMRO  released  a   statement  in  the  midst  of  the  drama.   Entitled,  ‘A  statement  from  the  Bishops’   Committee  for  Migrants  and  Refugees on  the  plight  of  asylum  seekers  on  the  Tampa’,   the statement expressed ‘great distress’ that the ship was refused entry to Australia, and  asked the Australian government ‘to reconsider whether the lives of people, particularly  those fleeing persecution, should be put at risk in order to send a message of deterrence  to  future  asylum  seekers’.   Recognising  ‘many  Australians  who  have  expressed  their   views  are  in  favour  of  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  to  the  Tampa’,  ACMRO  chairman   Bishop  Dougherty  reminded  Australians  ‘that  many  of  those  on  board  were  almost   certainly  fleeing  persecution  and  seeking  Australia's  protection’,  and  appealed  to  the   government to accept more refugees.   

 The  Government’s  responded  throughout  the  saga  by  labelling  the  asylum  seekers  as   ‘illegal immigrants’, ‘queue jumpers’ who were not waiting with other ‘real’ refugees in  camps across the globe.  There was ‘no way’ the government would allow any asylum  seekers on the Tampa to reach the Australian mainland.  Humanity dictated action; the  people existed in terrible conditions, hungry and sick.  While the Australian government  responded with food and medical attention, the situation was untenable.   

 The  Bishops  released  a  second  statement  two  days  after  the  first,  headlined  ‘Tampa's  innocent  pawns  in  a  messy  game’.   ACBC  president,  Archbishop  Francis  Carroll,   reiterated Bishop Dougherty’s previous call to the Australian Government ‘to rethink its  current response to the refugee crisis involving the Tampa in waters off the North West  Coast  of  Australia  …  Australia  should  not  be  treating  people  seeking  asylum  in  our   country in this manner’.  Noting opinion polls indicated most Australians favoured the  government’s  decision  to  refuse  entry  to  the  Tampa,  Carroll  expressed  sadness  and   encouraged  ‘all  Australians  to  adopt  the  simple  principle  of  placing  the  shoe  on  the   other foot’.    

 The  so-called  ‘Pacific  Solution’,  negotiated  with  the  government  of  Nauru,  was  the   Coalition’s  response  to  an  unsustainable  situation.   Confronted  with  the  possibility  of   ‘losing face’ if it let the asylum seekers into mainland Australia, as well as looking ‘soft’  on ‘illegal’ ‘queue jumpers’, the government committed to the expensive settlement on  the Pacific island state.  This was negotiated despite Australia’s international obligations  to allow the people ashore to be processed.  As noted in ACMRO’s media release, public  opinion  at  the  time  strongly  supported  the  Government’s  position.   Certainly  by   September,  a  Bulletin-Morgan  poll  found  that  ‘Howard’s  tough  stand  on  illegal   immigrants  has  paid  dividends  for  the  Federal  Government  in  terms  of  support’   (RoyMorgan.com 2001). 

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  9

 

 Shortly thereafter the second key event occurred which also kept the asylum seekers in  the  limelight,  the  ‘Children  Overboard’  scandal  (officially  referred  to  as  ‘A  Certain   Maritime  Incident’).   In  early  October  2001,  just  after  the  November  10  election  was   announced, an unseaworthy vessel faltered.  A child was ‘held in the air’ (in reality, this  was a misinterpretation of the  child being passed to a rescue  boat) and so began Peter   Reith’s allegations that boat people were ‘throwing their children overboard’.  While the  general  public  appeared  unconvinced,  the  matter  kept  the  issue  of  ‘border  protection’   visible during the election campaign.   

 The third event was the SIEV X tragedy.  In late October 2001, a total of 353 men, women  and  children  aboard  another  defective  vessel  drowned  after  the  sinking  of  their  boat   (later  named  SIEV  X).   It  was  not  clear  whether  the  Australian  government  did  its   utmost  in  attempting  their  rescue.   Again,  the  tragedy  did  not  harm  the  Coalition’s   approval ratings.   

 Influencing voter choice - the 2001 federal election    

 Political scientists have long acknowledged the ‘electioneering’ role of churches.  In the  past,  the  Catholic  church  appeared  to  influence  voter  choice  amongst  their   congregations.  In the early part of last century one bishop, alarmed at the socialist aspect  of Labor, labelled it ‘irreligious’ and encouraged Catholics to vote Liberal (Thompson 1994,  38,105).   More  famously,  during  the  Labor  ‘split’  of  the  1950s,  Bishop  Arthur  Fox  in   Melbourne said it was a ‘mortal sin’ to vote Labor while they negotiated with Communists,  as  clergy  elsewhere  largely  maintained  Catholics  could  vote  as  they  pleased,  or  even   encouraged  Catholics  to  persist  with  and  influence  the  traditional  labour  movement   (O’Farrell  1977,  401-3;  Hogan  1987,  p.249;  Campion  1982,  p.115;  Stokes  1983,  137;   Henderson  1986,  218,224).   Arguably,  the  release  of  a  position  paper  on  the  ‘Moral   Reference  Points  for  Tax  Reform’  by  the  ACBC  in  July  1998  could  be  seen  as  a  form  of   electioneering, despite their stated interest as being ‘essentially linked to issues of morality  and justice, rather than any party political agenda...’ (ACBC 1998).    

 During  the  2001  federal  election  campaign,  it  is  not  evident  that  churches  overtly   attempted to alter their congregations’ voting choice.  One possible explanation for this  is that neither the Coalition nor the Labor party held a particularly compassionate stance  with  regard  to  the  issue  of  detention  or  asylum  seekers  in  general.   However,  an   ‘Election  Special’  pamphlet  released  by  Catholic  Welfare  Australia  and  the  ACSJC   discussed the issue of asylum seekers in Australia, as second of five ‘crucial social issues  for  Australia’s  political  parties’,  and  encouraged  an  humanitarian  approach.   (CWA  &   ACSJC 2001, 2).    

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  10

 In any case, the Coalition won convincingly in the November 2001 election.  Although  various  people,  including  commentators  and  lobby  groups,  questioned  the  veracity  of   the government’s claims that boat people threw their children overboard, a strategically  released (and very incoherent) videotape was broadcast shortly before the November 10  poll.  Marr  & Wilkinson (2003, 255) contend that while it contained no evidence of the  claims  (indeed,  it  was  recorded  the  day  after  the  alleged  incident),  it  was  the   government’s way  of  shifting  public attention  from  the  doubts raised;  the  government   ‘had only to hold the line for another three days until the election’.     

 Interestingly, journalist Mungo McCallum (2002, 67) observed that since the November  2001 election, ‘public opposition [to government asylum seeker policy became] far better  organised.   The  churches  were  taking  a  stronger  role,  and  a  numbers  of  prominent   Australians were speaking out’.     

 Formal representation of interests - HREOC inquiry   

 Formal representation to government is a hallmark of any pressure group.  Shortly after  the  election,  churches  and  other  sympathetic  groups  again  turned  their  focus  to   detention  centres  and  the  children  within  them.  In  2001,  almost  600  children  aged   between eight and 18 were held in Australia’s immigration detention centres.  Of these,  almost  10  per  cent  arrived  as  unaccompanied  minors,  without  parents  or  a  legal   guardian,  with  most  from  Afghanistan,  Iraq  and  Iran,  according  to  figures  from  both   HREOC and DIMIA.   

 As concern grew that detainee children were mentally and physically ailing, particularly  in  light  of  the  year’s  revelations,  in  November  2001  HREOC  (2001)  announced  an   inquiry into the  treatment of children in detention centres.   HREOC stated  the Inquiry   would examine whether Australia was breaching its international obligations to the UN  Convention on the Rights of the child by detaining children, how detention affects their  mental  health  and  long-term  development,  the  adequacy  of  detention  conditions,   including education, culture and security practices and alternatives to detention, and an  assessment of the Woomera trial of community based detention of women and children.   A  spokesperson  for  Immigration  Minister  said  at  the  time:  ‘We  are  not  happy  with   children in detention but we are not the ones that have brought them here to Australia’  (Age 28/11/01, 1,4).   

 Following the announcement of the HREOC inquiry, Prime Minister Howard reiterated  the  Government’s  ‘hard-line  stance’  on  asylum  seekers,  even  going  so  far  as  to  say  ‘I   want to make it plain that we’re not going to alter our policy in relation to mandatory  detention’  of  asylum  seekers,  regardless  of  any  recommendations  from  the  HREOC.    When  Howard’s  attention  was  drawn  to  the  600  children  in  immigration  detention  

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  11

 centres,  he  concurred  with  Ruddock’s  view  that  unaccompanied  minors  were  sent  to   Australia to scam the Government into agreeing to family reunion migrations (SMH  30/11/01, 13).   

 This  contrasted  with  the  Labor  Party’s  response.   Following  the  2001  Federal  election,   criticism  of  Labor’s  policy  on  asylum  seekers  was  rife.   Many  within  the  ALP  blamed   Labor’s electoral defeat on the party’s acquiescence to bipartisan policy.  Yet on the same  day Howard affirmed his party’s position on asylum seekers, in November 2001, Labor  Senator Barney Cooney gave the first public indication of a change to Labor’s bipartisan  stance  on  the  issue.   He  pleaded  with  the  government  to  change  its  current  policy,   saying ‘[t]he incarceration of innocent children, no matter what conditions they are kept  in,  is  abominable  …  Keeping  children  in  confinement  discounts  decency’  (SMH   20/11/2001,  13).   Such  a  view  reflected  precisely  the  view  of  most  contributors  to  the   HREOC inquiry.     

 The church actively contributed to the report.  Of the 43 key submissions received that  addressed  multiple  issues,  18  were  from  church  organisations,  and  13  of  these  from   Catholic church organisations.  In addition, Catholic organisations provided three other  submissions,  one  of  each  addressing  legal  issues,  psychological  issues  and  educational   issues.  Furthermore, some church organisations (particularly Catholic ones) featured in  the public hearings held in capital cities around the country the following year.   

 Encouragement of social justice values - pressure group potential?   

 Persuading others to espouse certain values and act on them indicates a latent ability to  mobilise  people  into  pressure  group  activity.   A  pre-Christmas  message  in  December   2001  from  Australia’s  senior  bishop,  Archbishop  Francis  Carroll,  referred  to  the   November election and the issue of refugees and asylum seekers.  In part, the statement  said that ‘Australians need to do some soul-searching in light of the recent Federal poll  and such prominent election issues as the treatment of refugees and asylum-seekers …  We  have  prided  ourselves  on  being  a  generous  and  compassionate  people  …  Recent   statements  and  events,  particularly  in  regard  to  asylum-seekers  and  refugees,  have   shattered much of that reputation. Perhaps they should also shake our conviction about  ourselves.’  As if in reply to John Howard’s election statement that “We will decide who  comes  into  this  country  …”,  Carroll  suggested  that  although  Australia  had  a  right  to   control the number of people who came into Australia and the way in which they came,  very  few  rights  were  absolute,  and  ‘the  rights  of  others,  especially  with  basic  human   needs,  must  also  be  recognised.’  But  as  Moira  Rayner  (2001)  observed,  it  is  much  less   usual  for  political  leaders  and  administrators  in  Australia  to  talk  in  terms  of  human   rights.   

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  12

 The  statement  also  appeared  to  take  issue  with  the  sense  of  public  uncertainty  that   prevailed  after  the  terrorist  attack  on  the  United  States  on  September  11  2001,  and  the   government’s association of terrorists with asylum seekers.  In addition, it addressed the  political semantics of describing asylum seekers as ‘illegals’ or ‘queue jumpers’. 

 Narrow  self-interest  and  a  spirit  of  fear  provide  a  poor  environment  for  objective  discussion,  much  less  a   compassionate response. Negative language about illegal migrants and queue jumpers could hide the reality  of  legitimate  and  desperate  asylum-seekers.  Subtle  overtones  of  racism  and  cultural  deficiency  can  further   colour the conversation … we must have the generosity to look beyond self-interest, and the compassion to  recognise real people in desperate need.  (CV 12/2001). 

 

 It  is  not  clear  what  effect  affirming  Catholic  teaching  on  social  justice  values  has,  in   terms of stirring members of its church to action.  Measuring such an effect is thorny and  complicated,  as  is  judging  any  results  where  secular  bodies  have  also  made  a   contribution.  However  the  potential  lies  for  this  to  occur,  as  Catholic  groups  have  a   history  of  mobilising  their  congregations  into  pressure  group  style  activity,  most   famously demonstrated by the Goulburn school strike of 1962 (Hughes 1978; Campion  1987, 171-3).   

 Church contribution to public opinion - and the problem of measurement   

 Public opinion can be influenced by the action of interest groups.  Following evacuations  of children from the Woomera detention centres after some asylum seekers protests of   sewing  their  lips  together  and  hunger  striking  (TWA  26-7/1/2002,  3,8),  Howard   maintained the Government’s detention policy was the right approach.  He upheld the  view that any backdown in the face of protests by detainees would damage the message  of  deterrence  to  boat  people,  which  he  ‘believed’  was  working.   But  notably,  the   Weekend Australian (26-7/1/2002, 3) reported  

  [Mr  Howard]  rejected  an  offer  from  welfare  organisations,  including  the  Brotherhood  of  St  Laurence,   Centacare  and  St  Vincent  de  Paul,  to  provide  housing  and  other  support  if  asylum  seekers  were  released   from Woomera.  That would only encourage more people to come from overseas, he said. 

 Catholic  cleric  Fr  Frank  Brennan  subsequently  attracted  mainstream  media  coverage   when he described Australia’s detention policy as ‘morally reprehensible’.  He said  

 It will not be long before protected detention of children in the heated isolation of Woomera will be seen as a  moral  obscenity.   Members  of  [the  legal]  profession  must  be  heard  in  the  public  forum  when  political   conflicts relate to the liberty, dignity and rights of the person against the power of the state.  (Age 4/2/2002; 

 Cathnews 5/2/2002). 

 In  fact,  there  were  indications  public  opinion  was  beginning  to  change.   Campaigns   supporting  asylum  seekers  (especially  children)  continued  to  gain  momentum,  and  by   February  2002  a  Newspoll  indicated  that  while  most  Australians  favoured  mandatory   detention, support for the policy dropped markedly.4     

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  13

 Despite  the  church’s  consistent  and  pervasive  public  statements  addressing  refugee   issues, measuring any results of their efforts is at best, thorny. Because numbers of other  human  rights  groups,  refugee  advocates,  concerned  professionals  and  others  speak  on   the  issue,  isolation  of  the  contribution  of  one  group  to  public  opinion  is  problematic.    Many groups that are not church sponsored may be influenced by church commentary,  or may employ people whose personal beliefs are influenced by the church.   

 The expertise of church groups working with refugees enables them to draw attention to  key  points  and  underlying  and  associated  matters,  and  speak  with  knowledge  and   authority on the issues faced by refugees.  As a result, my focus for further study is on  the  contribution  the  institutional  church  makes  to  the  Catholic  opinion  -  however,   measurement of this aspect only is also fraught with difficulty, as churchgoers also often  listen to a variety of media and commentary.   

 A  major  triumph  for  church  organisations  and  other  supporters  of  a  more   compassionate approach to asylum seeker policy was the softening of Labor party policy  on  the  issue.   (The  effect  of  church  organisations  directly  lobbying  the  ALP,  and  the   influence of Catholics within the party will be explored in my broader study).  However,  in January 2002, then-Opposition Leader, Simon Crean, announced a shift in Labor Party 

 policy, imploring the Government to release children held in detention centres, into the  community.    

 [I]t  is  just  plain  wrong  to  hold  innocent  children  behind  razor  wire  …  Children  should  be  out  in  the   community where they can live normal lives, get an education and be protected from some of the horrors too  many of them have witnessed. 

 For  many  refugee  advocates  however,  this  was  only  the  first  step.   The  UN  High   Commissioner  for  Refugees  urged  for  asylum  seekers  to  be  released  from  detention   centres, without specifying children in particular.  (TWA 26-7/1/2002, 3).   

 The Catholic Church, while emphasising children, eagerly sought a change of policy for  all detainees.   In March,  the ACBC published a statement about Refugees and Asylum  Seekers, as a supplement to their July 2001 statement (such statements are distributed to  parishes  and  freely  available  from  displays).   The  March  2002  paper  affirmed  the   Australian  government’s  cooperation  with  other  countries  and  refugee  agencies,  but  

 implied that the emphasis on people smuggling was taking precedence over the issue of  why  people  fled  their  homelands.   Moreover,  the  statement  drew  attention  to  the   response  of  nations  to  asylum  seekers,  reminding  the  Australian  government  and  its   people of the obligations of Australia to accept refugees:  ‘Australia can and must give a  lead  and  have  a  new  sense  of  urgency  in  seeking  international  solutions,  not  only  to   combat people smuggling, but also to find settlement for suffering people.’   

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  14

 Framed  positively,  the  statement  appealed  to  the  ‘tradition  of  compassion  which  has   characterised  Australia’,  mentioned  the  hope  that  a  positive  response  to  such  people   brings,  and  affirmed  the  human  dignity  of  displaced  people.   The  bishops  also  noted   that they ‘have frequently applauded Australian Governments for opening the shores of  this  rich  continent  to  give  protection  to  refugees:  they  have  always  encouraged   Governments to be as generous and humane as possible’ (ACBC 2001a, 3-4).    

 Nonetheless,  the  statement  reiterated  the  numbers  involved  in  ‘the  present  world   refugee crisis’, and noted the fiction of ‘queues’ employed by the present Government in  its  border-tightening  response.   The  bishops  warned  governments  not  to  'always  be   driven  by  public  opinion’  (ACBC  2001a,  4-5).  Calling  for  ‘greater  generosity  in   Australia’s  refugee  program’,  the  bishops  countered  arguments  put  forth  by  major   political  parties  that  Australia  could  not  afford  to  increase  the  current  quota  (ACBC   2001a, 6).   

 While  they  urged  more  humane  treatment  of  asylum  seekers,  and  argued  against   detention,  the  bishops  noted  detention  was  ‘deeply  destructive  of  human  dignity’,   particularly  for  children.   Expressing  disapproval  and  concern  at  the  Government’s   changes  to  bureaucratic  processes  that  further  restricted  permanent  resettlement  of   refugees, the bishops also warned that ‘xenophobic feelings…[should not] be exploited  for political advantage’ (ACBC 2001a, 7-8).    

 The bishops concluded their statement by drawing attention to the efforts of the Catholic  Church  in  the  issue  of  refugees  and  asylum  seekers.   They  noted  some  of  the  various   organisations  and  levels  of  involvement  of  the  church:  at  state  and  national  level,   dioceses  and  parishes,  through  offices,  religious  institutes  and  church  organisations.    The church’s participation 

  ranged from intervention at the policy and advocacy levels to providing refugees, asylum seekers and those  who have been granted Temporary Protection Visas, with advise and assistance with housing, employment,  clothing, friendship, support and pastoral care.  (ACBC 2001a, 8). 

 

 Advocacy - the Bakhtiyari brothers   

 In its traditional  sense,  advocacy is ‘standing in the place  of another’, arguing on their   behalf.   Pressure  groups  often  exhibit  this  function,  and  the  church  regularly   demonstrates this, whether pastorally or politically.   

 Arguably  attention  was  most  focused  on  detained  children  after  the  escape  of  two   children  in  July  2002  from  Woomera  detention  centre.   Aided  by  asylum  seeker   sympathisers, the pair were hidden for three weeks, and in a dramatic turn, the children,  Alamdar and Montazer Bakhtyiari, were escorted to the British Consulate in Melbourne 

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  15

 and  sought  asylum  there,  after  reporting  mistreatment  by  detention  centre  guards,  an   allegation denied by then-Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock.   

 Following reports of the boys’ escape and appeal for asylum, a joint statement released  by  leaders  within  three  Australian  Capital  Territory  churches,  including  a  Catholic   bishop, argued  

  The plight of the two young boys … once more [highlights] the obscenity of children being kept in custody in  what are universally described as extreme conditions.  Whether the boys are Afghanis or Pakistanis, whether  they  are  refugees  or  illegal  immigrants  is  irrelevant.   They  are  children.   They  are  children.   They  are   children.     In  a  scale  of  moral  priorities  there  can  hardly  be  a  higher  priority  than  the  protection  of  children.   Why  

 would a country wish to protect its borders, if it is manifestly obvious that it cannot protect children within  those borders?    (Browning, Power & Lorenzen 2002). 

 

 Prohibited  from  seeing  their  father,  the  boys  returned  straight  to  Woomera.   The   opposition loudly criticised this action; then-Labor leader Simon Crean stated “there is  no  place  for  children  behind  razor  wire”,  while  Mark  Latham  asked  whether  it  really   would have “hurt Ruddock to allow the father to see those kids for an hour … instead of  whisking  them  away  on  a  charter  plane?”   ACTU  president  Sharan  Burrow  argued   Australia was “at risk of losing its humanity when we lock up children and their  families who are simply seeking asylum from what they consider to be desperate lives”  (SMH 22/7/2002, 6).     

 It was later revealed that a Catholic nun played a pivotal role for the escaped boys.  A  prominent Brigidine sister, Sr Brigid Arthur, took the children into the British Consulate  to claim asylum, but did not reveal those who placed the boys in her charge.  The order  maintained they knew nothing of the boys’ time on the run, and confirmed they do not  assist escapees; their primary action for assisting asylum seekers was running a project  for those released into the community on bridging visas (Cathnews 22/7/2002).   

 Implied  support  for  the  sister  came  in  the  form  of  a  statement  from  the  Sisters  of  St   Joseph  (the  ‘Josephite’  order),  a  few  days  after  this  revelation.   The  statement   highlighted  their  136  years  of  caring  for  children  in  need,  and  urging  the  immediate   release of detained children into the community.  Sr Joan Healey of the National Joseph  Justice  Network  declared  that  detaining  children  is  a  moral  issue  ‘upon  which  our   generation will rightly be judged’.  She also argued that ‘a detention centre behind razor  wire is no place to nurture a child … [early childhood trauma] has repercussions for the  whole of life’ (Cathnews 13/10/2002).   

 In  addition  to  the  advocacy  role  demonstrated  by  Sr  Brigid  Arthur  in  relation  to  the   Bakhtiyari  boys,  the  wider  church  also  operated  as  advocates  for  other  detained   children.   In  2002,  the  Bishop  Hurley  lobbied  the  government  to  allow  children  at  the  

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  16

 Woomera  detention  centre  to  attend  primary  school  at  St  Barbara’s,  the  local  Catholic   Parish  school  at  Roxby  Downs  in  South  Australia’s  north.   In  November,  the   government  permitted  this  arrangement  on  a  two-day  a  week  trial  basis  (Cathnews   22/11/2002).   

 Information distribution - social justice publications   

 Publications are a tool employed by many interest groups to convey their message.  In  early  2002  the  ACSJC  published  another  booklet  in  its  Catholic  Social  Justice  Series.    With the title, ‘The Call to Hospitality: Catholic Teaching on Refugees’, Sandie Cornish  (National  Executive  Officer  of  the  ACSJC)  provided a timely analysis of catholic social   justice teaching in relation to the issue. While the Catholic Social Justice Series is aimed  at a more educated reading audience, this document still fits with the role of information  provision.  As ACSJC Chairman, Bishop William Morris, acknowledged in the Foreword  (2002, 4), the paper is a 

  valuable resource for those engaged in work on behalf of refugees and asylum seekers and for the thoughtful  Catholic who is seeking the foundation of Church teaching on this divisive issue. 

 

 In  addition,  the  ACSJC  prepares  resources  for  use  in  church  discussion  groups  and   liturgies,  such  as  the  Lenten  discussion  group  booklet  ‘Give  Me  Shelter’  (2002)  which   reflected  on the  issue  of  refugees and  asylum  seekers.   The  Social  Justice  Sunday pack   ‘Subverting  Racism  2003’  also  included  reflections  on  asylum  seekers,  buttressing  the   ACBC’s Social Justice Statement, which focused on racism and addressed the treatment  of indigenous people, asylum seekers and the issue of race hatred.     

 While  the  ACSJC  is  prolific  in  its  statements  and  publications,  there  are  several  other   bishops’  committees  and  agencies  that  similarly  contribute.   ACMRO  published   numbers of articles about asylum seekers and detention, a number of which have been 

 referenced  by  mainstream  secular  organisations.   Other  Catholic  organisations  such  as   the  Catholic  Commission  for  Justice,  Development  and  Peace  or  CCJDP  (whose  article   on  ‘Improving  outcomes  and  reducing  costs  for  asylum  seekers’  was  published  on   Australian Policy Online), and the Edmund Rice Centre (whose ‘Debunking the Myths  about Asylum Seekers’ fact sheets are ubiquitous) also made significant contributions to  information disbursement.   

 Caretaking - Centacare responsibility for children    

 Catholic agency Centacare performed a pastoral rather than political role  when it took   responsibility  for  some  detainee  children.    Public  opinion  was  already  changing  with   regard  to  children  in  detention  -  but  the  government  appeared  more  concerned  with   legalities.  In June 2003, the Family Court ruled it unlawful for the Federal Government 

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  17

 to  indefinitely  detain  children  over  immigration  issues,  as  it  breached  the  United   Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.  In drawing attention to the Minister’s  ability  to  assign  detainees  into  substitute  forms  of  detention,  a  spokesperson  for  the   diocese-based  CCJDP,  Mr  Matt  Purcell encouraged  the  Government  to  use  the  powers   within  in  its  own  regulations  to  ‘not  prolong  the  suffering  of  kids  in  detention’  and   instead  find  custody  in  hospitals,  hostels,  community  care  and  foster  care  (Age   19/6/2003; Daily Telegraph 20/6/2003, 11).   

 In early August 2003, a Family Court justice ruled that a case existed that the detention  of five children was unlawful.  The five children, all siblings aged between five and 14,  were  from  Woomera  and  Baxter  detention  centres.   Denied  refugee  status,  they  were   assigned  to  be  deported.   Referring  to  the  earlier  finding  that  detaining  children  was   unlawful,  the  Immigration  Minister  stated  his  belief  that  the  Family  Court’s  review  of   the  legality  of  detaining  children  was flawed,  and  argued  that  ‘this  is  not  an  order  for   Family  Court  determination  and  the  court  is  acting  in  excess  of  (its)  power’  (Age   1/8/2003).   However,  at  a  hearing  the  following  week,  the  same  justice,  Justice  Steven   Strickland,  denied  the  children’s  release,  and  criticised  the  ‘rush’  to  have  the  children   discharged.  The basis for his decision was that he was ‘not satisfied that it’s in the best  interest of the children’ to release them (Age 5/8/2003).    

 On  the  25th  August,  the  Family  Court  in  Melbourne  ordered  the  release  of  the  five   children from their detentions, where they had been held since January 2001.  Described  by the children’s counsel as ‘a landmark decision’, it was the first time asylum seekers  were  released  from  detention  without  a  visa.   Centacare  was  ordered  to  care  for  the   children.  South Australian Centacare Director Dale West commented that the decision  ‘vindicates [the] belief that the children’s needs will be better met by the church than in a  detention  centre’,  and  noted  the  ‘cumulative  effect  on  those  children  of  the  trauma   they’ve experience in detention has been a massive one …[and now Centacare faces] the  challenge  of  working  with  those  children  to  …  settle  into  the  community  (ABC   25/8/2003).  The effects of trauma on children were widely reported in both mainstream  and  religious  media;  many  children  in  detention  experienced  bedwetting,  nightmares,   aggression, regression and other symptoms of anxiety.   

 Centacare’s  involvement  was  absolute,  with  West  even  driving  to  Port  August  in  a   rented  van  to  collect  the  family  (Age  25/8/2003).   After  the  children  were  released  into   Centacare’s charge they were initially taken to a ‘church house’ in the Adelaide suburbs.   Centacare  arranged  the  provision  of  ‘safe  accommodation’  and  professional  services   including  medical,  psychological  and  social  services  for  the  children.   Bishop  Joseph   Grech, Chairman of the Bishops’ Committee for Migrants and Refugees, confirmed that  ‘Respect  for  their  [own]  religious  faith  will  be  an  important  part  of  [their]  care’  (ABC   25/8/2003; Cathnews 26/8/2003). 

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  18

 

 Participation in public debate - critique of government policy   

 Churches  have  long  criticised  government  policy,  and  the  Catholic  bishops  continued   their  critique  of  government  policy  beyond  those  of  the  released  children.   Bishop   Hurley stated that ‘Children shouldn’t be in detention and neither should their parents.   Families  should  be  held  in  an  alternative  detention  model  in  the  community  while   claims  are  being  processed’  (Cathnews  26/8/2003).    On  that  note,  counsel  for  the   children  Mr  Jeremy  Moore  observed  that  the  children’s  release  put  pressure  on  the   Government  to  release  other  children  in  detention.   He  asked  the  Government  ‘to  act   upon this decision and release children without awaiting judicial orders’ (Age, 25/8/03).   A report released by various welfare agencies in Victoria, including the CCJDP, backed  these  views.   The  report  noted  that  alternative  models would not  only  be  beneficial  to   the  psychological  wellbeing  of  detainees,  but  could  also  save  money  (Cathnews   26/8/2003).      

 When the Federal Government took the matter to the High Court on appeal, there was  another outcry from the Church.  In October 2003, The Southern Cross Monthly led a page  one story quoting Archbishop Philip Wilson that ‘it would be “cruel” and “devastating”  to send … [the] children back behind razor wire fences after they have tasted freedom’,  and calling for the Federal Government ‘to show compassion (SCM 10/2003, 1).’  In the  same paper Monsignor (Mgr) David Cappo, former director of the  Australian Catholic  Social  Welfare  Commission,  described  Australia’s  detention  of  refugees  and  asylum   seekers as ‘a scandal’.  In a homily given during Mass at St Francis Xavier’s Cathedral in  Adelaide  on  Migrant  and  Refugee  Sunday,  Mgr  Cappo  highlighted  the  need  for   Catholics to be witnesses to the gospel, and commended church agencies for their work.   “[W]e  are  called  to  show  that  we  truly  welcome  the  migrants,  the  refugees  and  the   asylum seekers … I am very proud of the tireless work of some of our church agencies,  such as Centacare Catholic Family Services, whose staff have been very vocal advocates  for  refugees  and  asylum  seekers,  particularly  [those]  who  have  been  locked  away  at   Woomera and now Port Augusta” (Southern Cross Monthly 10/2003, 4).     

 Recent developments   

 Following  on  from  condemnation  of  the  policy  of  detaining  children,  in  December  the   Labor  party  went  further,  appealing  to  sympathetic  Government  Members  of   Parliament  to  demand  the  release  of  detained  children  by  Christmas.   The  Sydney   Morning  Herald  reported  Opposition  immigration  spokesperson  Nicola  Roxon  calling   on such MPs to support her private member’s bill to release all children being detained  without a family member, into foster care.  Many had been detained for over two years  (SMH  1/12/2003).   Mark  Latham  repeated  the  message  a  week  or  so  later,  while  

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  19

 describing  Labor’s  immigration  policy  as  ‘firmer  on  border  protection  with  our  coast   guard strategy but more compassionate with asylum seekers’.  He confirmed that Labor  would desert the Pacific solution, shift detention centre management back to the public  sector and have most asylum seekers processed within three months.  ‘Genuine refugees  are  welcomed  into  the  Australian  community  and  those  who  aren’t  genuine…have  to   make other arrangements’ (SMH 10/12/2003).      

 In April, the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission presented its report, A  Last  Resort, to Attorney-General Philip Ruddock,  and  on 13th May it  was tabled in the   Australian  parliament.   The  Minister  for  Immigration  and  the  Attorney-General   responded with a joint media release, rejecting the major findings and recommendations  of  the  report.   Particular  note  was  made  that  the  government  also  rejected  HREOC’s   ‘view  that  Australia’s  system  of  immigration  detention  is  inconsistent  with  our   obligations under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.’   

 A media release dated 14th May drew attention to a statement from the ACBC, meeting  in Sydney.  ‘A Message from the Australian Catholic Bishops’ Conference - May 2004’  stated that   

  The Australian Catholic Bishops wish to speak for refugees and asylum seekers and ask the Government and  all Australians to respond with urgency to their needs.  We plead the cause of refugees and asylum seekers  again because the Gospel compels us to do so.  We remain hopeful that hearts and minds will change so that  the treatment of refugees and asylum seekers in Australia may be more humane, more respectful of human  dignity.  The nation’s response should be just, compassionate  and  consistent  with  our  obligations  under   International  Law  and  the  1951  United  Nations  Convention  on  Refugees  and  other  Conventions  to  which   Australia is a signatory. 

 

 Again, particular note was made of children, as the bishops said     

  It is impossible not to be deeply moved by the plight of children who are detained … We must, as a matter of  urgency,  find  alternatives  to  detention  for  unaccompanied  minors  and  for  children  who  accompany  their   parents.  Such alternatives must respect the importance of family unity and family reunion, and ensure that  children  damaged  by  detention  receive  adequately  funded  care  in  the  community.   Church  agencies  have   shown their willingness to help in this … Detaining vulnerable persons such as … children, unaccompanied  minors [and others] is morally unacceptable. 

 

 Who is, what is, and who speaks for the church?    

 Statements  regularly  broadcast  by  the  bishops  and  their  commissions,  and  then   prominent  lay  Catholic  commentators’  or  Catholic  politicians’  remarks  appearing  at   odds with such statements, leads to notions of church and church elites.  The questions  of  ‘who  is  the  church?’,  ‘what  is  the  church’  and  ‘who  speaks  for  the  church?’  are   inevitably  raised,  particularly  when  the  views  of  so  called  church  elites  and  those  of   other churchgoers differ.  While prominent Catholics openly support the Government’s  current policy (such as Cabinet Minister Tony Abbott, Liberal MP Kevin Andrews and 

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  20

 newspaper  commentator  Angela  Shanahan),  observers  may  think  they  espouse  the   beliefs  of  the  church  hierarchy,  and  some  Catholic adherents may even take their  cues  from  these  people.   Byrne  (1998,  83-8)  detailed  anecdotal  evidence  (opinion  letters  in   both  religious  and  secular  media,  and  Nati onal Church Life Survey results) which  indicated  that  by  and  large  those  ‘in  the  pews’  espouse  more  conservative  views  than   their church leaders.     

 From  a  church  perspective,  the  ACBC  is  the  premier  Catholic  body  in  Australia.   As   such,  it  is  the  formal  ‘voice’  of  the  Catholic  church.   The  organisations  and  agencies  it   supervises  and  liaises  with  therefore  can  be  considered  as  providing  an  accurate   Catholic opinion.     

 From a political science view, it appears the ACBC is only one of a number of Catholic  organisations  communicating  in  the  polity  on  the  issue  of  asylum  seekers,  through  its   protest,  its  informal  and  formal  representation  of  interests,  its  contribution  to  public   opinion (including possibly influence on voter choice) and its lobbying of politicians and  policymakers.  While the ACBC and its agencies provide the formal Catholic position on  a  diversity  of  issues  (including  children  in  detention),  the  variety  of  other  Catholic   voices  and  political  action  surrounding  on  the  issue  can  sometimes  cloud  the  issues,   particularly where differing approaches or opinions are evident.   

 The  sheer  volume  of  social  justice  material  prepared  by  the  church  in  terms  of  both   teaching  and  publications,  and  the  wide  dissemination  of  this  material,  indicate  the   church  is  significant  in  an  information  role.   Furthermore,  the  church’s  power  in   commanding a certain degree of media coverage also points to the church as a slightly  different participant in refugee politics and policymaking than a regular interest group.   However,  the  effect  of  all  this  commentary  is  extremely  difficult  to  ascertain.   As   Warhurst  (1990,  6-7)  noted,  there  are  two  converging  routes  of  influence  for  churches   commenting  on  policy:  firstly,  there  is  influence  upon  members  of  their  own  church   community, which in turn can affect the government, especially if used as an ‘electoral  weapon’,  and  secondly,  there  is  direct  influence  upon  government  and/  or  political   parties through the whole community, using contacts in government, the media or other  avenues  of  influence.   Where  these  spheres  of  influence  cross  over,  there  is  an  added   complexity  -  for  example,  the  influence  of  church  commentary  upon  individual   politicians who are members of churches.   

 Another complication to any accurate measurement of the effect of church commentary  is  the  commentary  deriving  from  non-church  sources.   When  the  church  is  the  only   organisation voicing a particular point of view, it is much simpler to attribute any effects  to  its  commentary.   However,  with  regard  to  detained  children,  there  are  a  few  other   groups arguing from a similar perspective and unless community members restrict their 

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  21

 reading  or  listening  to  one  or  two  sources,  it  is  nearly  impossible  to  separate  the   influence  of  particular  groups.   In  any  case,  assessing  the  influence  of  any  interest   groups  can  be  tricky;  Matthews  (1997,  284-86)  recognised  the  problems  of  inferring   influence from outcomes, organisational resources, access, decisions or economics.   

 In  reviewing  the  Catholic  church’s  action  in  relation  to  asylum  seekers,  it  appears  to   operate in a number of different ways to fulfil a variety of tasks.  Though churches have  often  been  variably  recognised  as  ‘altruistic  pressure  groups’  (Crisp  1967,  132-3),   voluntary  associations  of  a  shared  interest  that  can  become  pressure  groups  as  issues   arise  (Davis  et.al  1993,  139),  and  as  a  type  of  interest  group  bridging  space  between   political parties and the electorate (Marsh 1995, 8), I believe their role is wider.  Broken  down,  there  are  a  number  of  ways  in  which  the  church  operated  in  relation  the   detention  of  children,  though  it  is  acknowledged  that  many  pressure  groups  also   regularly  perform  many  of  these  roles.   While  several  of  these  functions  fall  within  a   pastoral  role  and  many  fall  within  a  political  role,  there  are  several  that  overlap.   

 However,  extended  analysis  of  these  functions  exceeds  the  scope  of  this  paper  and  so   these will be analysed elsewhere.   

 It is obvious that the Catholic church attempts  to  influence  government  policy,  which   meets  a  basic  criterion  of  an  interest  group  (Matthews  1997,  270).   In  his  analysis,   Matthews (1997, 274) observed a wave of ‘traditionalist’ non-producer groups since the  1980s, perhaps in reaction to emerging social movements, and recognised some church  groups  within  them.   However,  broad-based,  social  justice  focused  church  interest   groups  are  not  detailed,  despite  fitting  within  a  discussion  of  interest  group  politics   (Matthews  1997,  278-83)  by  attempting  to  influence  the  electorate,  public  opinion  and   the international arena.  The public service, parliament, the courts and political parties  are the subject of further study.  Similarly, an examination of ways in which the church  is distinct from or surpasses the work of ‘regular’ interest groups is the natural corollary  of an acknowledged interpretation of the church as an interest group.   

 Conclusion   

 With regard to the question of how the Catholic Church can be categorised as a political  participant/player,  it  is  apparent  the  church  can  definitely  be  identified  as  a  ‘type’  of   interest group.     

 Voicing  protest,  raising  awareness,  distributing  information,  contributing  to  public   opinion  (perhaps  especially  of  its  parishioners),  and  the  informal  and  formal   representation  of  detainees’  interests  all  demonstrate  interest  group  or  pressure  group  

 style behaviour.  Moreover, significant contributions to government inquiries by various  church  bodies,  probably  surpassing  by  any  other  interest  group,  also  demonstrates  a  

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  22

 level of involvement and commitment in the polity to address the needs of children in   detention.  This is particularly highlighted by the custodial role assumed by a Catholic  nun  who  supported  escaped  children  in  seeking  asylum  from  the  British  High   Commission, and that of Centacare who took care of five released detainee children.   

 The  possible  sway  of  the  church  on  voter  choice  (the  so-called  ‘Catholic  vote’),  and  its   inspiration (and encouragement) to social justice action also indicates a latent ability to  mobilise people into pressure group style activity, a fascinating subject for further study.  

 The church’s lobbying action, particularly in approaching politicians and policymakers.   It is these final two elements that will ultimately dictate what type of political player and  interest group the Catholic church is in today’s political arena.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 ENDNOTES                                                   

 1  Disclaimer:  At  the  time  of  presenting  this  paper,  Moira  Byrne  was  employed  part-time  by  the  Commonwealth  

 Department of Treasury.  This paper reflects her personal views and not those of her employer.  Acknowledgements: The author thanks her supervisor, Professor  John Warhurst, and the three anonymous referees  for their constructive criticism and suggestions for this paper.  2 Therefore from here forth the term ‘Church’ should be interpreted as applying only to the Catholic Church, and its various  bodies and agencies, primarily the ones detailed at Appendix I.   3 There are currently six permanent detention centres currently operating in Australia: Villawood (Sydney), New  South Wales; Maribyrnong (Melbourne), Victoria; Curtin (Derby), Perth and Port Hedland in Western Australia; and  the new facility, Baxter (just outside of Port Augusta) in South Australia, which heralded the closure of the Woomera  detention centre near Roxby Downs.  Both Woomera and Baxter operated only since the Coalition took office  (Woomera in 1999 and Baxter in 2002), and Curtin RAAF base, while used as a detention facility in 1995/96, only  opened in its current form as a detention centre in 1999.    4 Support for mandatory detention dropped from 71% prior to the November 10 2001 federal election to a low of 56% 

 in February 2002 (GLW 13/3/2002, 3; Newspoll 2002).  

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  23

 

 REFERENCES   

 ACBC - Australian Catholic Bishop’s Conference, 1993, Refugee Week: Don’t close our doors to asylum seekers, media  release, 24 June 1993, as reproduced in pp.245-6 Australian Catholic Bishop’s Conference, compiled by Mary  Newport, Australian Catholic Bishops’ Statements 1985-1995, St Paul’s Publications, Strathfield, 1997   

 ACBC - Australian Catholic Bishops’ Conference, 1998, The Moral Reference Points for Tax Reform, Position Paper,  28/7/1998    

 ACBC - Australian Catholic Bishops’ Conference, 1999, Catholic Bishops' Committee calls on Government to review its  current handling of pregnant refugee, 6 May 1999, http://www.acbc.catholic.org.au/media/1999/99May6.htm    

 ACBC - Australian Catholic Bishops Conference, 2001a, Refugees and Asylum Seekers - A Statement From the Australian  Catholic Bishops’ Conference, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory   

 ACBC - Australian Catholic Bishops Conference, 2001b, Statement on the Tampa, 29 August 2001  http://www.acbc.catholic.org.au/media/2001/2001_august29c.htm, consulted July 2003   

 Browning, George, Power, Patrick and Lorenzen, Thorwald 2002, Joint Statement by Bishop George Browning, Anglican  Bishop of Canberra and Goulburn, Bishop Pat Power, Auxiliary Catholic Bishop of Canberra and Goulburn and The Reverend Dr  Thorwald Lorenzen, Senior Minister Canberra Baptist Church and President of the ACT Council of Churches, 2002   

 Byrne, Moira,  1998, The Holy Lobby: The Influence of the Churches on Contemporary Australian Politics  and Public  Policy,  unpublished  Honours  thesis,  Flinders  University  Faculty  of  Social  Sciences,  School  of  Political  and  International   Studies, Adelaide, South Australia   

 Campion, Edmund, 1982, Rockchoppers: Growing Up Catholic in Australia, Penguin Books, Ringwood, Victoria   

 Campion, Edmund, 1987, Australian Catholics, Penguin Books, Ringwood, Victoria   

 Cornish,  Sandie,  2002,  The  Call  to  Hospitality:  Catholic  Teaching  on  Refugees,  Catholic  Social  Justice  Series  No.44,   Australian Catholic Social Justice Council, North Sydney   

 Crisp, L.F. 1967, Australian National Government, Longmans, Croydon, Victoria   

 Crittenden, Ann, 1998, Sanctuary: A Story of American Conscience and the Law in Collision, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, New York   

 Cunningham, Hilary, 1995, God and Caesar at the Rio Grande: Sanctuary and the Politics of Religion, University of Minnesota Press,  Minneapolis   

 CWA & ACSJC - Catholic Welfare Australia and Australian Catholic Social Justice Council, 2001, Election Special: Searching for the  Common  Good:  Federal  Election  2001,  Leaflet,  Catholic  Welfare  Australia,  Curtin,  ACT  and  Australian  Catholic  Social  Justice   Council, North Sydney   

 G.  Davis,  J.  Wanna,  J.  Warhurst  and  P.  Weller,  1993,  Public  Policy  in  Australia,  2nd  Edition,  Allen  and  Unwin,  St   Leonards   

 Henderson,  Gerard,  1986,  ‘The  Catholic  Church  and  the  Labor  Split’,  in  J.  Davidson  (ed),  The  Sydney-Melbourne  Book,  George Allen & Unwin, North Sydney   

 Hogan, Michael, 1987, The Sectarian Strand: Religion in Australian History, Penguin Books, Ringwood   

 Hogan, Michael, (ed), 1990, Justice Now!: Social Justice Statements of the Australian Catholic Bishops, 1940-1966, Dept. of  Government and Public Administration, University of Sydney, Sydney 

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  24

 

 

 HREOC,  Human  Rights  and  Equal  Opportunity  Commission,  2001,  National  Inquiry  into  Children  in  Immigration   Detention, http://www.hreoc.gov.au/human_rights/children_detention/, consulted October 2002   

 Hughes, G.E.F., 1978, ‘Bishops and Pawns’, pp.35-40 in Quadrant, December, 1978   

 Jupp,  James,  1994,  Exile  or  Refuge?:  The  Settlement  of  Refugee,  Humanitarian  and  Displaced  Immigrants,  Australian   Government Publishing Service, Canberra   

 Jupp,  James,  and  Kabala,  Marie  (eds),  1993,  The  Politics  of  Australian  Immigration,  Bureau  of  Immigration  Research,   Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra   

 McCallum,  Mungo,  2002,  Girt  By  Sea:  Australia,  the  Refugees  and  the  Politics  of  Fear,  Quarterly  Essay  Issue  5,  Black  Inc.,   Melbourne, 2002   

 McMaster,  Don,  2002,  Asylum  Seekers:  Australia’s  Response  to  Refugees,  Reprint  with  new  Preface,  Melbourne  University   Press, Carlton South   

 Manne, Robert, with Corlett, David, 2004, Sending Them Home: Refugees and the New Politics of Indifference, Quarterly Essay  Issue 13, Black Inc., Melbourne, 2004   

 Mares,  Peter,  2001,  Borderline:  Australia’s  treatment  of  refugees  and  asylum  seekers,  University  of  New  South  Wales  Press  Ltd,   Sydney, 2001   

 Marsh,  Ian,  1995,  Beyond  the  Two  Party  System:  Political  representation,  economic  competitiveness  and  Australian  politics,  Cambridge University Press, Melbourne   

 Matthews, Trevor, 1997, ‘Pressure Groups’, in Smith, Rodney, Politics in Australia, 3rd edition, Allen & Unwin, Sydney   

 NCCA - National Council of Churches Australia 2001a, http://www.ncca.org.au/mediarelease/20010328-cws-refugees.asp   

 NCCA - National Council of Churches Australia 2001b, http://www.ncca.org.au/mediarelease/20010816-ncca-refugeesunday.asp   

 O’Farrell, Patrick, 1977, The Catholic Church and Community in Australia: A History, Nelson, West Melbourne, Australia   

 Palmer, Glen, 1997, Reluctant Refuge: Unaccompanied Refugee and Evacuee Children in Australia 1933-45, Kangaroo Press, Simon &  Schuster Australia, East Roseville, NSW, 1997   

 Parliament  of  the  Commonwealth  of  Australia,  1994,  Joint  Standing  Committee  on  Migration,  Asylum,  Border  Control  and   Detention, Parliament of Australia, February 1994   

 Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, 2001a, Flood, P., Report into Immigration Detention Procedures,  Parliament of Australia, February 2001   

 Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, 2001b, Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade, A  Report on Visits to Immigration Detention Centres,    

 Ransom, Helen, 2002, ‘Bishop Urges Action on Asylum Seekers’ Plight’, in Kairos Catholic Journal, Vol. 13, No.3,  Catholic Archdiocese of Melbourne, 2002, http://www.melb.catholic.aust.com/kairos/1303/bishopurgesaction.htm,  consulted 1/12/2003   

 Rayner, Moira, the 2001 Walter Murdoch Lecture, presented 31/10/2001, Murdoch University, Perth, Western Australia 

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

  25

 

 

 Geoff Stokes, 1983, ‘South Australia: Consensus Politics’, pp.132-164 in Andrew Parkin and John Warhurst (eds), Machine  Politics in the Australian Labor Party, George Allen and Unwin, Sydney    

 Thompson, Roger C., 1994, Religion In Australia: A History, (Australian Retrospectives Series; Series Editor, David Walker),  Oxford University Press, Melbourne, Australia   

 Tomsho, Robert, 1987, The American Sanctuary Movement, Texas Monthly Press, Austin, Texas, United States   

 Warhurst,  John,  1990,  The Catholic Church and Public Policies: The Inquiry into Wealth Distribution, paper  presented  to the  Annual Conference of the Australasian Political Studies Association, Hobart, 24-26 September 1990   

 JOURNALS   

 Quarterly Essay   

 NEWSPAPERS   

 Age - The Age  Australian - The Australian  CV - Catholic Voice (Catholic newspaper, Australian Capital Territory)  GLW - Green Left Weekly   SCM - The Southern Cross Monthly (Catholic newspaper, South Australia)  SMH - The Sydney Morning Herald  TC.com TotalCatholic.com, email newsletters (United Kingdom)  TWA - The Weekend Australian  TWAR - The Weekend Australian Review  Cathnews, 24/1/01, http://www.cathtelecom.com/news/101/97.asp.   

 WEBSITES   

 HREOC - Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, www.hreoc.gov.au  DIMIA - Department of Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, www.immi.gov.au  Ninemsn polls 2001, http://news.ninemsn.com.au/other.aspx?id=3928  Roy Morgan polls 2001, http://oldwww.roymorgan.com/polls/2001/3438/  Newspoll 2002, http:www://newspoll.com.au/image_uploads/cgi-lib.803.1.0202_detention_centre.pdf   

 Moira Byrne: the Catholic church’s response to child detainees 

 APPENDIX  Formal organisation of the Catholic church and its agencies, associated with the Australian Catholic Bishops’ Conference.   

 Organisations linked to dioceses, lay organisations, reli gious orders and parishes have not been included here. 

 

 A u s t r a l i a n   C a t h o l i c   B i s h o p s   C o n f e r e n c e   (A C B C) 

 Bishops’ Committees - there are 19 Bishops’  Committees under the ACBC.  The Committees cover a range of issues from Aboriginal Affairs to Welfare and are established to advise their brother bishops on issues specific to them as well as to maintain the work of the Committees between the two Plenary meetings held annu ally.  Each Bishops’ Committee oversees or liaises with at least one of the Conference Organisations.  All positions on Bishops’ Committees are elected and are held by individual Bishops for a  period of three years. Bishops Committee for Employment Relations 

 Bishops’ Committee for Migrants and Refugees 

 Bishops Committee for Justice, Development and Peace 

 Bishop’s Committee for Social Welfare 

 Bishops’ Committee for the Laity 

 Bishops’ Committee Ecumenical and Interfaith Relations 

 Bishops Committee Evangelisation and Missions 

 Bishops’ Committee Education 

 Bishops’ Committee Clergy and Religious 

 Bishops’ Committee for Litugy 

 Conference Organisations - these organisations are entrusted by the Bishops' Conference and its Bishops' Committees to continue  and build upon their work at the national level in their respective areas, monitored by the supervising committee. Australian Catholic Commission for Employment Relations (ACCER) 

 Australian Catholic Migrant and Refugee Office (ACMRO) 

 Australian Catholic Social Justice Council (ACSJC) 

 Caritas Australia 

 Catholic Welfare Australia 

 Commission for Australian Catholic Women 

 NOTE: Liaises with the National Council of Churches of Australia 

 Catholic Inquiry Centre 

 National Catholic Education Commission 

 National Commission for Clergy Life and Ministry 

 National Liturgical Commission 

 Bishops’ Committee for Health Care 

 Bishops’ Committee for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People 

 Bishops Committee for Evangelisation and Missions 

 Bishops’ Committee for Canon Law 

 Bishops’ Committee - Central Commission 

 Bishops’ Committee for Doctrine and Morals 

 Bishops’ Committee for The Family and For Life 

 Bishops’ Committee for Finance 

 Bishops’ Committee for the Media 

 Bishops’ Committee for Membership Panel 

 Bisshops Committee for Professional Standards 

 Organisations in liaison with the Conference - these organisa tions liaise closely with their appropriate Bishops committees. Catholic  Health  Australia 

 National  Aboriginal  and Torres  Strait Islander  Catholic  Commission 

 Pontifical  Mission  Societies 

 

 Sourced from the ACBC website: http://www.acbc.catholic.org.au , consulted June 2004    

 

