---
title: "Government punishing temporary protection Visa Holders."
date: "2004-03-24"
creators:
  - "Stephens, Ursula"
source: "Office of STEPHENS, SEN URSULA"
subjects:
  - "Rural areas"
  - "Visas"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Bills"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211265446
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LR2C6%22
---

 

 Media Release  24th March 2004   

 Government punishing temporary protection Visa Holders 

 Speaking in the debate in the Senate on the Migration Legislation  Amendment Bill (No.1) 2002 Senator Ursula Stephens said “Rather than  concentrating on harsher penalties for the people smugglers the Government  are punishing temporary protection Visa Holders - dragging out their time and  uncertainty here. The Government is adopting a ‘blame the victim’ attitude,  and is furthermore ignoring the wishes of a large number of Australians in rural  and regional areas.” 

 Refugees on temporary protection visas are living in Australian country towns  making a big contribution to the local economies. The uncertainty of their  situation takes its toll both on the refugees and on the businesses relying on  their contribution to the local workforce. 

 “There are many situations in rural NSW, such as the Burrangong Meat  Processors Plant in Young and farm workers in Tooleybuc, where temporary  protection visa holders are prepared to step in and fill labour shortages in rural  Australia. These people and their employers deserve a more certain future,”  said the Senator. 

 “Rural and regional Australia could lose millions of dollars and a regional  labour shortage be exacerbated if refugees are not given permanent status  in Australia. If the government was serious about regional economic  development they would grant permanent protection to refugees and give  them a real chance to put down roots in our communities,” said Senator  Stephens. “Of course it is necessary to have strict migration legislation, but  sometimes the inflexible rules can cause inhumane suffering.” 

 “Labor supports a one-off TVP period for all unauthorised arrivals, and we  believe that a 2 year period is ample time to do the necessary background  checks to determine new arrivals' status. Under this model we can reduce the  amount of anxiety unnecessarily suffered by so many refugees. And, in what  could well be called a win-win situation, we could be helping ourselves as  well as the refugees.” 

 

 

 

 Contact Monique Earsman: 02 4822 8155 / 02 6277 3333 / 0408 653 289 

