---
title: "Exploring environmental security: nuclear waste in the Indian Ocean region."
date: "2004-09-29"
creators:
  - "Doyle, Timothy"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Indian Ocean"
  - "Environmental management"
  - "Radioactive wastes"
  - "Regional security"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211271833
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/543F6%22
---

  1

 

 

 

 

 Exploring Environmental Security:  

 Nuclear Waste in the Indian Ocean Region 

 Associate Professor Timothy Doyle 

 School of Social Sciences, 

 University of Adelaide 

 

 Refereed paper presented to the 

 Australasian Political Studies Association Conference, 

 University of Adelaide 

 29 September - 1 October 

 

 

 

 

 

  2

 

 

 

 

 Abstract 

 

 Interest in the concept of environmental security emerged forcefully in the 

 Brundtland Report in 1987, and increased at the first Earth Summit in Rio de 

 Janeiro in 1992. Ten years later, the nexus between environment, development 

 and security was never stronger than at the recent ‘Earth Summit Plus Ten’ in 

 Johannesburg in 2002. The notion of environmental security, however, is hotly 

 contested. Its most common variation is concerned with the impact of 

 environmental stress on societies, which may lead to situations of war within 

 and between societies. Usually, environmental security issues cross nation-state boundaries, and provide an ideal vehicle for the discussion of regional 

 frameworks. This paper critically examines the concept of environmental 

 security within the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). It then introduces one urgent 

 environmental security issue - the production, treatment, transport and 

 storage of nuclear waste - within the context of the IOR. 

 

 Whilst many parts of the more affluent world are moving away from nuclear 

 power as an industrial and domestic energy source, the Indian Ocean Region 

 (IOR) is rapidly increasing its nuclear energy profile. Most often, this increase 

 in nuclear profile is evidenced in discourses linked to the nuclear proliferation 

 of weaponry. Because of the IOR’s informal status as ‘Ocean of the South’, the 

 environmental security focus on nuclear power has not been sufficiently 

 explored, as the possibilities of nuclear accidents - whether in mining, power 

 generation, reprocessing, transport or storage - are seen as risks that those 

 ‘less affluent’ are expected to take. With the IOR’s increased nuclear profile, it 

 is critical that environmental security concerns are included alongside the 

  3

 more traditional security concerns of weapons proliferation and possible 

 nuclear war. 

  4

 

 

 

 

 Introduction: What is Environmental Security? 

 

 

 Although there have been conflicts over resources since the earliest human 

 societies, interest in both renewable and non-renewable resources within 

 environmental security frameworks has dramatically increased since the end 

 of the Cold War. Security is usually understood in state-centric terms, 

 ‘concerned with intentional physical (mainly military) threats to the integrity 

 and independence of the nation-state’ (Scrivner 2002: 184). Immediately after 

 the so-called ‘victory of capitalism’ and the break-up of the communist-inspired USSR in the late 1980s, world orders, which had existed since World 

 War II, were called into question. During this time of uncertainly, there re-emerged a global, almost post-modern, policy-shaping concept embracing a 

 shared plurality of interests which crossed nation-state borders, commonly 

 referred to as multilateralism. The multilateralist decade of the 1990s, which 

 The environment has often been used as a tool of war, from the 

 salting of Carthage to the Russians’ scorched earth retreats before 

 the armies of Napoleon and Hitler. Plato, mocking the notion of a 

 republic of leisure, argued that such a regime would soon resort to 

 a war to satisfy its taste for more space and natural resources. But 

 sustained thinking about the environment-conflict connection is a 

 product only of the last few decades. While clashes over non-renewable resources such as oil or gold are as familiar as the 

 Persian Gulf war, the question now is about the role of renewable 

 resources such as water, fish, forests, and arable land (Dabelko 

 1999: 2). 

  5

 ended as the current phase of US unilateralism emerged forcefully in the new 

 millennium, was an era when new boundaries and borders were drawn in the 

 sand, as alternative concepts of identity and collectivity were imagined. One 

 such idea, which evolved at this time, was that of environmental securityi. 

 

 This trend was reinforced and supported by military establishments, which 

 sought means by which they could continue to justify Cold War levels of 

 military expenditure during an apparent time of peace and prosperity for the 

 West. As a result, both the US and Russia formed high level units of 

 environmental security within established security institutional 

 infrastructure, such as the Pentagon’s Centre for Environmental Securityii. 

 Paradoxically, some peace advocates also championed the concept. In a book 

 appropriately entitled Green Security or Militarized Environment, Jyrki Kakonen 

 writes: 

 

 

 This interest in Gaia as the common enemy (as well as a pathway to common 

 salvation) was further heightened in the West due to increasing, but rather 

 late, understandings that the minority world (the more affluent world) had to 

 share its basic survival systems with the majority world (the less affluent 

 world). This concept of a shared spaceship Earth had been vociferously 

 Peace researchers have argued for environmental security in order 

 to show that…national defence resources could be used for civilian 

 purposes in the field of environmental problems. The aim is to 

 convert military resources…to do the environmental protection in 

 order to transform the military into a paramilitary and further into 

 a non-military organization. This is an option after the Cold War, 

 but there is a danger that the militarist approach to deal with 

 environmental issues leads to the militarisation of the 

 society…(Kakonen 1994: 4). 

  6

 pushed by the western environmentalists since the late 1960s, but due to the 

 characteristic conservatism of traditional security studies this green rhetoric 

 was only picked up in the academic literature and the governmental grey 

 documentation in the late 1980s and early 1990s. 

 

 This interest in environmental security emerged forcefully in the Brundtland 

 Report in 1987, and increased at the first Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 

 1992. The nexus between environment, development and security was never 

 stronger than at the more recent ‘Earth Summit Plus Ten’ in Johannesburg in 

 2002. The notion of environmental security, however, is hotly contested. Its 

 most common variation is concerned with the impact of environmental stress 

 on societies, which may lead to situations of war within and between 

 societies. In this manner, environmental security agendas are about seeking 

 issues which, if not addressed, may provide the basis for increasing human 

 conflicts. In this sense, environmental security is understood in somewhat 

 negative terms. 

 

 The advantage of this redeclared enemy - nature itself - was, or so it was 

 believed in the Westphalia mindset, that it constituted a ‘common’ security 

 issue for all humankind, or in the words of Brundtland ‘Our Common 

 Future’. Despite the aforementioned interest in the concept of green security 

 by peace researchers, it is an aggressive and militarised version, which has 

 been financed and supported by more affluent nations. As with the now 

 dominant, ambiguous and insidious concept and symbol of terrorism, the 

 symbol, environment and such spin-off concepts as sustainability are powerful 

 multilateral and equally malleable concepts, which cross nation-state borders 

 relatively easily. In this manner a new enemy is imagined, nature is 

 constructed as a terrorist, able to attack the nation-state at any time, bypassing 

 the traditional rules of warfare and its conventions, striking at the very heart 

 of the marketplace: ‘we are at war with the earth’. 

 

  7

 This interest in a combative environment is not new. In western terms it has 

 been aptly recorded in the 18thC works of Thomas Hobbes. In his most 

 famous work - Leviathan - Hobbes depicts nature as in a state of perpetual 

 war with itself: ‘…and the blood-dimmed stains shall be loosed upon the 

 world and all anarchy will prevail…’ (Hobbes 1772). This conservative view 

 of nature was used by Hobbes to justify his call to create an all-powerful 

 authoritarian ‘machine’ which would be the only means to avert global 

 environmental catastrophe. Of course, in this understanding of nature, 

 humanity is also in a perpetual ‘state of ware’ (Hobbes). This western 

 understanding of the ‘state of nature’ is not just restricted to neo-Obeisant, but 

 has substantial populist credence, as most western imaginings comprehend 

 peace to be the aberration whilst war is construed as the ‘natural state’. In 

 many ways, within this dangerous mindset, nature can be constructed as the 

 ultimate enemy. Like terrorism, it can be despised and feared by all. Clear 

 boundaries marking out who is friend and who is foe are no longer possible 

 to draw in the sand. Like an imagined alien attack, it unites all in a flag-rallying fervour. The Westphalia argument continues: only Hobbes’ 

 authoritarian machine will save us. A concept which, at first glance, offers the 

 promise of multilateral initiatives, is now leading to unilateral and bilateral 

 solutions, imposed by the minority world over the majority world, through 

 enforced market entrance leading to cultural and ecological dispossession and 

 devastation, ultimately backed up by the military force of the West. 

 

 Of course, the symbols environment and sustainability are not common at all; 

 rather the issues, which gather under its umbrella, are culturally diverse. 

 Concepts of environment are far from apolitical; rather, they are the exact 

 opposite (Doyle 2002). They are intensely politicised categories utilised to 

 redraw boundaries of collective identity, behaviour, political activity, security 

 and, most importantly, power and resource distribution. Elsewhere I write:  

 

  8

 So environmental politics is not just about ‘goodies’ versus ‘baddies’. 

 This symbol environment has such power that numerous cultures, and 

 the powerful and powerless within them, invoke its name for disparate 

 purposes (Doyle and McEachern 1998: 4). 

 

 That the ‘environment’ flag means many different things to different people, 

 does not make it a charlatan. Rather, it is a symbol almost as broad as nature 

 itself. It is perfectly chosen for the infinity of possible responses, which gather 

 under and around it. Just when it appears that a safe net of definition can be 

 cast over it, it wriggles out, and takes on a new guise, in a separate context 

 (Doyle 2002, Chaturvedi 1998). Therefore, the list of issues, which make up an 

 environmental security agenda is an important list; but an extremely 

 subjective and culturally determined one. Those who construct such an 

 agenda must be cognisant of these different meanings and issues, and 

 respectful of these differences and variations if practical solutions are to be 

 uncovered which make sense to the people who are most affected by these 

 forms of environmental degradation.  

  9

 

 

 Environmental Security and The Indian Ocean Region 

 

 Obviously, establishing an environmental security agenda for the Indian 

 Ocean Region (IOR) is significant in that it addresses basic survival issues 

 which affect most of the inhabitants of the region, approximately one third of 

 the globe’s population. Chaturvedi writes: 

 

 The Indian Ocean has been rightly described as the 'Heart of the Third 

 World' or the 'Ocean of the South', with low per capita income and low 

 levels of development in the majority of countries. The overwhelming 

 mass of these peoples struggle to survive under the conditions 

 characterised by chronic poverty, precarious political systems, 

 stagnating and struggling economies, fragmented political systems 

 guided by the considerations of ethnic identities....(Chaturvedi 1998: 

 712). 

 

 At the end of the 1980s, when these agendas for common futures were first 

 being drawn up, predominantly western issues were being recast as global 

 ones. The minority world, in this light, portrayed the major problems of the 

 globe as species extinction, global climate change, desertification, and 

 overpopulationiii. Needless to say, at the end of the 1980s, these were not 

 issues high on the environmental agenda as defined by most people living in 

 the majority world, many of whom dwelt in the Indian Ocean Region. Other 

 issues of more immediate survival dominated (and still do) such as health, 

 shelter, food and water security. In a provocative book entitled Tears of the 

 Crocodile, Moyo et. al. argues that the developed world has managed to divest 

 itself of its responsibility to the global environment by moving the arena 

 'away from people and onto things, forces'. They write: 

 

  10

 

 Within this western framework, when people were seen as part of an 

 'environmental security' agenda, ambiguously people are not perceived as 

 part of the environment; they are simply users or, in the case of the poor, 

 degraders (Doyle 1998). In 1990, the United Nations Human Development 

 Report argued that poverty is one of the greatest threats to the environment 

 and in 1993, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced: ‘Poverty and 

 the environment are linked in that the poor are more likely to resort to 

 activities that can degrade the environment' (International Monetary Fund 

 cited in R. Broad 1994). There are two key problems with this line of 

 argument. First, all poor people are regarded in an homogenous fashion. An 

 important distinction must be made on the connections between types of 

 poverty and environmental degradation. For example, those still operating 

 subsistence lifestyles (though under threat); those who have been recently 

 removed from this lifestyle; and those people who have long ago been driven 

 to the precipice of survival (the ‘landless and rootless’) have very different 

 relationships with their environments. The latter have no security of tenure 

 and little connectedness to place. This category includes those peasants and 

 squatters who survive by cutting forest cover, by consuming wildlife, and by 

 planting crops on soils, which will erode (Doyle 1998).  

 

 Secondly, many western environmental security theorists fail to weigh up the 

 costs of advanced industrialism on a global scale; not just within the 

 boundaries of nation-states. Issues of over consumption in the minority world 

 - and by the minority world  - cannot be underestimated. The fact is that the 

 In short the developing world  for the first time, is being asked to 

 be an equal partner in a world-wide endeavour precisely because 

 the emphasis has shifted away from the needs of the poor. By 

 advancing an environmental agenda the North has once more 

 concentrated on its own interests and has called them globalism 

 (Moyo et al 1993: 5). 

  11

 U.S. and Japan together represent 40 per cent of the world's Gross National 

 Product cannot be denied (Imura 1994). In the Indian Ocean region, the 

 consumption patterns of Australians far outweigh most of, for example, their 

 Indian and South-East African neighbours. Obviously, the creation of an 

 agenda for this kind of common environmental security was greeted with 

 some scepticism in parts of the majority world. Dabelko writes: 

 

 A concept of environmental security which is more inclusive of the interests 

 of the majority of people in the Indian Ocean states, both littoral and non-littoral, is one that moves away ‘from viewing environmental stress as an 

 additional threat within the (traditional) conflictual, statist framework, to 

 placing environmental change at the centre of cooperative models of global 

 security’ (Dabelko and Dabelko 1995: 4). But to do this, there must be 

 increased understanding of the environment, not as an external enemy force; 

 but as a diverse nature which is inclusive of people; a nature which has the 

 potential to provide secure access to individual citizens of all countries in the 

 Indian Ocean region to basic nutrition; adequate access to healthy 

 

 In less developed countries of the world, these ideas have elicited 

 mixed emotions. Obtaining food and water is a daily struggle for 

 the world's 800 million malnourished people, and according their 

 problems the high priority of a security issue obviously has great 

 appeal. But leaders in......Cairo, and Kuala Lumpur also fear that 

 such an approach will invite violations of their national 

 sovereignty as outside powers intervene to "help". They gave a 

 frosty reception, for example, to Gorbechev's 1988 proposal to 

 complement the blue-helmeted armed forces serving under the 

 United Nations with a "Green Helmet" force to react to natural 

 catastrophes and environmental crises (Dabelko 1999: 14 - 18). 

  12

 environments; appropriate shelter; and, a security to practice a diverse range 

 of livelihoods which are both culturally and ecologically determined. 

 

 There is an enormous gap in the literature on environmental security and the 

 Indian Ocean region. There have been substantial academic works completed 

 in recent years on the broad subject of environmental security (see, for 

 example, Myers 1993; Dabelko and Dabelko 1995; Broda-Bahm 1999; Lowi 

 and Shaw 2000; Redclift 2000; Cheremisinoff 2002). Some of these works move 

 from theory into empirical research, but when this occurs, most of this 

 scholarship is based in and around the Atlantic, Pacific and Southern Oceans 

 (see Kakonen 1994; Barnet and Dovers 2001; Dokken 2001; Foster 2001). It has 

 been very rare that researchers have utilised the concept of environmental 

 security in the Indian Ocean region. 

 

 This lack of research literature reflects neglect by Australia to look westwards 

 to its Indian Ocean neighbours; but also, at the broader level, by the more 

 affluent, minority world in addressing social science policy issues confronting 

 the South. There have been some articles addressing a particular 

 environmental security issue in a specific country, such as water wars in the 

 Jordan Basin (see Shaheen 2000) or environmental degradation leading to 

 human displacement in South Africa (Singh 1996). In a search of the electronic 

 version of Expanded Academic Index, only one reference emerges which 

 includes environmental security insights into the Indian Ocean region as a 

 whole (Chaturvedi 1998).  

 

 The concept of environmental security must be brought to life by reference to 

 some of the most pressing environmental issues confronting the Indian Ocean 

 region. Whilst many parts of the minority world are currently seeking 

 technological solutions to environmental problems, for many researchers in 

 the Indian Ocean region the major task is still documenting the list of 

 environmental problems, attempting to collate base-line data which is sadly 

  13

 missing. In another expanded article (Doyle 2004b), I outline the work of the 

 Indian Ocean Research Group (IORG) of which I am Foundation Convenor 

 for Environmental Security. At its inaugural conference in India’s troubled 

 Punjab last November, broad social and ecological problem areas were 

 identified, each one ecologically interlocking with the other, snowballing in 

 magnitude, creating desperate realities for billions of people culminating in 

 abject poverty, both in terms of biodiversity (or lack thereof) and in terms of 

 human existence: land degradation; water; fisheries; climate change; nuclear 

 waste; environmental refugees; and urban explosion and deterioration.  

 

 In this paper I introduce another issue to add to the original environmental 

 security agenda of the IORG: the increasing nuclearisation of the region, with 

 an emphasis on waste creation, storage and transport. 

  14

 

 Nuclear Issues as Environmental Security 

 

 Like climate change and population growth, nuclear issues cross nation-state 

 boundaries with ease. The globe is at an interesting point in its relation to 

 nuclear power. Despite the recent re-championing of nuclear power by the 

 George W. Bush administration in the United States, many industrialised 

 countries are reducing their reliance on nuclear energy, recognising its 

 inherent, long-term environmental dangers. Wealthy countries such as the 

 heavily industrialised Germany, are now decommissioning their nuclear 

 industry over the next thirty years.  

 

 Just as many parts of the industrialised world have come to the realisation 

 that the nuclear option cannot be sustained in an environmentally secure 

 fashion, parts of the majority world have now embraced the technology. The 

 Indian Ocean Region (IOR) is now undergoing rapid nuclearisation, with 

 many countries inhabiting the IOR now embracing the technology for the first 

 time. Issues of nuclear waste, its safe transport, and its final disposal have not 

 been high on their environmental or nuclear agendas. 

 

 Issues pertaining to nuclear power have so far largely escaped being included 

 in debates about environmental security. One of the key reasons behind this is 

 that nuclear issues are already considered as part of the mainstream, 

 traditional, ‘hard’ security or defence debates. This focus on nuclear energy is 

 almost always considered from the angle of weaponry and arms proliferation, 

 and is almost always centred on the identities of nation-states. So, it is not so 

 much introducing nuclear issues into the security rhetoric out of the policy 

 cold; but rather, dragging some of its related issues out of “traditional” 

 

  15

 security debates, and then including them in the more alternative, human and 

 environmental security discourses. 

 

 For the purpose of this paper, I have not purposively entered into the debate 

 over nuclear weapons build-up in the region (which of course is already high 

 on the international security policy agenda); but, instead, I have sought to 

 recast the nuclear question in the Indian Ocean Region as an environmental 

 security issue: principally dealing with the ever-increasing problem of nuclear 

 waste, its production, transport and its storage.  

 

 Before this paper can concentrate on its core task - the ever-increasing 

 problems of the storage of nuclear waste and its transport in the IOR - it must 

 be fully understood that opposition to nuclear power in the Indian Ocean - to 

 this point in time - has been minimal, except in the case of Australia. The 

 reasons for this are many. First of all, the majority of the Indian Ocean is 

 usually classified as third world, and nuclearisation has normally been a 

 characteristic of industrialisation. But most importantly, the dangers of 

 nuclear accidents - whether they occur during plutonium production or 

 during the handling and storage of waste products - are often regarded by 

 majority world governments as constituting acceptable levels of 

 environmental risk. In the current case of Iran, with fears of a U.S.-led 

 invasion dominant in domestic policy circles, the possibilities of a nuclear 

 accident are not rated highly on either security or environmental agendas. 

 Concerns over such environment risks are often regarded as luxury concerns. 

 

 At the other end of the Indian Ocean, Australia, on the contrary, has been 

 home to the vanguard of anti-nuclear movements in the global theatre, 

 alongside with the aforementioned Germany. Some of the questions on 

 environmental security which have emerged from the Australian experience 

 have informed the more affluent, minority world. These arguments are a 

  16

 harbinger of what is to come in the Indian Ocean region as a whole, as it 

 becomes the nuclear ocean. 

 

 Current Nuclear Issues in the Indian Ocean: The Case of Australia 

 

 Nuclear reactors and nuclear waste dumps are either being constructed, or are 

 under consideration for the first time in many parts of the IOR. Australia is 

 currently in the early stages of building a new nuclear reactor to replace its 

 old research reactor at Lucas Heights in Sydney. Other IOR nations, including 

 India, Pakistan, Iran and South Africa, have all either recently developed a 

 nuclear program, or are in the initial stages of development. Linked to these 

 reactors is the need to consider more permanent repositories for nuclear 

 waste, as well as issues that relate to the transport of such waste. At this time 

 of writing, there are at least five major anti-nuclear campaigns unfolding 

 concurrently in Australia:  

 

 1. Jabiluka  The most world renowned Australian anti-nuclear campaign is 

 the Jabiluka campaign fought at Kakadu in the Northern Territory. It 

 arguments are three-pronged, inter-changing between the rights of 

 indigenous peoples (which is the most dominant voice), the values of Kakadu 

 wilderness in its national park, and its anti-nuclear stance against uranium 

 mining.  

 

 2. Roxby Downs The campaign against Western Mining Corporation’s 

 (WMCs) Roxby Downs is aimed at curtailing the expansion of one of the 

 biggest uranium mines in the world. Mostly this campaign is run out of South 

 Australia. Environmentalists opposing the mine primarily utilise anti-mining 

 and anti-nuclear arguments; though there are some subservient indigenous 

 arguments, and a very small number oriented around wilderness values. The 

 aforementioned campaigns focusing on the Roxby Downs in South Australia 

 are largely confined to that state. Most eco-action takes place in the capital 

  17

 city, Adelaide, with some direct actions occurring at the mine sites themselves 

 and within local aboriginal communities.  

 

 3. Insitu-Leach Mines Also in South Australia are campaigns levelled at 

 halting the development of two ‘in-situ leach’ mines which are currently 

 under production. The mines are owned by two transnational corporations: 

 General Atomics (primarily a U.S. corporation) and Southern Cross (a 

 Canadian-based company). Most of the movement’s arguments in these cases 

 are levelled at inappropriate ‘third world’ technology being utilised by these 

 companies, which pump a uranium-depleted, acid-based waste solution back 

 into the aquifer when the mining process has been completed. This process is 

 illegal in the corporations’ ‘home’ countries.  

 

 4. Lucas Heights Reactor In New South Wales, another Australian state, there 

 is a key anti-nuclear campaign which focuses on shutting down the existing 

 Lucas Heights Reactor in Sydney, and preventing the building of a new 

 reactor facility to replace it. Also in Sydney is a campaign which focuses on 

 matters of nuclear war. Most particularly, strategic arguments have emerged 

 which contest the United State’s proposed missile defence strategy 

 championed by the U.S. President George W. Bush. Linked closely to the new 

 reactor is the development of a national waste repository. 

 

 5. International and National Waste Dumps In Western Australia and South 

 Australia large campaigns based on mass mobilisation techniques are aimed 

 at stopping Australia, and those specific states within Australia, from 

 becoming an international and/or national nuclear waste dump.  

 

 Most of these campaigns in the Australian context are either aimed at halting 

 the nuclear fuel cycle at its base: that is, to challenge the validity of mining 

 uranium ore itself; and/or to object to the construction of a storage facility for 

 the waste products of these processes.  In this manner, opposition against 

  18

 nuclear programs is firmly placed within the discourse of environmental 

 security as laid out earlier in this paper. 

 

 Transport and Storage as an Environmental Security Issue 

 

 In Australia - the nation with the most developed opposition to nuclear 

 energy in the IOR - the future campaign phase will inevitably be levelled at 

 the proposed transport of nuclear waste, once (and if) plans for a centralised 

 waste facility becomes a reality. At the moment, this is also a political party 

 issue, and the fate of the 2004 general election may decide the issue’s final 

 outcome. Already, however, anti-nuclear activists, both within mainstream 

 parties and within broader social movements, are building a new case for 

 opposition based purely on environmental security issues which will 

 inevitably emerge from the transport of such wastes. The transport of nuclear 

 waste crosses both state, national and international boundaries: it comprises 

 and environmental security issue in the purest sense. Within the IOR, there 

 are two key areas of concern. The first relates to radioactive waste being 

 transported by sea from international reprocessing units in Europe. The 

 second area relates to the transport of waste by land. This may include waste 

 which emerges from the mining process (reviewed using the case of India, in 

 the next section), as well as the more toxic substances which evolve after the 

 processes of nuclear reaction. As far as the latter scenario is concerned, this 

 has not yet occurred in sufficient quantities in the IOR.  

 

 Transport and Storage of Nuclear Waste Within the Indian Ocean 

 

 As discussed at length, traditionally, the key problem for the globe in relation 

 to waste has been waste disposal after atomic reaction occurred. But because 

 most countries in the IOR region have infant nuclear programs, this problem 

 has not yet reached its future magnitude. But what is already pressing in 

 these less affluent countries, are issues of primary waste management which 

  19

 relate directly to the mining process itself. In wealthier countries such as 

 Australia, the management of these wastes through the utilisation of tailings 

 dams is usually based on adequate levels of technology, although there are 

 still dangerous leakages reported at disturbingly regular intervals. In the 

 poorer parts of the region, these basic storage issues pertaining to tailings 

 dams are further exacerbated by the increased levels of environmental risk 

 which are considered by both state and corporate players as acceptable. 

 

 Let us consider the case of India. India has embarked on the three-stage 

 nuclear energy program which its government believes will reach its full 

 fruition by 2020, with 20,0000 mw of electricity produced. One of the key 

 problems for India relates to its very low grade uranium stocks, thus 

 necessitating mining on an extremely large scale, with few economic margins 

 available to pursue adequate environmental and safety measures. As a 

 consequence, ‘normal’ safety standards pursued in the minority world are 

 almost non-existent in South Asia. In the main uranium mine - Jaduguda - 

 200 trucks of ore pass through the village everyday. Uranium tailings lie 

 unprotected in front of the local school. The liquid waste from the mine is 

 dumped in the tailings dams, which is then diverted into a channel, ending 

 up in the Subernarekha River. In one of the villages, Chatikocha, 500 people 

 live below the embankment of the tailings dam (Mahapatra 2004). Saluka 

 Himbram, the head of the village, talks of living next to the mine and the 

 tailings dam: 

 

 Abnormal births have become common. Half of the women have 

 problems in delivery and miscarriages… We feel like vomiting when the 

 wind, carrying fine dust from the pond, reaches us… The tailing pond 

 must be causing the problem (quoted in Mahapatra 2004) 

 

 The critical message here is that environmental security issues relating to 

 uranium mining and nuclear energy will be magnified in the less affluent 

  20

 world. The case of Australia may allow us to imagine a nuclear future for the 

 Indian Ocean - to wrestle with potential waste issues - but the cold reality is, 

 that the Indian Ocean, as a nuclear ocean, will exhibit levels of environmental 

 degradation which can be scarcely understood in west imaginations. In 

 simple terms, the lives of people are more expendable, in political terms, in 

 the majority world, and this, in turn, has a devastating impact on their 

 environments. 

 

 At the regional level, it is not just waste that is generated within the region; 

 but also the ever-increasing waste which passes through the region. The Indian 

 Ocean is often referred to as the Ocean of the South (Chaturvedi 1998). As 

 such, environmental practices are often excused on the basic reasoning that 

 the lives of many people in the region are so environmentally-marginal, that 

 ‘a little bit more degradation will not hurt’. As a consequence, the Indian 

 Ocean region is currently being used as a key transport route for nuclear 

 waste. The two biggest destinations for the processing of waste are Sellarfield, 

 in England and Le Hague in France. Song writes: 

 

 

 Waste reprocessing breaks down spent fuel, chemically dissolving it, with the 

 plutonium separated from it. Apart from large, routine discharges of 

 radioactivity from this high level and long-lived nuclear waste, this 

 plutonium is now mixed with uranium (MOX) and re-used in conventional 

 reactors. The Japanese are the biggest proponents of this process, and receive 

 their shipments from both the British and French reprocessing plants. 

 The first question in nuclear waste disposal is reprocessing, which 

 can recover a significant quantity of useable material for nuclear 

 reactors and reduce the amount of high-level waste that must be 

 stored to about three per cent of the original spent fuel (Song 2003: 

 8). 

  21

 Unfortunately, this MOX fuel is often transported through the Indian Ocean 

 on its way back to Japan. 

 

 It is impossible to know just how many of these shipments are being made, 

 due to the high-levels of secrecy which surround them. What we do know, is 

 that on 21 July 1999, two ships carrying weapon-usable plutonium, left 

 Europe via the Cape of God Hope, through the Indian Ocean to Japan. The 

 task of publicising the shipments was left to transnational NGO - Greenpeace, 

 who reported as follows: 

 

 The two British flagged vessels, the Pacific Teal and the Pacific Pintail, 

 left Barrow in Britain and Cherbourg in France carrying the first 

 commercial shipment to Japan of mixed-oxide (MOX) reactor fuel, made 

 from plutonium and uranium. An estimated 446 kilograms of plutonium 

 is contained in the 40 nuclear fuel elements - enough fissile material to 

 construct at least 60 nuclear bombs …The Cape of Good Hope has 

 become the path of least resistance (Greenpeace 1999). 

 

 Only Mauritius, acting alone, made public its opposition to the reprocessed 

 fuel’s transport, by refusing to admit the vessels into their Exclusive 

 Economic Zone (African News Agency 7/3/99). Of course, this can only be a 

 symbolic position, as the devastation which would occur if the vessel was 

 sunk, or caught fire, would make the 200 km zone, as a zone of protection, 

 look ludicrous. The point has already been made that under existing liability 

 agreements, there is some limited compensation under international 

 conventions; ‘but no assurances exist whatsoever that the full costs of health, 

 environmental and economic damages would be paid to victims in enroute 

 states.’ (Greenpeace 1999). 

 

 Conclusions 

 

  22

 Apart from dismissively being regarded as simply enroute states for the 

 international trade in waste reprocessing, countries of the IOR are also 

 increasingly being looked at as possible repositories for international waste, 

 as a nuclear dumping ground. If the only waste product of nuclear energy 

 was high-levels of radioactivity with a half shelf life of 250,000 years (as is 

 widely reported for high-level waste) then the Indian Ocean would already 

 have been targeted. For as is already well-documented by the environmental 

 justice movement, it is the poorer nations who accept the waste of wealthier 

 societies, in exchange for money. And within those countries, it is the poorest 

 communities who are forced to dwell alongside these repositories (Bullard 

 1993). 

 

 At this juncture, the environmental security concerns of waste storage and 

 transport become intermeshed, once more, with more traditional, security 

 concerns of nation-states and their defence. Because spent nuclear fuel can be 

 reprocessed to produce both weapons of mass destruction - as well as energy 

 - the placement of such waste dumps is highly politicised; with the United 

 States increasingly involved in decisions as to who can and who cannot store 

 and reprocess spent nuclear fuel. In fact, recently the US has decided to store 

 all its own spent fuel at Yucca Mountain by 2010 in Nevada, in large part, due 

 to its fears that exported waste may find its way into the nuclear defence 

 programs of other nations. 

 

 Of the Indian Ocean countries, as mentioned, Australia has been specifically 

 targeted as a possible dump by transnational corporation Pangea. In the late 

 1990s, Pangea placed the policy spotlight on Australia due to its apparent 

 political and geomorphological stability. Though there is some merit to the 

 geomorphological arguments, imagining that political stability could survive 

 thousands of years is rather comical and nonsensical, at best and, at worst, 

 downright dangerous. Currently, Pangea has backed off its Australian target, 

 whilst the Australian Federal Government has taken over the running - this 

  23

 time advocating a low to medium density national waste repository in South 

 Australia. As touched upon, both the state government of South Australia, the 

 national opposition, and many interest groups in South Australia remain 

 vehemently opposed against such disposal on their doorstep. 

 

 In other countries in the IOR, both India and Pakistan store their own waste. 

 In the case of Iran, there appears to be some tensions as to whether the waste 

 from the newly constructed Bushehr nuclear power plant will be transported 

 to Russia, or will remain on home soil (Kerr 2002: 29). Sections of the Iranian 

 government want to store their own waste, whilst powerful elements in the 

 international community - particularly the U.S. - have made it clear that if the 

 waste is not returned to Russia, then the nuclear program within Iran should 

 be terminated. 

 

 At the broader level of anti-nuclear movements across the globe, it is 

 extremely interesting to see anti-nuclear movements emerging for the first 

 time in the majority world. As aforesaid, these movements also share an 

 active disdain for the build-up and utilisation of nuclear weapons within 

 traditional security discourses.  

 

 The Indian Ocean is fast-becoming the nuclear ocean. Because of its status as 

 ocean of the south, the environmental security focus on nuclear power has not 

 been sufficiently explored, as the possibilities of nuclear accidents whether in 

 the mining of uranium, power generation, reprocessing, transport or storage 

 are seen as risks which those less affluent are expected to take. With its 

 increased nuclear profile, it is critical that environmental security concerns are 

 included alongside the more traditional concerns of weapons proliferation 

 and possible nuclear war. 

 

 Environmental security issues such as nuclear energy, provide human 

 security issues which cross the political boundaries of nation-states, gathering 

  24

 momentum in ecological, geopolitical regions such as the Indian Ocean 

 region. It is the immensity of these problems, paradoxically, which demand 

 regional co-operation if they are to be successfully addressed. This co-operation, with great hope and conviction, may one day provide 

 environmental security - human security - for all who dwell in the region. 

 

 

 Bibliography 

 Africa News Service, (1999) “Mauritius-Nuclear Mauritius Opposes Nuclear 

 Waste Transfer,” Africa News Service, August 2. 

 Africa News Service (2001) ‘US About-Face on Climate Change: A threat to 

 Global Environmental Security’, March 15, 2001, p1008074u0121 

 Barnet, Jon and Dovers, Stephen, (2001) ‘Environmental Security, 

 Sustainability and Policy’, Pacifica Review, Volume 13, No. 2, June 2001 

 Barry, J.  and Frankland, G. (2002) International Encyclopaedia of Environmental 

 Politics, Routledge, London and New York 

 Beck, U. (1995) Ecological Enlightenment,  Humanities Press, New Jersey 

 Bidwai, P. and Vanaik, A. (2000) New Nukes: India, Pakistan and Global Nuclear 

 Disarmament, Signal Books, U.K. 

 Bullard, R. (1993) Dumping on Dixie, Westview Press, Philadelphia.  

 Broda-Bahm, K. T. (1999) ‘Finding protection in definitions: the quest for 

 environment security’, Argumentation and Advocacy, Spring 1999, v35, i4, 

 p159(1) 

 Chaturvedi, S. (1998) “Common Security? Geopolitics, Development, South 

 Asia and the Indian Ocean,” Third World Quarterly, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 701 - 24. 

 Cheremisinoff, N. P. (2002) ‘Environmental Security: The Need for 

 International Policies’, Pollution Engineering, May 2002 

 Curtis, J. (1998) ‘The Challenge of Environmental Security’, Habitat Australia, 

 Dec. 1998, v26, i6, p32(1) 

  25

 Dabelko, G.D. and Dabelko, D.D. (1995) “Environmental Security: Issues of 

 Conflict and redefinition”, Woodrow Wilson Environmental Change and 

 Security Project Report, issue 1, pp. 3 - 12. 

 Dabelko, G.D. (1999), ‘The Environmental Factor’, The Wilson Quarterly, 

 Autumn 1999, v23, i4, p14. 

 Deudney, D. (1994) ‘Environmental Security’, Book Review on Ultimate 

 Security: The Environmental Basis of Political Stability, by Myers, N., W.W. 

 Norton, New York, 1993 

 Dokken, K. (2001), ‘Environment, security and regionalism in the Asia-Pacific: 

 is environmental security a useful concept?’, The Pacific Review, Vol 14, No. 4 

 2001, 509-530. 

 Douglas,  M., Y.S.F. Lee and K. Lowry, 'Introduction to the Special Issue on 

 Community Based Urban Environmental Management in Asia', Asian Journal 

 of Environmental Management, 2, 1, 1994: ix-xv. 

 Doyle, T. (1998) "Sustainable Development and Agenda 21: The Secular Bible 

 of Environmental Management", in special issue 'Rethinking Geographies: 

 North-South Development, v. 19(4)Third World Quarterly, United Kingdom, 

 pp. 771 - 786.  

 Doyle, T. (2000) Green Power: The Environment Movement in Australia, 

 University of New South Wales Press, Sydney. 

 Doyle, T. and McEachern, D. (2002) Environment and Politics, second edition, 

 Routledge, London and New York. 

 Doyle, T. (2004a) “Dam Disputes in Australia and India: Appreciating 

 Differences in Struggles for Sustainable Development,” in D. Gopal and D. 

 Rumley (eds) India and Australia: Issues and Opportunities, Authors Press, 

 Delhi, pp. 365 - 84. 

 Doyle, T. (2004b) “An Agenda for Environmental Security in the Indian Ocean 

 Region,” in D. Rumley and S. Chaturvedi (eds) Geopolitical Orientations, 

 Regionalism and Security in the Indian Ocean, South Asian Publishers, New 

 Delhi, pp. 154 - 71. 

  26

 Doyle, T. (2005) Environmental Movements in Minority and Majority Worlds: A 

 Global Perspective, Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, New York and 

 London. 

 Foster, G. D. (2001) ‘Environmental Security: The Search for Strategic 

 Legitimacy’, Armed Forces and Society, Spring 2001, v27, 13, p373 

 Greenpeace (1999) “Japanese Plans to Make Carribean the Toxic Throughway 

 for Clandestine Shipments of Nuclear Waste and Plutonium”, unpub. 

 briefing, April. 

 Kakonen, J. (1994) Green Security or Militarized Environment, Dartmouth 

 Publishing Company, Aldershot and Brookfield 

 Kerr, P. (2002) “U.S. Reportedly Offers Russia Deal on Bushehr,” Arms Control 

 Today, November, p. 29. 

 Imura,  H. (1994) ‘Japan’s Environmental Balancing Act’, Asian Survey ,  

 XXXIV,  4: 355-368. 

 International Monetary Fund cited in R. Broad (1994) ‘The Poor and the 

 Environment:  Friends or Foes?’,  in World Development,  22,  6: 811-822, 

 Levy, M. A. (1999) ‘Exploring environment-security connections. (World 

 Wide Web sites on the relationship between environment and security), 

 Environment, Jan 1999, v41, i1 p3, (1) 

 Lowi, Miriam R. and Shaw, Brian R. (2000) Environment and Security Discourses 

 and Practices, Macmillan Press Ltd, London and New York 

 Mahapatra, R. (2004) “Eyewitness: Radioactivity Doesn’t Stop at the Mines in 

 Jaduguda,” Down to Earth, vol. 12, no. 23. 

 Moyo, P., O'Keefe and N. Middleton, (1993) The Tears of the Crocodile: From Rio 

 to Reality in the Developing World, London: Pluto Press: 5. 

 Myers, N. (1995) Environmental Exodus. An Emergent Crises in the Global Arena, 

 Climate Institute: United States. 

 Pettiford, Lloyd and Curley, Melissa (1999) Changing Security Agendas and the 

 Third World, Pinter, London and New York 

 Redclift, M. (2000) ‘Addressing the Causes of Conflict: Human Security and 

 Environmental Responsibilities’, Reciel, 9(1) 2000, ISSN 0962 8797 

  27

 Schultz, Richard H., Godson, Roy and Quester, George (1997) Security Studies 

 for the 21st Century, Brasseys, Virginia 

 Song, F. (2003) “Currently Indisposed: Managing Radioactive Waste,” Harvard 

 International Review, Summer, pp. 8 - 9. 

 Soroos, M.S. (1995) ‘Environmental Security: Choices for the twenty-first 

 century’, National Forum, Winter 1995, v75, n1, 20-5 

 Summy, R. and Saunders, M. (1986) A History of the Peace Movement in 

 Australia, published by University of New England, Armidale, Australia. 

 Thompson, M. (1997) ‘Security and Solidarity: and anti-reductionist 

 framework for thinking about the relationship between us and the rest of 

 nature’, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 163, No.2, July 1997, 141-149 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  28

 

 

 

 i I first wrote about the issue of environmental security in the context of the Indian Ocean in a  paper dedicated to establishing an agenda for broad environmental security issues for the  Indian Ocean Research Group (see Doyle 2004b). I wrote this in my capacity as Convener for  Human and Environmental Security for the IORG. The IORG is a non-profit social science  research group dedicated to discussing regional issues specific to the Indian Ocean Region. 

 ii Interestingly, since the events of September 11 2001, environmental security in the US  context is often considered as one and the same as ‘homeland security’. (Cheremisinoff 2002).  iiiFor an excellent example of this line of reasoning read Hartshorn, G.S., ‘Key Environmental  Issues for Developing Countries’, Journal of International Affairs, vol. 7, 1991, pp. 393-401. 

