---
title: "Hysteria, tolerance, race and writing. Canberra PEN Lecture, 15 November 2004"
date: "2004-11-15"
creators:
  - "Keneally, Thomas"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Opinion manipulation"
  - "Human rights"
  - "Refugees"
  - "PARKES, Henry"
  - "Case studies"
  - "Irish Australians"
  - "History"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211272850
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/C2HE6%22
---

 

  Writers have always tended to examine and be attracted to matters of race 

 hysteria, of our human passion for tribal pretensions, of our insatiable addiction to  

 scape-goating. Mistrust and division are one of our chief sports, the grimmest, 

 meanest but most instinctive of sports that our species has come up with. And yet the 

 story of love and fraternity across the tribal, cultural and political divide is one that 

 writers love to exploit - what else was Shakespeare doing in Romeo and Juliet, or 

 Alan Paton in Cry, the Beloved Country? It is also a story we humans, as much as we 

 indulge in tribalism, like to hear.  

         Since the Nobel laureate J M Coetzee saw fit to give the PEN lecture in Sydney 

 this year as a series of enlightened and cunning tales, I would like to tell a plain story 

 of hysteria long ago - a story I researched for a book of mine years past - and let you 

 draw conclusions and comparisons to the present.  

       In 1868, a prince named Alfred, the Duke of Clarence, Queen Victoria’s youngest 

 son, the first of the royal blood ever to visit this continent, came to greet his mother’s 

 Australian subjects.  A royal charity picnic open to the public was arranged to be held 

 at the pleasure grounds of Clontarf in Sydney Harbour, a name resonant in Irish 

 history as the site near Dublin of King Brian Boru’s final victory over the Danes and 

 of his death.  The picnic was attended by a large crowd, amongst them a solitary and 

 self-declared Fenian -as the Irish republican activists of the day called themselves. 

 His name was Henry O’Farrell, and - like today’s speaker  - he was “a ruined 

 seminarian.”  He harboured equally passionate feelings against the church, 

 particularly the Archdiocese of Melbourne, as he did against the British Empire.  

 O’Farrell carried with him on the harbour ferry to Clontarf on March 12 1868 a Smith 

 and Wesson revolver and a Colt.  In the press of the crowd, O’Farrell saw the prince 

  1 

 Hysteria, tolerance, race and writing  Canberra PEN Lecture, 15 November 2004 Thomas Keneally

 pass him and fired point blank, striking him in the back.  O’Farrell delayed his second 

 shot because a civilian stepped into the line of fire, and by then he had been grabbed 

 from behind, and his third shot went wild.  “I’m a Fenian, God save Ireland!” yelled 

 O’Farrell.   

  Still, after all the energy that the citizens of the Commonwealth of Australia 

 have spent in fear of each other, O’Farrell’s happens to be the most exorbitant act of 

 terror the country has seen.  The bullet entered to the right of the prince’s spine and 

 lodged in the flesh of the chest by the ribs.  The prince - it was reported - sought no 

 anaesthetic when having it removed.  A young, robust man, he made a good recovery.   

              Lord Belmore, the urbane, personable young governor of New South Wales, 

 an Anglo-Irishman taking colonial governorship to help pay his ancestor’s mortgages 

 on the great Palladian mansion of Castle Coole in Fermanagh, saw the possibility that 

 the populist government of New South Wales, particularly that ultimate populist, Sir 

 Henry Parkes, might use this event to create a schism in society and evoke in the 

 mainstream the possibility of a witch hunt.  Before dying on the scaffold, O’Farrell 

 said he had acted alone, and Lord Belmore decided that “the balance of probability is 

 in favour of the truth of his dying statement”.  But loyalists from New South Wales to 

 British Columbia were only too willing to paint all Irish Catholic immigrants with 

 O’Farrell’s colours.  Demagogues such as Sir Henry Parkes, Attorney-General of 

 New South Wales, saw votes and new popularity in promoting the idea that O’Farrell 

 was the visible sign of a pervasive, fanatic network amongst Irish-Australians.   

          The New South Wales Colonial Secretary’s papers of the time indicate the level 

 of hysteria.  Attorney General Parkes was so anxious to prove a conspiracy that he 

 allowed a prisoner named Charles Miller, a convicted confidence man who had shared 

 a cell with O’Farrell, to be released from Darlinghurst Gaol to begin an investigation 

  2

 into Irish Fenian cells in the towns throughout the bush.  Every communication 

 between Agent Miller and the Inspector-General of Police dealt not with hard 

 intelligence but rumours of some cell further along, and requests for cash. From the 

 Albion Hotel in Grenfell came an urgent telegram: “Not sufficient funds for Bathurst 

 - please send more money”.  Even a primitive Methodist journalist named Boggis of 

 The Newcastle Chronicle was under investigation for saying at a camp meeting that 

 Prince Alfred was “a Sabbath-breaker, and a gambler, and, if report speaks true, a 

 drunkard”.  A Detective McGlone of Berrima was investigated for opinions expressed 

 at Shalvey’s Hotel, where he was reported to have said that if a poor man with five 

 children were killed no one would pay this much account.  Questions were raised in 

 the New South Wales Legislature about even the humblest of Irish labourers:  The 

 intended St Patrick’s day demonstration of certain persons styled Fenians on Number 

 Five contract of the Great Western Railway Works, and the threat they constituted to 

 the sovereignty of Queen Victoria over Australian earth.  In fact, on St Patrick’s Day 

 the police reported, “persons did collect, but were easily dissuaded from marching”.  

 An Irish baker named Mr McBurnie, delivering bread in Edgecliff, an eastern suburb 

 of Sydney, was reported to have said that the prince was a rare boy for the girls, but if 

 he took away a wife of his he’d cut him and pickle him in salad oil.  McBurnie was 

 arrested and questioned. A taxi driver named Stoneman, proprietor of Sydney cab 

 number 148, reported that he had driven an Irishman named Laing to Homebush, west 

 of Sydney, that Laing had confabulated with a number of other Irishmen there, and 

 had then got back into the cab and told Stoneman that the prince would be shot.  

          At the St Patrick’s Day parade in Melbourne, sectarian hate resulted in an attack 

 on the procession and the murder of an Irishman, but no prosecution resulted. 

 Thousands of other colonial Australians with Irish names or accents were sacked. 

  3

 Victoria, however, decided to abstain from the extremity of bad law which Sir Henry 

 Parkes now rushed through the New South Wales parliament, accusing anyone who 

 would not vote for it of being in favour of regicide and assassins. With Sir Henry, as 

 with some of his successors in our polity, you were either for him or against him. So 

 he was able to enact in New South Wales a version of the Treason-Felony Act of 

 Ireland, which made it a prisonable offence to express any republican opinion. No one 

 was ever arrested under it, but Parkes presented it to Parliament like Moses returning 

 from Mount Sinai with the pillars of stone.  

          Lord Belmore was appalled by the sectarian fever Parkes orchestrated, but 

 Parkes relished it. He had his version, his scare campaign, and it would be as fruitful 

 to him as hysterias yet unborn - hysterias which could be labelled Reds Under the 

 Bed, The Tampa, Abos Will Claim Your Backyard, and All Islamics Are Dangerous  - 

 would ever be to later politicians. Like all such hysterias, Henry Parkes’s version 

 appealed not to the frontal, informed end of the beast of identity we all live with, the 

 beast whose company we all need and love to keep by our hearth, the Pull-Me-Push-

 You animal which marks who we are and comforts us for belonging, but to its arse-

 end, the backside which spews acid on nuance and loves to perceive a challenge to the 

 cultural health of the community in any whiff of strangeness.  

        Parkes the demagogue cared nothing in this case that he had created or vastly 

 played upon a divide of suspicion, a split unnecessary by any genuine measure of 

 state, a meaningless, fatuous, futile, exhausting division between two sections of the 

 Australian community which would exist and work its damage through discrimination 

 and vilification for at least the next ninety years.  

         As I implied earlier, I need not point out to people of your intelligence how close 

 are the parallels to the political opportunism of today’s government and to the level of 

  4

 frenzy which many politicians seem content to let loose amongst us. Let it be said 

 only that the course of such ethnic manias is long, the course is poisonous and helps 

 exhaust and thwart the natural cleverness and adaptability of the people. Yet hysteria  

 also works, for the moment, like an enchantment, and its ridiculous nature becomes 

 apparent only with the passage of time.    

             Writers are sometimes themselves attracted to these pleasing and narcotic 

 frenzies - some of us are willing to stoke the fires. But we also like to believe that we 

 can see through the low tricks of demagoguery.  I think it is partly the truth that we 

 do. In all genres and in all forms of journalism, we spend a lot of time trying to write 

 about people who are separated from us by social or cultural faultlines, trying to 

 interpret people who live on the far side of some divide.  The last time I made that 

 point, a poet told me I was idealising writers, who were often - to quote the 

 complainant - “shits and bastards.” That is the truth too. But I was not so much 

 exalting them as giving their job description. By temperamental impulse, the writer 

 seeks to inhabit many skins. As for their imperfections, we know writers are not 

 always the most noble or generous of human beings.  It is even a delight of us lesser 

 talents to read of the moral contradictions in the lives of great writers. Charles 

 Dickens, who could love children so robustly in his novels, was impatient of the lack 

 of academic achievement amongst some of his children, and blamed it not on his own 

 hapless father but on his wife’s family, the Hogarths.  He dispatched two of his less 

 academically gifted sons to the outer darkness of Australia, two young men not of 

 great expectations but of decent colonial ones. Their lives in the colonies however 

 took on more the character of tragedy than success, and they were haunted by what 

 could be called their father’s rejection of them .  

  5

        Patrick White, a genius, was nonetheless strenuously unforgiving of the 

 peccadillos of his friends, and imperfect himself, demanded nothing less than 

 perfection in everyone who sat at his table. Ezra Pound was, of course, a Fascist 

 collaborator. W.B. Yeats was a spiritist who believed in automatic writing as a 

 method of channelling the spirits of the dead. It actually gives us a frisson of 

 consolation to see that the follies of our own lives appear on a large scale in the lives 

 of great writers, and no one would pretend that writers aren’t sometimes the aforesaid 

 “bastards and shits.” As Gore Vidal honestly said, he never hears of the literary good 

 fortune of a friend without something inside him dying a little.  

             But our imperfect lives are governed by the proposition that we have 

 something to tell the world, something the world must hear. It’s often something 

 which breaks the mould of the monochrome history the state is attempting to push. It 

 is usually something at variance with jingoism, and frequently something to do, 

 directly or directly, with human rights. We are perversely attracted to such stories. So 

 it is no wonder that tyrants, and even parliamentary democracies pursuing a particular 

 government line, feel they need to condemn or intimidate writers. Fundamentalism of 

 all kinds, Christian, Jewish, Muslim, is a fertile source of fatwahs, of the kind which 

 led to the assassination of Dutch writer-film-maker Theo Van Gogh in Holland last 

 week.  

         In Australia, the conservative assault upon the historian Manning Clark, and the 

 utterly shameful attempt to brand him a Stalinist spy, did not involve weaponry but 

 subtler means, and arose not so much because Clark was a socialist, but because, like 

 the true son of an Anglican clergyman, he introduced the concept of original sin, of 

 flawed intentions, of vanities and anomalies of characters, of arrogance and blindness, 

 into our history.  Complexity itself is dangerous to governments.  An unalloyed and 

  6

 immaculate monochrome history, history as a narrow, manageable, policy-affirming 

 comic book, is an easier instrument of state.   

         So, writers get into trouble with regimes not because they are necessarily saintly 

 but because they often want to tell the story of human complexity.  They want to tell 

 us a tale which links our own experience to that of someone we might not previously 

 have felt identity with.  The very term “human interest story” carries within it the 

 possibility that the journalist might establish an unexpected affinity between the 

 general population and the despised minority; between the community and some 

 obscure, silenced or misinterpreted voice.   

           Warts and all, writers are important servants of humanity and the humane 

 perception of our species’ journey. That is also why Chip Rolley from Sydney Pen 

 Centre, and someone equally dedicated from other Pen Centres, keep us informed of 

 writers who are imprisoned around the world. It is why his network of letter-writers 

 exists, their letters directed at regimes, letting them know that the world is aware of 

 their repression of the voices of poets, novelists, dramatists, historians and journalists.   

           It became obvious to Pen that we had a duty towards writers who were or had 

 been in detention. And not only to such writers as Cheik Kone, a charming Ivory 

 Coast journalist whose release came as a result of the activism of Pen Centre 

 Melbourne. But also a duty to those who had been driven to writing as a means of 

 dealing with their experience of the toxic system.  

            Our interest in such people was not gratuitous or politically driven. It arose in 

 part because Pen International had already condemned the Australian mandatory 

 detention system.  

           It was Pen’s belief that if the voices of detainees under that system were 

 permitted to emerge, they would be so obviously the voices of fellow human pilgrims 

  7

 that they might help win at least a few Australians to the proposition that detention 

 was a bad principle. It was bad, we believed, even for the health of the polity of 

 Australia, it was ruinous to the inmates, and publishing their work would help 

 demonstrate how diaphanous was the separation between them and us. And indeed, 

 there was an overriding humanity and dignity to the voices which Australia, an 

 unaccustomed tyrant, had suppressed by an infamous detention system. That 

 authenticity rings through the collection called Another Country, published by Pen 

 Sydney Centre, originally by courtesy of Southerly magazine, and edited by Pen 

 Sydney Centre members, Rosie Scott and myself.     

         “Fellow creature,” writes Mahommed Reza “Tony” Zandavar, Iranian poet 

 detained for five years in Port Hedland for the crime of seeking asylum,  

           “seconds are pregnant with panic and anxiety here 

          And worried, frightened eyes are witness to human beings’ devastation. 

          Fellow creature, to seek shelter is an indecent crime here 

          And there is no value, no even a penny for human dignity in the passage of life. 

          Fellow creature, leeches are prescribed for healthy hearts in this place 

          And between madness and insanity anodynes are best 

          ‘some for morning, some for night’ 

          To remind you that peace and deliverance will prevail in madness. 

          Fellow creature, nightmares are permanent guests here 

          And worn out bodies are squeezed by frightful night pressures.”   

 

          “Don’t touch the bars,” he writes elsewhere. “It is a mortal sin. 

           Keep watching the series of endless fence. It is beautiful 

           In its shining regularity! 

  8

           Wait, wait years if necessary, until you become a great man 

                      with a broken heart, crook back and empty mind. 

            Then you can cry gently, noiselessly. 

            Don’t disturb your loneliness.”  

            Adeeb Kamal al Deen, Iraqui detainee now released, wrote during his 

 detention: 

           “I get bored with waiting and non-waiting, 

           With advantage and non-advantage, 

           With friendship and enmity, 

           With the charity bread  

           And the bread soaked in blood, 

           With the scent of meaning  

           And the scent of meaninglessness 

           With heaven that never comes  

           And with hell that stripteases everyday 

           To uncover its violent attractiveness  

           In the circus of great torture.” 

          Aamer Sultan, Iraqi doctor, detained for over three and a half years, confesses to 

 the damage done by life behind the tall walls and razor-wire. “My reaction, my 

 attempts to make a difference have shifted from anger, shouting, advocating, 

 networking and humble individual support to that of feeling simply disempowered 

 and simply stunned, shamed and depressed. Totally disillusioned about the western 

 world humanitarian utopia I used to believe in.”  

         Mohsen Sultani Zand is an Iranian who spent time in Port Hedland and 

 Villawood, and who goes on fighting against our government’s return of Iranian 

  9

  10

 asylum seekers to Iran with no inquiry into their subsequent welfare under that savage 

 regime. 

          “I see a hyena that is waiting for the ‘war on terrorism’ 

          I see a shark that is trying to rescue boat people 

          I see a prisoner mouse making a party for the cat 

          I see a fox teaching freedom to the hen and rooster 

          I see an executioner putting the mask of religion on his face 

          I see a locust sowing a green field for humanity 

          I see an elephant stepping tentatively to avoid crushing the ant 

          I see a hungry wolf shaking hands with the lamb…” 

         Nasrim Nahouchi, Iranian refugee, wrote of her imprisonment in Iran, and thus 

 of the sort of regimes from which the asylum seekers flee. In prison, “I just gave birth 

 to a baby. That [other] mother lost her life to give birth to her baby. The war gives 

 birth to powerful faces with disabled bodies.  Two people come to the door and order 

 me to put my chador on and stand up facing the wall. Then they come in and order me 

 to collect my things because I must be transferred….. Next to the last drawing [on the 

 prison wall], I draw a little violet flower for her [my daughter’s] birthday. Then I 

 write: 

 During the war, one night in this prison: A baby girl dies a baby girl is born.” 

           So the voices came, voices that are subversive only in so far as they overthrew 

 the lies and stereo-typings of government.  They are the sorts of voices for whom 

 PEN stands, too, and one hopes, in standing for them, stands for the rest of the 

 oppressed as well, and stands for the humanity of us all.     

