---
title: "Economic development and participation for remote Indigenous communities: best practice, evident barriers, and innovative solutions in the hybrid economy: presentation to Ministerial Council for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs (MCATSIA)"
date: "2004-11-28"
creators:
  - "Altman, Jon"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Remote areas"
  - "Community participation"
  - "Aboriginal communities"
  - "Economic development"
  - "Transition economies"
  - "Best practice"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211273190
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DRCF6%22
---

 J.C. Altman Page 1

 Economic Development and Participation for Remote Indigenous Communities: Best Practice, Evident Barriers, and Innovative Solutions in the Hybrid Economy

 Professor Jon Altman

 Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research Australian National University

 Presentation to Ministerial Council for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs (MCATSIA), Sydney, 28 November 2003.

 My presentation today focuses on remote Indigenous communities of which there are 1,200,  with  a  total  population  of  around  120,000  or  30%  of  the  total  estimated Indigenous  population.  These  figures  suggest  an  average  community  size  of  only 100—clearly  there  is  a  great  deal  of  variation  from  tiny  outstation  and  pastoral communities  to  relatively large  remote  townships  that  are growing  quickly.  Most  of these  communities are  in what  was called  ‘colonial Australia’ by Charles Rowley in 1971.  While  they are  often  also  termed  ‘discrete’  Indigenous  communities  many of the larger also have non-Indigenous, but often temporary, residents.

 My reasons for focusing on these communities,  mainly in the NT,  WA,  Qld and SA, are  twofold.  First,  according  to  official  statistics  gathered  by  the  ABS  with  an Indigenous identifier only since 1971, the socio-economic status of residents of these communities  is  the  lowest  of  all  Australians—a  view  that  I  will  challenge  below. Second,  these  are  the  contexts  where  the  issue  of  economic  development  looms largest, something that was highlighted by the Miller Committee of Employment and Training in 1985.

 What  is  the  economic  development  issue  in  these  contexts?  First  and  foremost,  the perceived  problem  is  an  absence  of  significant  market  or  private  sector  economies. This explains in part why these discrete communities exist and in part why Indigenous people choose to live at them for mainly non-market reasons—because of continuing links  with  country.  But  while  orthodox  economic  theory  might  suggest  that Indigenous  residents  of such  communities  should  migrate  elsewhere  to  engage  with the market economy, it is highly contestable how effectively they would compete for employment,  owing to  historic legacy.  In any case,  the liberal democratic Australian nation  state  enables  people  to  stay  in  townships  created  initially  by  administrative

 Economic Development and Participation for Remote Indigenous Communities

 J.C. Altman Page 2

 colonial  fiat,  on  or  near  traditional  lands,  and  at  outstations—and  most  Indigenous people in remote Australia are choosing to do just that.

 Economic  development  in such contexts  is  not  just  about  development  for  enhanced market  engagement,  high  formal  employment  and  high  and  growing  income.  Such options  rarely  exist  in  these  contexts.  Rather,  development  should  be  viewed  as  a process that might enhance Indigenous participation with local, regional and national economies.  The  nature  of  economic  development  will  be  a  function  of  the  precise nature  of  local  and  regional  economies,  rather  than  of  the  currently  prosperous metropolitan  economies  of  south-east  Australia  successfully  engaging  with globalisation.  There  is  considerable  diversity  in  the  nature  and  structures  of  remote and regional opportunities and circumstances.

 These  local  and  regional  economies  are  unusual  in  a  First  World  context.  They  are what  I  have  termed  elsewhere  ‘hybrid  economies’,  with  customary  (or  Aboriginal), market  (or  private)  and  state  (or  public)  sectors  interacting  in  different  ways.  The ‘real’ economy in such situations is the hybrid economy.  Arguably,  the development problem in such contexts  is  that  there  is  too  much state and  not  enough market  and customary; clearly Indigenous  competitive  advantage  is  embedded  in the  customary, whether in production for use or production for market exchange.

 Part  of  the  argument  I  make  here  is  that  over  the  30-year  period  since  1971  these remote economies have been in apparent crisis, according to official statistics, because a  crucial  element,  the  customary,  has  been  overlooked  and  another  element,  the market,  is relatively absent.  These are not dual but  three-sector  economies,  but  there has been consistent  failure to  accurately conceptualize remote Indigenous economies in this way.

 Let  me  provide  five  vignettes  to  demonstrate  the  contributions  made  by elements  of the hybrid economy in some contexts.  I mainly draw my examples from the tropical savannas, where I have worked over the last 25 years.

 1. I first worked in central Arnhem Land with Kuninjku harvesters in 1979-1980. At  that  time  with welfare  just  arriving,  the  customary sector  accounted for  the major  part  of  the  local  economy,  64%  of  cash  and  imputed  (at  market replacement  value)  income  was  generated  by  the  customary;  26%  by  welfare (the  state);  and  10%  by  the  sale  of  art  (the  market).  In  recent  research undertaken  with  the  same  people  at  the  same  places  in  2002-2003,  it  is estimated  that  with  full  incorporation  into  income  security (CDEP  and  Family Allowances)  these  proportions  have  changed  somewhat,  now  the  customary is relatively smaller at 32% and the state larger (at 57%) while the market sector is similar.  Nevertheless  for  an  average  Kuninjku  outstation  of  25  people, customary  activity  generates  an  estimated  $72,800  worth  of  food  per  annum. This  is  not  just  activity  that  generates  imputed  income,  it  indirectly  generates cash and it enhances people’s diet, nutrition and health status.

 2. Let’s  examine  another  customary  sector  example.  The  recently  completed National  Recreational  and  Indigenous  Fishing  Survey  2003  showed  a remarkable  92%  fishing  participation  rate  for  the  surveyed  Indigenous population  in  north  Australia.  An  estimated  37,300  Indigenous  fishers participated in 420,000 fisher days harvesting a total of nearly 3 million fish of many  species.  This  customary activity would  have  been  unrecorded  in  official labour force or income statistics.

 Economic Development and Participation for Remote Indigenous Communities

 J.C. Altman Page 3

 3. The Indigenous visual arts industry is an important  example of how productive activity,  grounded  in  the  customary,  has  been  modified  for  the  market.  It  has recently been estimated that the sector is valued at a minimum $100 million per annum  Australia-wide,  with  most  art  produced  at  remote  communities.  The recently-launched  NT  Indigenous  Arts  Strategy  notes  that  this  activity  is  a significant  employer  and  source  of  cash  income  in  regional  and  remote communities where opportunities for market engagement are rare. The Strategy also  notes  that  the  sector  supports  a  range  of  positive  cultural  and  social outcomes.  It  is  estimated  that  5,000-6,000  arts  practitioners  in  remote communities  everywhere  engage  in  visual  arts  production,  yet  there  is  no recognition in official statistics of this high level of participation.

 4. In the NT, the Caring for Country and Caring for Sea Country community-based ranger  programs  are  aiming  to  manage  Aboriginal-owned  land  and  sea  natural resources  sustainably—the  terrestrial  jurisdiction  is  currently  about  170,000  sq kms and the coastal/intertidal zone totals about 85% of the NT total. About 35 community-based  ranger  programs  are  underway,  providing  activity  for  about 300 Aboriginal people with funding coming mainly from the CDEP scheme and Natural  Heritage  Trust.  Some  community-based  rangers  are  also  engaged  in additional commercial utilization of wildlife like crocodile eggs and fresh water turtles.  Ranger  programs  focus  on the  eradication of noxious  weeds,  especially mimosa,  and  the  management  of feral animals  and  pests,  including  cane  toads, crazy  ants,  cats,  pigs,  horses,  donkeys  and  buffalo.  An  informal  network,  the North  Australia  Indigenous  Land  and  Sea  Management  Alliance  (NAILSMA), has evolved to integrate activity across the tropical savanna. Some alliances are emerging  with  AQIS  to  test  feral  animals  for  disease  and  community-based ranger  programs  could  play  an  important  role  in  eco-services  delivery  and  in bio-security  in  remote  and  under-populated  regions.  This  is  a  case  where  the customary  is  delivering  private  and  public  good  in  a  missing  market—local, regional  and  national  benefit  is  generated.  The  programs  are  also  helping Australia meet its international biodiversity obligations.

 5. A  final  brief  example  is  where  the  maintenance  of  customary  fire  regimes, innovatively  mixed  with  modern  technology,  is  assisting  to  reduce  late  dry season  wildfires  in  the  Top  End.  The  Arnhem  Land  Fire  Abatement  (ALFA) project  is  generating  public  benefit  by  reducing  greenhouse  gas  emissions, abating  atmospheric  carbon  dioxide  and  by  reducing  smoke  that  has  negative health impacts  on Indigenous  and  non-Indigenous  populations  in Darwin.  This embryonic  project  has  commercial  potential  in  a  possible  emerging  market, carbon trading, as it seeks to reduce atmospheric carbon by a minimum 300,000 tonnes  per  annum  over  a  60,000  sq  kms  region.  The  sequestered  carbon  sink potential of the region will be even greater.

 These are but five examples of the workings of the hybrid economy. It is important to enhance  each  of  these  contributions  because  not  only  do  they  generate  economic development  opportunities  based  on  participation,  but  in  many  situations  they  also generate  positive  spin-off  benefits  to  regions  and  the  nation.  What  are  barriers  to expansion and some solutions that governments could consider?

 1. How can people be assisted to participate in harvesting in the customary sector? One  option  is  to  facilitate  outstations  residence;  another  is  to  assist  with appropriate  equipment.  For  example,  evidence  from  recent  analysis  by  Tony

 Economic Development and Participation for Remote Indigenous Communities

 J.C. Altman Page 4

 Griffiths  indicates  that  a  hunt  with  a  gun  generates  $154  worth  of  harvested food, a hunt without a gun $25, or over 6 times less. Policies and programs are needed to enable effective participation in this sector, especially as feral species like pigs and buffalo that need regular culling are increasingly being hunted. The negative,  and  unintended,  impacts  of new  gun laws  on Aboriginal people  who hunt as part of a customary lifestyle need urgent consideration.

 2. The  recent  Indigenous  fisheries  survey  indicated  that  fishing  was  happening everywhere,  but  rather  than  being  a  cause  for  celebration  this  was  viewed skeptically as Indigenous fishers endangering protected species (with little hard evidence on species stocks, causation, or sustainable yields). In reality there are real  barriers  to  commercialization  of  the  customary  in  coastal  communities because  of  regulatory  and  property  rights  barriers.  Put  another  way,  an Indigenous  fisher  can  catch  a  barramundi  to  eat,  not  to  sell  in  home communities.  Some serious consideration needs to be given to  how community licences  can  be  extended  to  allow  local  harvesting  of  commercial  species  for local sale to facilitate local micro-enterprise.

 3. The  period  1973-2003  has  seen  spectacular  growth  in  Indigenous  visual  arts. Not  only  do  Indigenous  arts  provide  a  means  for  market  engagement,  but  the community-controlled art  centre model,  originally developed by the Aboriginal Arts  Board of the  Australia  Council in 1973,  also  has  a  long  and  proven track record.  Yet in the last  decade funding support  to the sector has stagnated,  even though  much  quantitative  evidence  shows  very  positive  ratios  in  terms  of outcomes for dollar inputs.  In 2003, both NT  and Commonwealth governments developed  strategies  to  enhance  infrastructure  support  to  Indigenous  arts  to facilitate  further  growth.  A  Land  Rights  News  article  in  October  2003  was headed  ‘It’s  raining  arts  strategies!’—it  is  important  that  the  fundamentals  of past  successes,  community-controlled  mediation  of artists  with  the  market,  are not overlooked.

 4. Some  recent  calculations  undertaken  by  a  colleague,  biological  scientist  Peter Whitehead,  compares  the  cost  of  natural  resource  management  (NRM)  in Kakadu  National  Park,  a  region  of  20,000  sq  kms,  with  a  nearby  region  of 10,000  sq  kms  in  central Arnhem Land.  He  estimates  that  in  Kakadu,  a  world heritage  area,  about  $890  is  spent  in  management  per  sq  km  (with  much obviously  spent  on  dealing  with  high  tourism  visitation)  compared  to  between $60  and  $140  in  Arnhem  Land.  Yet  there  is  no  evidence,  as  a  recent  ANAO Report noted, that biodiversity conservation outcomes are effectively monitored in  Kakadu  nor  that  biodiversity conservation  is  better  than  in  Arnhem  Land— indeed for many migratory species and in relation to fire management these are highly interdependent bio-regions. There is a need to consider equitable funding for NRM outcomes or at the very least to provide recurrent and stable support to community-based ranger programs that  generate jobs and positive conservation outcomes.  The same case can be made with Indigenous sea rangers and coastal fisheries, refugee and bio-security surveillance.

 5. Over  the  last  three  years  a  consortium  made  up  of  a  number  of  savanna stakeholders  including  local  community  rangers,  the  NLC,  Tropical  Savannas Management Cooperative Research Centre, the Bushfires Council of the NT and major  regional  Aboriginal  organisations  have  tried  to  get  the  ALFA  project supported  by  the  Australian  Greenhouse  Office  (AGO)  under  its  Greenhouse

 Economic Development and Participation for Remote Indigenous Communities

 J.C. Altman Page 5

 Gas  Abatement  Program  (GGAP).  Currently,  a  private  sector  stakeholder  is looking  to  invest  in  this  proposal  even  though  only  a  quasi-market  in  carbon credits is in place; the AGO is reconsidering the proposal. To operate effectively resources  are  needed  for  equipment,  wages  and  infrastructure,  especially  to access uninhabited regions.

 I summarise my findings with five key messages to stakeholders here:

 1. I have provided a few examples of what  is working.  This is not  to suggest that other  possibilities  do  not  exist  especially  in  market  and  state  sectors  that  have not been my focus today.  Economic diversity suggests that local circumstances require  local  solutions,  solutions  that  will  not  be  driven  from  outside  and  that need  to  mesh  with  Indigenous  aspirations—this  is  not  an  easy proposition  for public  policy  to  consider.  We  need  to  move  beyond  thinking  in  terms  of mainstream  jobs,  training,  or  CDEP  as  a  transition.  Rather  we  need  to  afford people the dignity of recognizing their economic contributions. We also need to recognize that many remote development aspirations are likely to be articulated as hybrid economic forms.

 2. The power of language must not be overlooked. Honest unambiguous discourse about Indigenous development is needed. Policy should aim to enhance activity and  generate  income,  facilitate  development  in  the  hybrid  economy.  This  will not  necessarily  lead  to  economic  independence,  formal  statistical  equality  or even so-called welfare (income security?) reduction. We need to be clear about the  massive  hurdles  faced  when  seeking  to  deliver  market  solutions  in  very difficult circumstances where the market is largely absent.

 3. There  is  a  need  to  support,  celebrate  and  grow  what  is  working  and  to  focus program effort on all three sectors of local economies, the customary, the market and  the  state,  while  recognizing  current  and  potential  inter-linkages  between these sectors.

 4. A  mix  of  the  difficulties  of  remote  circumstances  and  cross-cultural contestations  about  development  suggests  that  the  Commonwealth  and  States need to work together, not seek to substitute one for the other. There is evidence of such collaboration attempts in the state sector with Indigenous Communities Coordination  Pilots;  if  evaluated  as  successful  and  cost  effective  then consideration should be given to extending this approach to other sectors.

 5. And we need to recognize transportability of the hybrid economy model to more settled regions,  even to metropolitan contexts.  In such situations the customary might  currently be a sliver,  but  it  can have important  competitive advantage in delivery  of  goods  and  services  to  the  market  (e.g.  in  cultural  tourism,  in fisheries)  and  to  the  state  (e.g.  in  fire  management  in  co-managed  national parks).

 In  conclusion,  we  need  creative  and  innovative  solutions  to  complex  development issues.  To  begin,  we  need  to  conceptualise  these  issues  correctly  and  the  hybrid economy  model  will  assist.  Using  this  model  it  is  clear  that  nowhere  are  things  as ‘under-developed’  as  they  first  appear  according  to  official  statistics—many customary contributions are just invisible or unrecognised. This is not to suggest that all is well or that there is room for complacency; rather it is a call to invest in what is working with assurance that appropriate support will generate development outcomes. In the native title era, the customary sector has potential to expand—this is the sector

 Economic Development and Participation for Remote Indigenous Communities

 J.C. Altman Page 6

 where many Indigenous people are demonstrating strong aspirations for participation. By looking to maximize participation in all sectors, without getting too caught up in policy rhetoric about economic independence or equality, development outcomes that match Indigenous aspirations with state policy goals, can be achieved.

