---
title: "Long term immigration detention and children's mental health. Paper presented to the XXIV World Congress of OMEP, Melbourne 24 July 2004"
date: "2004-07-24"
creators:
  - "Ozdowski, Sev"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Children"
  - "Mental health"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Case studies"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211269122
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LIGD6%22
---

 Paper Presented By Dr Sev Ozdowski   Human Rights Commissioner   To the XXIV World Congress of OMEP  Melbourne 24 July 2004  "Long-term Immigration Detention and Children's Mental Health" 

 Acknowledgements 

 International guests, committee members, ladies and gentlemen, all.  

 First of all I would like to acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we stand and pay  my respects to their elders both past and present.  

 New trends in child immigration 

 The globalisation of the world economy, including much improved communication and transportation,  has increased flows of people across borders. This includes the movement of children both with their  family and unaccompanied..  

 During 1999 alone, the most recent year for which UNHCR has some numbers on this, more than  20,000 unaccompanied children applied for asylum in Western Europe, North America or Australia.  They were refugees, humanitarian asylum seekers or victims of trafficking.(1)  

 Transnational organised criminals have taken advantage of the freer movement to open new markets for  their trade. In some cases their relatives may have paid a people smuggler to transport them to a place  where they believed the child would be safe. They can be from all corners of the globe, but in general,  the flows are from south to north and from east to west.  

 Separated children crossing borders may be refugees, humanitarian asylum seekers, trafficked girls  who will be forced to work as prostitutes, or simply children lost in the aftermath of war.  

 So today, children can literally travel across the world undetected. And Australia, as part of this global  system, has its share of these children. Therefore my report on Immigration Detention. But before I talk  about the outcomes of my report, let me first give you some statistics.  

 There are also many conflicts in the contemporary world that continue to create large numbers of  displaced or orphaned children. At the end of 2001, there were 37 civil wars in 30 countries, with 38% in  Africa and 41% in Asia.(2)  

 The number of people of concern to UNHCR from conflicts worldwide increased from 2.4 million in 1974  to peak at around 27.4 million in 1996.(3) At the start of the year 2004, the number of people of concern  to UNHCR was 17.1 million. They included 9.7 million refugees (57%), 985,500 asylum seekers (6%),  1.1 million returned refugees (6%), 4.4 million internally displaced persons (26%) and 912,200 others of  concern (5%).  

 The majority of unaccompanied refugee and humanitarian asylum seeker children who make it to  the west go to Western Europe (especially the Netherlands, the Nordic countries and Switzerland), the  USA and Canada.(4) Some of those end up in Australia and New Zealand.  

 The majority of trafficking victims, on the other hand, are sent to Western Europe, the Middle East,  Thailand and India - and also to the US.  

 The majority are girls, trapped in debt bondage and forced to work as unpaid prostitutes. Every year,  300,000 women and girls are trafficked into Thailand alone, to be exploited in the commercial sex  trade.(5)  

 They come from Burma, Laos, Cambodia and southern China (reputedly a major element of Triad  commerce). Every year, between 5,000 and 7,000 Nepali girls are trafficked to India. Most of them are  deceived into a life as sex workers. According to UNICEF, approximately 200,000 Nepali women, most  of them girls under 18, work in Indian cities.(6)  

 Child trafficking from the former Soviet Union has reached epidemic proportions. From Ukraine alone, in  the first decade after the collapse of communism, 400,000 women and girls were trafficked into  international commercial sex markets (Western Europe, Israel, the US)(7).  

 That is the Ukrainian Interior Ministry estimate; NGOs and independent researchers believe the number  could be much higher.(8)  

 From the African continent, children are trafficked to Western Europe and the Middle East to be sold as  sex slaves. They are also trafficked to neighbouring countries.  

 In the mid-90s in Uganda, for example, the "Lord's Resistance Army", a heavily-armed rebel group that  was fighting the Ugandan government, systematically abducted between 6,000 and 8,000 children. Most  were between the ages of 10 and 17, and were marched to southern Sudan.  

 They were forced to take part in combat, carry heavy loads, act as personal servants to the rebels, and,  in the case of girls, serve as "wives" to rebel commanders.  

 Roughly half the children escaped but the remainder probably died in captivity.(9)  

 To sum up, the number of child immigrants and asylum seekers has grown significantly over the last few  years and it is likely that this trend will continue into the future.  

 Australia is not immune to this world trend, put simply the figures of unaccompanied children crossing  international borders to reach Australia dwarf all previous figures of child migration.  

 Many of you would be aware that I have completed my report into children in immigration detention.  

 The report titled "A last resort?" was tabled in Federal parliament on May 13. Before I outline our  findings and recommendations let me give you some general facts and figures about immigration  detention.  

 Some Basic Statistics on the Immigration Detention Regime 

 When was the policy introduced? In 1992 to deal with the perceived influx of Cambodians and  Vietnamese. One of the primary purposes was to perform basic health, identity and security checks.  Detention was limited to 273 days under this early version of mandatory detention.  

 Who is detained? All persons who either arrive without a visa or whose visa expires. If they are  intercepted outside Australia's territorial waters or arrive at an "excised offshore place" such as Ashmore  Reef, they go to Nauru/PNG or Christmas Island; or otherwise to Australian detention centres.  

 How many boat arrivals? It goes in waves - a short term bulge between 1999 - 2001 when a little over  8,000 arrived, smoothing out in the medium term, in that since 1989, only about 13,500 have arrived by  boat in that 14 year period. This equates to only 1%, when compared with the 1.4 million new settlers  who arrived in Australia over the same 14 year period. In other words, all boat arrivals over the last 14  years would only fill about 15% of the Melbourne Cricket Ground (MCG).  

 Where are they from? Over the past few years most boat arrivals have been from Afghanistan, Iraq  and Iran. Reasonable numbers have also come from Palestine, Sri Lanka, China and Turkey.  

 How many in detention (all categories)? The number of children in detention changes over time. For  example in July 2001 there were approximately 3,100 people in detention, and 657 were children. A  year later (July 2002) there were approx 1,400 people in detention, and172 were children. In July 2003  there were 1,200 in detention and 159 were children. As at December 2003 there were 111 children in  detention.  

 Are they genuine refugees? Using DIMIA's figures, in 1999 - 2000 95% of Afghans and 90% of Iraqis,  were found to be genuine refugees.  

 How many children are refugees? Nearly 50% of children who applied for asylum over the past three  years are from Iraq and 98% of were successful. Approximately 35% are from Afghanistan and 95%  were successful. Just under 10% were from Iran and 74% were successful.  

 In the same period only about 25% of the asylum seeker children who arrived with a visa (eg tourist  visa) were found to be refugees; this refutes the argument that there is a correlation between being a  "boat person" and a "fake refugee"; in fact boat people are much more likely to be refugees.  

 How long in detention? All boat arrivals, including children, must stay in detention until they get a  refugee visa or are sent back home. Length of detention varies greatly - depending on the individual -  some children spend weeks or months, whilst others can be detained for years. Here are some  statistics.  

 On 1 October 2003, 62 children (51%) had been in detention for more than 2 years (8 of whom had  been there for more than 3 years). All of those children were in detention with one or more parents.  

 The children who were in detention on Boxing Day in 2003 (26 December), had spent an average of one  year, eight months and 11 days (619 days) in detention.  

 What type of visa do they get? Since 1999, those who do get a refugee visa only get a three year  temporary protection visa. After three years is up they must start all over again. This compares with  those who arrive (say) on a tourist visa and then apply for refugee status - they get permanent visas.  Regulations proposed by the Government to bring these applicants into line with "boat arrivals" were  disallowed by Parliament in September 2003.  

 What impact do the TPVs have on their recipients? There is evidence suggesting that, despite their  'right to work' and access to some basic services eg 'special benefit' and Medicare, they suffer from a  lack of stability, have difficulty settling and factually they cannot access some key services like:  

 • English tuition for adults;  

 • Full range of employment assistance and programs;  

 • Access to tertiary education, and  

 • Family reunion or 'right of return' on departure.  

 What are the official reasons for the policy? 

 Why do we lock them up for years behind barbed wire? The government says that it has had to make  the awful choice between: 

 • locking up children; and  

 • deterring people smugglers.  

 And, it chooses the second of these. 

 I have several responses to this. 

 1. First, show me the evidence that detention deters people smugglers! 

 Furthermore the Government's policy shift last week regarding the 9,500 TPV holders in Australia,  highlights that the Government itself no longer believes there is a linkage. 

 I have seen no evidence at all. 

 We have had a detention policy since 1992. Over the past 12 years, sometimes there have been large  numbers of boat arrivals, and sometimes there have been very small numbers. 

 There are all sorts of factors that might encourage or deter people from coming to Australia, including: 

 • so-called push out factors, or the conditions in countries like Afghanistan, Iran and Iraq;  

 • the level of coastal patrolling;  

 • the imposition of tough people smuggling laws; and  

 • international cooperation on criminal smuggling rings.  

 It is not correct to say that detention is the only - or even the primary - factor. 

 2. Second, show me which part of human rights law - or any other modern law -  allows the Government to use innocent children to deter criminal people  smugglers! 

 While Australia has the right to protect its borders and stop people smuggling, it also has the  responsibility to uphold its human rights obligations to children.  

 The human rights that Australia owes to children include: 

 • that detention of children must be a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate  period of time; and  

 • that any detention of children must be a proportionate response to achieving a legitimate  aim.  

 This report shows clearly that Australia's detention policy does not meet those standards.  

 3. Third, show me where to find these so-called 'floods' of boat arrivals into  Australia! 

 We need to take a reality check, as I described at the start of my speech. 

 4. Fourth we were told that boat people pose security threats. 

 But there is no evidence to support this proposition. For example, in an appearance before Parliament's  "Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade, Human Rights Subcommittee"  (examining aspects of HREOC's Annual Report 2000-01 concerning immigration detention centres) on  22 August 2002, the Director-General of ASIO, Mr Dennis Richardson had this exchange with a  committee member: 

 • Question: Mrs Judy Moylan (Liberal MP) "...........Did I understand you correctly that none of  those arriving on boats (2001-02) that were checked posed a security threat?"  

 • Answer: Mr Richardson "I said that none of them had received an adverse security  assessment in terms of posing a direct or indirect threat to Australia's security."  

 Finally, we must keep reminding ourselves that almost 93 percent of the children that we lock up  eventually end up in the community under the care of many of you in this room.  

 Our current immigration detention laws just do NOT make any sense - either legally, practically  or morally  

 "A last resort" - overview 

 During my visits to different immigration centres, mental health has become an issue of major concern  to me. Clearly it was the most disturbing finding of my visits. This was later confirmed by evidence given  to the Inquiry by mental health professionals. Broadly we can distinguish three phases of detention:  

 1. Honeymoon:  In general, one could say, asylum seekers can take up to 2-3 months of detention without major visible  impact on them. They are relieved to be in Australia and believe that their new start in life is just around  the corner.  

 2. Culture of Despair:  After this their behaviour changes: "I'm a father of two teenage children. My 15 year old son sleeps only  with the help of sleeping pills. Both of my children are severely depressed after 5 or 6 months in the  camp. My daughter is 16". (Iranian man, detainee representative committee meeting, Curtin IRPC.)  

 This is one of the milder reactions that I have personally observed in the course of my many visits. Other  reactions include intense trauma, self-harm and complete family disintegration.  

 Many children have showed symptoms like: 

 • Nightmares  

 • bed-wetting  

 • muteness and  

 • lost appetite  

 3. Total abandonment:  After one year in detention the rate of decline is marked: "It's about 16 months since I arrived here. I've 

 been under a lot of pressure. My life has been taken away from me. Within this 16 months I have  become mentally and also physically ill. Every day my physical well-being is getting worse.... I've  become a useless person who wishes for death every day". (Afghan man, interview, Perth IDC.) 

 My personal observation of the number of detainees requiring psychological and psychiatric help is  staggering.  

 For example, some children have been diagnosed with: 

 • clinical depression  

 • post traumatic stress disorder and  

 • developmental delays and  

 • suicidal ideation - the list goes on.  

 I will briefly tell you about two of the many tragic examples that are recounted in our report. 

 Case example 1 

 Between April 2002 and July 2002 - a four month period - a 14 year old boy detained at Woomera: 

 • attempted to hang himself four times  

 • climbed into the razor wire four times  

 • slashed his arms twice and  

 • went on hunger strike twice.  

 This boy's mother was hospitalised due to her own mental illness during this whole period.  

 Case example 2 

 Then there is the case of a 13 year old child who has been seriously mentally ill since May 2002. This  boy has regularly self-harmed.  

 In February 2003 a psychiatrist examining the boy wrote the following: 

 'When I asked if there was anything I could do to help him, he told me that I could bring a razor  or knife so that he could cut himself more effectively than with the plastic knives that are  available.' 

 There have been approximately 20 recommendations from mental health professionals saying that he  should be released from detention with his family. Some said that removal from detention was a matter  of urgency. This child, with his family, were removed in mid-June 2004, after they won a Refugee  Review Tribunal case and were declared to be refugees. 

 Findings and Recommendations of "A last resort?" 

 Let us now return to the formal findings of the Inquiry about the mental health of children in immigration  detention. 

 By now many of you probably know what our primary findings were but I will briefly reiterate them. 

 First - we found that the mandatory detention policy itself breaches the Convention on the Rights of the  Child because it makes detention the first and only resort, not the last resort.  

 The policy also fails to ensure that there is an individual assessment of the need to detain and there is  no effective review of detention in the courts. 

 Second - we found that children have been in detention for long periods of time. The longest a child has  been in detention is five years, five months and 20 days.  

 Third - we found that children in detention for long periods are at high risk of serious mental illness.  

 In particular, the Inquiry found that the Department's failure to implement the repeated  recommendations to release children suffering from mental illness amounts to cruel and  inhumane treatment under article 37(a) of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  

 This is the most serious finding that the Inquiry made.  

 Fourth - we found that the conditions in detention centres: 

 • FAILED to provide sufficient protection from physical and mental violence;  

 • FAILED to provide the appropriate standard of physical and mental health;  

 • FAILED to provide adequate education until late 2002;  

 • FAILED to provide appropriate care for children with disabilities; and  

 • FAILED to give unaccompanied children the special protection that they needed. This directly  relates to the fact that the Minister for Immigration is both the guardian and jailer of  unaccompanied children.  

 Inquiry Recommendations 

 Having found these breaches of human rights the question is:  

 Where do we go from here? 

 What should be done in the future to avoid ongoing breaches? 

 Recommendation 1: Release 

 The Inquiry said that the first step is to get the children who are in detention centres and  residential housing projects out of there.  

 In July 2004, the Minister for Immigration completed release from detention on mainland Australia of all  but one of the class of asylum-seeking children that were the main subject of the Inquiry. However that  still leaves 15 children on Christmas Island in detention, and many more in Nauru. 

 That is simply unacceptable. 

 Some of these children and their parents will undoubtedly have serious mental health issues and need  specialised, on-going medical help - help they cannot get and are not getting in the detention  environment.  

 But the recent release of the children who were in detention only solves the immediate problem. 

 We need to make sure that asylum seekers who arrive in the future don't end up suffering under this  same system again.  

 Unless Australia's laws change, children will continue to be locked up in places like Christmas Island  and Baxter for indefinite periods of time.  

 That is why we went on to make a second recommendation. 

 Recommendation 2: Change the law 

 So what kind of laws do we need? 

 We need new laws that make detention of children the last resort -NOT the first and only resort.  

 We need new laws that make detention of children for the shortest appropriate period of time - NOT  for indefinite periods of time.  

 And we need new laws that make the best interests of the child a primary consideration - NOT  laws that force a choice between family separation or indefinite detention. This is a false  dichotomy.  

 New laws like these will ensure that Australia lives up to its responsibilities under the Convention on the  Rights of the Child. 

 Long term legacy 

 If we don't change the laws we will be creating a terrible legacy for ourselves. 

 We know that the longer children are in detention the more likely it is that they will develop serious  mental heath problems.  

 We also know that more than 9 out of 10 of these children end up calling Australia home - because  they are eventually found to be genuine refugees. Out of 2,184 children in detention between 1999 and  2003, almost 93% have been found to be refugees.  

 So the Australian community - in fact many of you attending this Congress- is left with the burden of  helping these families deal with BOTH: 

 • the normal challenges of settling into a new society AND  

 • the additional mental damage that we ourselves have caused.  

 The Government's tacit response to the Report can reasonably be said to have been the accelerated  release from detention of children and families. On 11 June the Prime Minister publicly declared that: "It  is the Government's intention to dwindle the number of children in immigration detention to zero".  

 The Minister for Immigration then held a press conference, some weeks later, in which she announced  that there was only one child left, (that might be reasonably classified as the subject of HREOC's report)  in any immigration detention centre on mainland Australia.  

 And finally the Minister announced last week's policy shift regarding TPV holders which can partially be  attributed to our Report.  

 Today I welcome Mark Latham's statement that with his government no children will be kept in  detention.  

 These are very good moves. 

 Promising though this may be, it does not alter the fact that the laws regarding mandatory immigration  detention must be changed.  

 Therefore action of the civil rights movement is still needed to secure the required changes to the law.  

 Until this occurs there is no way we can be certain the next lot of child asylum seekers will be treated in  accordance with Australia's obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  

 Endnotes 

 1. UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). See http://www.unhcr.ch/children/  

 2.  Project  Ploughshares,  Armed Conflicts Report 2002. See  http://www.ploughshares.ca/content/ACR/acr.html  

 3.  Graca  Machel,  The Impact of War on Children  

 4.  UNHCR.  See  http://www.unhcr.ch/children/  

 5. US Department of State press release, 3 October 2002. See  http://usinfo.state.gov/topical/global/traffic/02100401.htm  

 6.  See  http://www.unicef.org/programme/cprotection/focus/trafficking/stats.htm  

 7. See International Organisation for Migration, Information Campaign against trafficking in  Women from Ukraine; Research Report, July 1998, p.16.  

 8. ibid.  

 9. Report of the UN Secretary General, Assistance to unaccompanied refugee minors, 26 August  1998, A/53/325  

 

