---
title: "Human rights and responsibilities in the age of terror: Chancellor's Human Rights Lecture, University of Melbourne."
date: "2005-11-29"
creators:
  - "Fraser, Malcolm"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Political credibility"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
  - "Human rights"
  - "Counter terrorist measures"
  - "Rule of law"
  - "Proof (Law)"
  - "Sedition"
  - "Torture"
  - "Military commissions (US)"
  - "Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2002"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
  - "Terrorism"
  - "Islamic fundamentalism"
  - "Racial discrimination"
  - "Freedom of the press"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211287022
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XSFI6%22
---

 Human Rights and Responsibilities in 

 the Age of Terror  The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH 

 

 Former Prime Minister of Australia 

 29 November 2005 Chancellor's Human Rights Lecture 

 

 

 I would like to begin by acknowledging the Wurundjeri people 

 of the Kulin Nations, the traditional owners of the land on 

 which the university stands.  I would like thank the University 

 of Melbourne for asking me to give this lecture.  In particular I 

 would like to thank all of you for coming.   

 

 It is possible that the fateful and horrific events of September 

 11, 2001 changed our world for ever. But the change is not 

 represented by the age of terrorism; terrorism is not new.  It is 

 not represented by the War on Terror; wars are not new.  It 

 was not even the scale or nature of the attacks themselves, 

 terrible as they were, that brought about our changed world;  

 we have been attacked before.  But the change as I see it has 

 been brought about by the haste with which leaders of great 

 democratic nations around the world made the fundamentally 

 wrong assumption that we cannot maintain liberty and the Rule 

 of Law and defend ourselves.   

 

 In discarding these principles, Governments have created fear 

 and practiced discrimination based on race and religion.  For 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 2 of 29 

 Australia, fear was created and deception practised in relation 

 to the boat people and over Tampa in late 2001.  There was 

 serious discrimination against legitimate asylum seekers.  This 

 was the effective end of the liberal age and the beginning of a 

 period of regression.  As a response to the War on Terror, 

 liberty has been seriously compromised and arbitrary powers 

 sought by the executive. 

 

 These events have made me think seriously about my own 

 position within the Liberal Party.  I remember the party I 

 joined, the party of Menzies, of liberal and progressive ideas, a 

 forward-looking party, willing to make experiments.  As 

 Menzies himself put it, a party that believes fervently in the 

 Rule of Law, in higher education accessible to all able students, 

 in a government accepting national obligations and a vision for 

 the future, a party that slowly abolished the White Australia 

 Policy and broadened Australia to a more open, multicultural 

 society.  It was a party of hope and of vision.   

 

 The departures from the principles underlining that Liberal 

 Party are substantial and serious.  The party has become a 

 party of fear and reaction.  It is conservative and not liberal.  It 

 has not led in positive directions, it has allowed and, some 

 would say, promoted race and religion to be part of today ’s 

 agenda.  I find it unrecognisable as liberal. 

 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 3 of 29 

 The grounds for resignation would be substantial but then I 

 think of the future, of those within the party who hope for 

 changed circumstances, of those within the Parliament who 

 seek to keep a Liberal flame alive.  I think of the founder of the 

 Liberal Party, of his contribution to Australia and, not least, to 

 this University. 

 

 I wish in this speech, in the strongest possible terms, to 

 emphasize the departure from basic principles and to urge all 

 of those who are concerned by events to take part in public 

 life, in the affairs of the party, to seek change and secure 

 liberty.  It ’s a hard task and a long one.   

 

 Many of the reasons for these views are defined in this speech. 

 

 Fear and deception have become the order of the day. 

 

 Since September 11, 2001, fears have been aroused not only 

 in the United States but around the world.  Deception has been 

 used to enhance those fears.  Fear was created by a pretence 

 that Saddam Hussein could drop chemical or biological 

 weapons on the city of London within 45 minutes1.   

 

 No one had said Saddam Hussein could do that - but the 

 British Government had left, hanging in the air, the strong 

 impression that he could deploy such weapons within 45 

                                          1 This claim was contained in the document commonly referred to as the “British Dossier”: Government of the United Kingdom, Iraq ’s Weapons of Mass Destruction, published on 24 September 2002 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 4 of 29 

 minutes, even though the Government knew Iraq had no 

 missiles that could achieve that result. 

 

 My friends in London were fearful, believing that such a 

 possibility justified war against Iraq.  Deception was allowed to 

 stand. 

 

 Serious qualifications placed by intelligence agencies on the 

 possession of weapons of mass destruction were not heeded by 

 the Coalition of the Willing.  Arrangements were put in place to 

 provide “intelligence” to justify policy already determined.  

 Deception was practiced by depicting weapons of mass 

 destruction as a certainty.   

 

 Deception was practiced by pretending that a decision to go to 

 war had not been made till very shortly before the event, when 

 recently published British Cabinet Papers have made it clear 

 that President Bush had made the decision to go to war as 

 early as July 2002, long before the American people were told.2   

 

 Those same Cabinet papers show that deception was practiced 

 by the United States Government, which clearly had no 

 intention of allowing the United Nations Monitoring, Verification 

 and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) to complete its task 

 before launching an attack on Iraq3.  The US did not even want 

 UNMOVIC to conclude its weapons inspections, because its 

                                          2 See, eg, the following leaked memorandum: Matthew Rycroft, Downing Street Foreign Policy 3 See, eg, ibid 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 5 of 29 

 failure to find the elusive weapons of mass destruction would 

 have taken away the primary cause for war, which the Bush 

 Administration had already been planning for months. 

 

 Deception was practiced and accepted by the Coalition of the 

 Willing in going along with the idea that Iraq had participated 

 in the 9/11 attacks. 

 

 We would do well to recall some words of John Stuart Mill:  “To 

 go to war for an idea, if the war is aggressive, not defensive, is 

 as criminal as to go to war for territory or revenue;  for it is as 

 little justified to force our ideas on other people, as it is to 

 compel them to submit to our will in other respects.”4  And this 

 is precisely what has happened. 

 

 It was clear that the world had to react strongly to the attacks 

 on 9/11.  Whether we have reacted effectively is in 

 considerable doubt. 

 

 A concern, even paranoia, has developed in many places about 

 Islamic fundamentalism and indeed, in some quarters, about 

 Islam itself.   

 

 Recently, on 22 October 2005, a major newspaper carried a 

 front page headline that said that up to 80 Australian Moslems 

 could immediately be placed under effective house arrest under 

                                          4 Owen Harries: The Failure of the Bush Doctrine:  The Age, 28 Oct 2005  

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 6 of 29 

 the Government ’s proposed anti-terror laws 5. Assuming 

 accuracy, that had to come from Government, police, or ASIO. 

 Why would they release sensitive information that can clearly 

 create fear, division or even hatred?  It is inconceivable that, at 

 the height of IRA action in London, reporting would have 

 specifically mentioned the religion of those arrested.  It is 

 almost laughable to imagine a report which said: “ten Roman 

 Catholic terrorists were arrested in Belfast today”. 

 

 If we want to avoid a “clash of civilisations”, as Samuel 

 Huntington put it,6 we will work to bring reason and common 

 sense to the debate and switch off the paranoia.  Remember, 

 we are still more likely to die from a road accident than a 

 terrorist attack. 

 

 This demonstrates the need for balanced leadership.  We need 

 governments who can speak of the reality so that there can be 

 a considered and effective response.  Leaders  who expand the 

 truth, who unadvisedly support extreme action and exploit the 

 politics of fear, will in the end, not succeed.  If we are to 

 survive the age of terrorism and protect and defend our way of 

 life, we must understand our enemies. 

 

                                          5 The Australian, 22 October 2005 6 Samuel P Huntington developed this theory in The Clash of Civilisations and the Remaking of World Order (1996) 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 7 of 29 

 An example comes from Tony Blair, talking about “The 

 Opportunity Society”7 in September last year.  On one page he 

 said that terrorism “is a wholly new phenomenon” ... Whose 

 fundamental advocates…“preach hatred of the West and our 

 way of life.”  Blair speaks of these people, of the terrorists 

 saying “They are not provoked by our actions;  but by our 

 existence.  They are in Iraq for the very reason we should be.  

 They have chosen this battleground because they know success 

 for us in Iraq is not success for America, or Britain, or even 

 Iraq itself, but for the values and way of life that democracy 

 represents.  They know that.  That ’s why they are there.” 

 

 That to me is saying they are fighting because they hate us for 

 what we are.  But then a little further on in the same speech, 

 Prime Minister Blair says:     

 “After November 1, I will make its (Middle East Peace Process) 

 revival a personal priority.  Two states, Israel and Palestine, 

 living side by side in an enduring peace would do more to 

 defeat this terrorism than bullets alone can ever do.”   

 

 His first statement is saying terrorists have no cause but 

 hatred.  The second statement is saying they have a cause 

 which is their perception of a fundamental injustice suffered by 

 the Palestinians. 

 

                                          7 Speech by Tony Blair MP, Prime Minister and Leader of the Labour Party, Labour Party Annual Conference, Brighton Centre, UK (28 September 2004) 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 8 of 29 

 Both statements cannot be true.  I believe his second 

 statement is true.   

 

 There are many causes of terrorism:  In the Middle East, the 

 perception of injustice to Palestinians;  In Chechnya, the desire 

 to break away from Russia;  In Basque, there are specific 

 objectives;  For decades, Britain experienced terrorism 

 practiced by the IRA.  Those wanting separatism in the 

 Philippines, over several decades, have another reason.  While 

 techniques and practices may be similar, the objectives of 

 terrorists are varied. 

 

 None of this should be construed as justifying any element of 

 terrorism or any sanctioning of violence against civilians.   

 

 It is a plea for our governments to ask themselves:   Why do 

 people become terrorists?  Unless we understand that, our fight 

 against terrorism will fail.   

 

 We must look at the reality. 

 

 A secret survey undertaken for the United Kingdom Ministry of 

 Defence and seen by the press showed that 65% of Iraqi 

 citizens believed that attacks on Coalition forces were justified 

 and less than 1% believe that the presence of those forces 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 9 of 29 

 advances their own security. 8  Does that not seriously question 

 the Coalition ’s propaganda concerning Iraq? 

 

 We must reduce the pool of those willing to martyr themselves 

 for a perversion of Islam.  If this is to happen, young people 

 need to be given some hope that they can work for a better life 

 in an equitable world.  The hard core will only be defeated if 

 they find it too difficult to gain new recruits.  Unfortunately the 

 war on Iraq has increased the numbers willing to join the 

 Fundamentalists. 

 

 We should also look closely at the arguments we use.  Nearly 

 every religion in different stages of its history has been 

 perverted by a minority whom today we call fundamentalists or 

 terrorists.  Even now it is not only from Islam that such 

 fundamentalists can be found. 

 

 From the end of the Second World War to September 11, 

 democratic powers moved - falteringly and often inadequately - 

 to establish a world governed by law.   

 

 The Universal Declaration of Human Rights9 and the 

 Conventions designed to give legal force10 to those rights 

 advanced a law-based world.  The Rome Statute for the 

                                          8 See, eg. Sean Rayment, ‘ Secret MoD Poll: Iraquis Support Attacks on British Troops ’, Daily Telegraph (London, 23 October 2005) 9 General Assembly Resolution 217A (III), UN Doc A/RES/217A (III), 10 December 1948 10 See, eg, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, opened for signature 16 December 1966, 999 UNTS. 171 (entered into force 23 March 1976); International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, opened for signature 16 December 1966, 993 UNTS 3 (entered into force 3 January 1976). 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 10 of 29 

 International Criminal Court came into force in July 2002 11 - 

 perhaps the most substantive change to international 

 structures - since the foundation of the United Nations itself.   

 

 In these years, the ideal of a world governed by law was more 

 than a dream.  Many people worked for it.   

 

 Under the Rule of Law, there can be no discrimination.  The law 

 must apply to all people of all nations without discrimination, 

 regardless of race, colour, ethnicity, religion or gender.   

 

 In today ’s world we ’ve stepped back into a darker age.   

 

 It is now common to argue that because of the nature of global 

 terrorism, we must also alter the principles by which we have 

 lived.  I do not agree with that assumption.  There are too 

 many examples of governments and people accepting that we 

 cannot fight terrorism and preserve fundamental rights. Indeed 

 it has often been those in positions of legal authority who have 

 led the charge against Human Rights. 

 

 The U.K. legislated discriminately against aliens who were 

 thought to have some links to terrorism12, but who were not 

 charged and who were held in jail - the Law Lords found such 

 laws unconstitutional.13 The solution required removal of 

                                          11 Rome Statute for the International Criminal Court, opened for signature 17 July 1998, 2187 UNTS 3 (entered into force 1 July 2002 12 Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 13 A (FC) and others (FC) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 56 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 11 of 29 

 discriminatory legislation and close supervision both by the 

 Courts and the Parliament.  Untrammelled use of Executive 

 Power was checked. 

 

 The recent defeat of Prime Minster Blair in the House of 

 Commons has also demonstrated that the Commons is 

 concerned at the way the executive has acted and sought to 

 conduct the War against Terror.   

 

 The arbitrary use of executive power is not new.  During the 

 Second World War, Prime Minister Winston Churchill sent a 

 cable to Herbert Morrison, as Home Secretary.  At the time, Sir 

 Oswald Moseley, leader of the Nazi Party in Britain, and his wife 

 Lady Diana Moseley, were to be released from custody. 

 

 They had been imprisoned under Section 18B of the Emergency 

 Powers Act.   

 

 Two and a half years later, in November 1943, the war was 

 going a good deal better for the Allies;  the Moseleys had 

 become ill;  and the Home Secretary was preparing to release 

 them, but with restrictions.   

 

 Churchill ’s memorandum to Morrison asked the Home 

 Secretary to emphasise that the release of the Moseleys was 

 also a matter of high principle.   

 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 12 of 29 

 Churchill considered “the great privilege of habeas corpus, and 

 of trial by jury, which are the supreme protection invented by 

 the English people for ordinary individuals against the State… - 

 The power of the Executive to cast a man into prison without 

 formulating any charge known to the law and particularly to 

 deny him the judgement of his peers - is, in the highest 

 degree, odious and is the foundation of all totalitarian 

 governments... Extraordinary powers assumed by the 

 Executive with the consent of Parliament in emergencies should 

 be yielded up, when and as, the emergency declines... This is 

 really the test of civilisation.”14 

 

 But today, in the name of security, the most curious and 

 frightening provisions are justified.  The United States has put 

 hundreds of people in Guantanamo Bay, in an effort to place 

 them beyond the reach of the law.  The Supreme Court ruled 

 that they had access to the habeas corpus jurisdiction of 

 American federal courts, and can therefore challenge their 

 detention15.  That was a notable victory for the Rule of Law.16 

 

 Military Commissions were established to try people from 

 Guantanamo Bay.17  The legality of the Commissions remains 

 undecided in the US, as the challenge to their jurisdiction by 

                                          14 Prime Minister Winston Churchill, Cable to Home Secretary Herbert Morrison from Cairo, 21 November 1943, ex The Second World War, Closing the Ring, 1952; reprinted in A W Brian Simpson, In the Highest Degree Odious: Detention Without Trial in Wartime Britain (1944) p 391 15 Rasul v Bush, 124 S. Ct.2686 (2004) 16 Judge Joyce Hens Green, US District Court, District of Columbia Circuit, Judge Joyce Green, Civil Actions 2002-0299 Guantanamo Detainee Cases, January 31 2005 17 Presidential Military Order, ‘Detention, Treatment, and Trial of Certain Non-Citizens in the War Against Terrorism ’ 66 Fed. Reg. 57833 (13 November 2001); Procedures for Trials by Military Commissions of Certain Non-United States Citizens in the War Against Terrorism, General Counsel, Department of Defense, Military Commission Order No.1 (21 March 2002). 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 13 of 29 

 detainee Salim Ahmed Hamdan awaits a final decision on 

 appeal to the Supreme Court.18 

 

 The highest law authority in the United Kingdom, the Attorney 

 General Lord Goldsmith has said that the military tribunals 

 would not provide the kind of justice that the British 

 Government would expect for all British citizens19.  The U.K. 

 ensured the return of nine British citizens from Guantanamo.  

 

 The Australian Government has decided to support the United 

 States Government.  The Prime Minister gave a more open 

 insight into why this is so on SBS World News on 11 November 

 2005.  In his words: “the Government is committed to the 

 Military Commission trial.  If David Hicks was brought back to 

 Australia he would go free, he could not be charged under 

 Australian law.  It is not our intention to do that.”  That 

 represents the abandonment of an Australian citizen who has 

 not breached Australian law.  It is also assumed that David 

 Hicks is guilty, that the presumption of innocence is irrelevant.  

 It denies the right to a fair trial.  The Government has turned 

 itself into prosecutor and judge in relation to David Hicks, 

 before even the process of the Military Commission, which has 

 been described by former prosecutors as being “rigged”, is fully 

                                          18 Judge James Robertson of the District Court for the District of Columbia held that the military commissions were unlawful: Hamdan v Rumsfeld, 344 F.Supp. 2d 152 (DDC, 2004).  The DC Circuit then reversed Judge Robertson ’s decision, holding that the military commissions were lawful: Hamdan v Rumsfeld, 415 F.3d 33, 2005 (DC Cir 2005).  On 7 November 2005, the US Supreme Court granted certiorari in Hamdan v Rumsfeld 415 F.3d 33 (DC Cir, 2005).  Consequently, a final decision by the Supreme Court on the legality of the military commissions is expected in 2006. 19 Rt Hon Lord Goldsmith, Attorney General ’s Chambers, ‘Military Commissions to Try Detainees at Guantanamo Bay ’, 24 July 2003. 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 14 of 29 

 under way.  Because of the Hamdan Appeal, the Hicks trial is 

 again in abeyance. 

 

 If the Government is prepared to so abandon the Rule of Law 

 in relation to one Australian citizen, for how many more will 

 that also apply?  It is not the action of a democracy, it is the 

 exercise of arbitrary executive power. 

 

 Where proper Executive Power is transgressed - as has been 

 the case in the United States - the Courts come into play.  This 

 is to the credit of the United States. 

 

 We all need to take a long, hard look to see what Governments 

 have executed in our name. 

 

 When we first saw the photographs of Abu Ghraib, many were 

 horrified at the images sent around the world and many rushed 

 to condemn torture. 

 

 But the release of the book entitled The Torture Papers: The 

 Road to Abu Ghraib20 by New York University ’s Centre on Law 

 and Security, and published by Cambridge Press, give a 

 different emphasis. 

 

 The Executive wanted to know how far interrogators could go 

 without running foul of the Geneva Conventions, applicable 

                                          20 Karen Greenberg and Joshua Dratel (eds), The Torture Papers: The Road to Abu Ghraib (2005) 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 15 of 29 

 during armed conflict, 21or human rights obligations under both 

 domestic and international law22.  The torture trail began.  The 

 Executive wanted to know, “How do we justify the rigorous, 

 intrusive questioning?”. 

 

 Critics from the United States have offered their own 

 condemnation of these events. 

 

 In the New York Times, a long term National Security Advisor 

 to the first President Bush, Donald Gregg, wrote that the 

 memorandum “cleared the way for the horrors that had been 

 revealed in Iraq, Afghanistan and Guantanamo that make a 

 mockery of Administration assertions that a few misguided 

 enlisted personnel perpetrated the vile abuse of prisoners.  I 

 can think of nothing that can more devastatingly undercut 

 America ’s standing in the world or more importantly our view 

 of ourselves than those decisions.”23 

 

 Even more recently, the willingness to use torture has been 

 underlined by the United States defence of “rendition” for 

 terrorist suspects:  Capture them, then take them to a country 

 where they can be interrogated without supervision.  Thus 

 torture is well and truly on the agenda.   

 

                                          21 In particular, Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of August 12, 1949, opened for signature 12 August 1949, 75 UNTS 135 (Entered into force 21 October 1950). 22 See, eg. Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, opened for signature 10 December 1984, 1465 UNTS 85 (entered into force 26 June 1987;  implemented domestically in 18 US Code ## 2340-2340A. 23 Donald P Gregg, Opinion Piece, New York Times (New York, 10 June 2004). 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 16 of 29 

 The fact that we are having this debate about torture 

 represents a major change in the world.  British courts began 

 to outlaw evidence taken under torture with Magna Carta in the 

 15th century.  Today, in almost every Western country, 

 domestic and international law absolutely condemn and outlaw 

 torture.  One does not take even the first step.  It is utterly 

 extraordinary that there is now a debate about the acceptable 

 degree of torture.  How has this come about?  What have we 

 lost?  What have the terrorists won?  This underlines loss of 

 principle, a loss of principle that will make our society less 

 secure more vulnerable. 

 

 Australia is complicit in these events by openly supporting US 

 policy in Afghanistan, Guantanamo Bay and Iraq.  . 

 

 I come now to recent Australian laws, which themselves 

 demonstrate a loss of principle. 

 

 The Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Legislation 

 Amendment (Terrorism) of 200224 has been described as the 

 most draconian bill any Australian Government has ever 

 conceived.  

 

 The Legislation has been compared to Counter Terrorism 

 Legislation in the United States, Canada and the UK and many 

                                          24 Introduced into Parliament in March 2002 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 17 of 29 

 believe it exceeds the measures adopted in any of these 

 jurisdictions.   

 

 One person summed it up in this way:   “...only Australia has 

 sought to legislate to authorise the detention in secret of non-suspects”25.    

 

 More specifically this legislation allows our government to 

 detain a person whom authorities believe may help in counter-terrorism enquiries.  The authorities do not have to believe the 

 person is guilty of any offence. 

 

 They only have to believe that the person may know something 

 of relevance to anti-terrorism enquiries, even if the person 

 does not know he or she knows it.  

 

 While in some cases provision can be made for the person to 

 access a lawyer, there is a general provision which prevents a 

 detained person contacting anyone at all.26  

 

 If the detained person fails to provide information requested, 

 he or she is subject to prosecution and up to 5 years ’ jail.27  

 The legislation goes on to say that if the person does not have 

 any information, then it is not an offence; but the person has 

                                          25 George Williams, “Australian Values and the War Against Terrorism” (2003) 26(1), UNSW Law Journal, p.191-194, 197. 26 ASIO Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2003, Part III, Division 3, SubDiv. A, Sect. 34F(8) Detention of Persons.  Communications while in custody or detention. 27 ASIO Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2003, Part III, Division 3, SubDiv. A, Sect. 34G(3), Giving information and producing things, etc. 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 18 of 29 

 to prove he or she has no information. 28  The onus of proof is 

 reversed and the right to silence abolished. 

 

 The same provision applies for the production of records.29  

 

 If the authorities happen to be wrong at the outset and the 

 person does not know anything, and does not have anything - 

 failing to answer or to produce proof, could result in a very 

 heavy jail term unless they can prove a negative.   

 

 It is for good reason that under British law and under our law, 

 the onus of proof has been on the Crown and the presumption 

 of innocence until proven guilty is accorded to all people, but 

 no longer under this legislation. 

 

 As originally introduced, the legislation placed no restrictions 

 on who could be detained or questioned.  In other words, it 

 applied to any child.  The only restriction as to age was that a 

 child under 10 years could not be strip searched.30  

 

 In response to opposition from the Senate, the legislation as 

 passed, applies to anyone over the age of 18. 

 

                                          28 ASIO Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2003, Part III, Division 3, SubDiv.A, Sect 34G(4) (Note. Subsection 13.3(3)of the Criminal Code). Giving information and producing things, etc. 29 ASIO Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2003, Part III, Division 3, SubDiv.A, Sect 34G(6). Giving information and producing things, etc. 30 ASIO Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2002, First Reading, Part III, Division 3, SubDiv.A, Sect 34M. Rules for conduct of strip search. 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 19 of 29 

 So a person can disappear for the time prescribed. 31 

 

 You might think we have a free press and that a disappearance 

 will get reported and perhaps notoriety, but our Government 

 has thought of that also. 

 

 The authorities have covered normal reporting of these events.  

 Anyone disclosing somebody ’s detention under a warrant, or 

 for two years from the end of that warrant, commits an 

 offence.  Under the provisions of this legislation, the penalty for 

 such disclosure is 5 years jail.32 

 

 There are also provisions that apply to the person subject to 

 detention and to that person ’s lawyer, if that person has been 

 permitted access to a lawyer, making it an offence to disclose 

 the fact of detention and questioning.33 

 

 How would one describe these powers?  How is it that both 

 major parties in Australia agreed with these provisions?   

 

 The legislation is contrary to the Rule of Law.  It is contrary to 

 Due Process, to Habeas Corpus, to the basic rights which we 

 have come to understand are central to a free and open 

                                          31 ASIO Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2003, Part III, Division 3, SubDiv.A, Sect 34HC Person may not be detained for more than 168 hours continuously. 32 ASIO Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2003, Part III, Division 3, SubDiv.A, Sect 34VAA(1) Secrecy relating to warrants and questioning. 33 ASIO Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2003, Part III, Division 3, SubDiv.A, Sect 34VA Lawyers ’ access to information for proceedings relating to warrant. 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 20 of 29 

 society.  Such changes are unlikely to prevent a terrorist 

 attack. 

 

 9/11 occurred in the United States, not because laws were 

 inadequate, not because laws made it difficult for the agencies 

 to do their job but because of a failure of intelligence and 

 analysis.  It is highly unlikely that additional draconian laws 

 would have altered the outcome. 

 

 All this is already law.   

 

 Australian Law or lack of it has already failed many individuals 

 and groups.  Amongst these we can include:  Aboriginals; 

 people held in the Department of Immigration detention 

 centres; an Australian citizen deported; Australian citizens 

 wrongly held in detention centres without medical attention; a 

 United States citizen deported without “due process” and an 

 Australian citizen being tried before a Military Commission.  By 

 the detention of the innocent, by the questioning of people 

 known to be innocent by the authorities, by the right confirmed 

 by the High Court with a majority of 4 to 3, to keep a failed 

 asylum seeker in jail for the term of his natural life, if he could 

 not be returned to his land of origin. 

 

 Authorities in Australia now have the capacity for the exercise 

 of extreme and arbitrary power without adequate judicial 

 safeguards. 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 21 of 29 

 

 In Australia the exercise of these powers is undertaken in an 

 entirely different environment from that which prevails in 

 virtually every Western democracy.  In the United States, 

 Britain, in Europe, governments are constrained by a Bill of 

 Rights.  In Australia there is no such restraint. 

 

 Many individuals have suffered in Australia because of the 

 gravest failure of administrative and ministerial responsibilities.  

 As shown in the Palmer and Comrie Reports the Department of 

 Immigration has been at the centre of much of it.  Two 

 Ministers have been in charge.  Apparently neither Minister is 

 responsible.  As far as one can tell, nobody has been held 

 accountable.  The people involved appear not to have mattered 

 to the Administration or to the Government or to the silent 

 Opposition, which has failed to demand any adequate 

 explanation. 

 

 Now we come to new proposals currently in front of the 

 Parliament which would provide even greater power to the 

 police and to the Government.   

 

 In examining the intent of the Government, we need to look at 

 the draft proposed by the Government, not necessarily at the 

 law as finally passed by the Parliament.  While we know the 

 intent of the Government, we do not yet know the final shape 

 of the legislation. 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 22 of 29 

 

 Attention should in particular be turned to those provisions 

 which alter the sedition laws and which govern the use of 

 control orders and preventive detention.   

 

 There are two aspects of the amendments to sedition laws 

 which I find disturbing.  First, under these new provisions, it is 

 not necessary for the person to have a “seditious intent”;  it 

 appears that a person could commit the offence if they are 

 “reckless” as to whether they urge another to use force or 

 violence.  What does “reckless” mean?  Secondly, there is 

 some doubt as to whether there needs to be a direct link 

 between a person ’s conduct and the use of force or violence, or 

 whether the person ’s conduct need only be an indirect cause. 

 

 There is considerable doubt, therefore, as to whether words, 

 which may well have a peaceful intent in the speaker, could be 

 construed as recklessly urging violence in the listener, even 

 though there is no direct link.  There is a risk, therefore, that 

 public comments, open criticism of the government with whose 

 policies one strongly disagrees, could easily be caught by the 

 proposed changes. 

 

 One ground for a “control order” is that a person has provided 

 training to or has received training from a listed terrorist 

 organisation.  Does the organisation need to be listed when the 

 training was actually received?  Does the training have to be 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 23 of 29 

 recent, could it have occurred 20 years ago in different times 

 and different circumstances?  For example, the CIA was heavily 

 involved in training Afghan groups to fight the Soviet Union. 

 

 In one respect more severe problems arise in relation to 

 detention orders.   

 

 There is no involvement of a court in achieving authority for an 

 initial “preventive detention order”;  a senior member of the 

 Australian Federal Police has the power to order initial 

 preventive detention.  It is only an order for continued 

 preventive detention which must be sought outside the AFP.  

 There is still no consideration by a court.  Such an order can be 

 issued, amongst others, by a judge, a retired judge or a legal 

 person, provided they are appointed by the Minister.  They 

 exercise the powers in a personal capacity.  There is thus no 

 effective check on the Executive branch of government in the 

 exercise of this power. 

 

 The intelligence rational for a control order and a preventive 

 detention order is not easy to grasp.  If surveillance is 

 thorough why not watch the person, collect more evidence and 

 then charge the person with an offence? 

 

 Another consequence of a “control order” or a preventive 

 detention order would be the immediate disappearance of all 

 the subject ’s contacts and collaborators.  They would know 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 24 of 29 

 from their point of view that something was wrong, they would 

 fade away and disappear. 

 

 If there were valid grounds for concern, why not double 

 surveillance, collect more information, which would enable a 

 charge and a prosecution to be laid.   

 

 The strategy of “control orders” and “preventive detention” 

 may have some relevance but the case has not been made.  In 

 fact, it appears that such measures could actually reduce our 

 ability to collect evidence and to bring charges in relation to 

 these acts.   

 

 The lack of appropriate judicial involvement in the application 

 for preventive detention orders is a total derogation of justice. 

 

 Legal officers would in those circumstances be disinclined to 

 second guess the policeman.  In reality, detention orders are 

 imposed solely on the involvement of the police.  The Rule of 

 Law is abandoned.  Is that not a characteristic of a police 

 state?34 

 

 As we have seen with ASIO ’s new powers, there are significant 

 limitations on the ability of a person in preventive detention to 

 disclose the fact that they are being detained.  In addition, any 

 contact with another person (e.g. a lawyer or family member) 

                                          34 Terry O ’Gorman, President, Australian Council for Civil Liberties Media Release 4 November 2005 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 25 of 29 

 that is allowed must be monitored by a police officer (with the 

 assistance of an interpreter if necessary).  This fundamentally 

 undermines the legal system which demands lawyer/client 

 privilege. 

 

 Do we really believe these powers will be effective in the fight 

 against terrorism, or do we believe that the powers themselves 

 are likely to lead to a sense of grievance, of alienation?  These 

 are powers whose breadth and arbitrary nature, with lack of 

 judicial oversight, should not exist in any democratic country.   

 

 If one says, but they will not be abused, I do not agree.  If 

 arbitrary powers exist they will be abused.   

 

 All this has happened in a country which has not experienced a 

 significant terrorist incident for many years.  What would be 

 our Government ’s reaction if this great city were tied up and 

 disorganised by terrorist attacks similar to those which recently 

 occurred in London?  How much further would they be 

 prepared to go? 

 

 Recent arrests in Sydney and Melbourne have taken place 

 under existing law.  It was apparently part of a police and ASIO 

 operation that had been moving forward for the best part of 18 

 months.  Why did the Prime Minister ’s statement of 3 

 November 2005 claim that certain matters had to be rushed 

 forward because of urgent and specific intelligence advice?   

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 26 of 29 

 

 Presumably the Prime Minister and Premiers had all been 

 advised of this continuing operation over more than a year.  

 What suddenly made it so urgent?  It is clear that some of the 

 police were very much put out that their operation had been 

 blown by the government.  Had ASIO asked for that 

 amendment, the substantive change of a “the” to an “a” in 

 relation to a terrorist incident, be put in place as a matter of 

 urgency?  If not, why did the government believe it was urgent 

 to act?  

 

 Certainly the perception of an imminent threat has been 

 heightened and people are more afraid.  

 

 The Government is really saying on these issues, trust us, but 

 no part of the history of the Coalition ’s invasion and occupation 

 of Iraq or of the incident involving “children overboard” gives 

 any member of that coalition the right to say on these issues:  

 “Trust us”.   

 

 Our Government has constantly said that our participation in 

 the Coalition in Iraq has not increased the risk of terrorist 

 attacks in Australia.  But the former head of ASIO, Dennis 

 Richardson, and the former Chief of the Defence Force Staff, 

 General Cosgrove, have both suggested the contrary. 

 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 27 of 29 

 After the Tampa, after the Children Overboard, the experience 

 and treatment of asylum seekers, the abandonment of Hicks, 

 all suggest that any right to trust has been long destroyed.  

 Would Cornelia Rau trust the Government?  Would Vivian Solon 

 trust the Government?  Concerning the Tampa and Children 

 Overboard, the Government knew they were playing to the 

 more fearful and conservative elements in the Australian 

 community and with great success.  The Government also 

 knows in relation to terrorism that the public is concerned, 

 even fearful and can be made more fearful.   

 

 It may be brilliant politics but will the new laws make Australia 

 secure?  By its actions, the Government has long abandoned 

 the middle ground.  The Rule of Law and “due process” has 

 been set aside.  Has the Government already created an 

 environment in which people will accept a serious derogation 

 from the Rule of Law, if the Government says it will help in the 

 fight against terrorism?  How can such a situation be reversed? 

 

 No adequate case has been made that these proposed 

 breaches in the Rule of Law will be effective in the fight against 

 terrorism.  Unless substantially amended, the laws should be 

 opposed on the basis of substance.  The powers are arbitrary 

 altering the quality of ASIO and of the police in significant 

 ways.  There is no adequate judicial review. 

 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 28 of 29 

 The broad thrust of the legislation is wrong because it makes 

 the fundamental assumption that liberty cannot defend itself. 

 

 The Government and the Labor Party have both assumed that 

 we cannot fight terrorism and adhere to the basic principles of 

 justice and democracy and the Rule of Law.  They have created 

 a situation in which some people are outside the law, beyond 

 the reach of justice.   

 

 We would do well to heed the words of Israeli Professor Naomi 

 Chazan in the recent Gandel Oration in Melbourne:  “There is 

 one standard and one standard for all, and the challenge that is 

 posed by terrorism is how to defend the rights of those that we 

 don ’t agree with?….How can we defend the rights, the basic 

 human and civil rights, of those whose ideas we simply abhor?  

 It is the system, the process, the courts, it is the measurement 

 of justice that determines the nature of our civilisation.” 

 

 Thomas Paine made the same point, thus: 

 

 “He that would make his own liberty secure must guard even 

 his own enemy from oppression, for if he violates this duty, he 

 establishes a precedent that will reach to himself.”   

 

 The fact that the Government, with the support of the 

 Opposition, has moved so far away from the Rule of Law 

 The Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH Human Rights and Responsibilities in the Age of Terror 

 University of Melbourne www.unimelb.edu.au/speeches/ Page 29 of 29 

 demonstrates the fragility of our grasp of a liberal, democratic 

 society. 

 

 If we stand silent in the face of discrimination and in violation 

 of the basic principles of humanity, then we betray our way of 

 life.  We must fight extremism, fundamentalism, terrorism, 

 whatever its origins, whatever its objectives but we must be 

 confident we can best defend our free society by adherence to 

 our own principles. 

 

 

 (5565 words) 

 

