---
title: "Life chances and social exclusion: 11 years on: paper presented at [Families Matter] 9th Australian Institute of Family Studies Conference."
date: "2005-02-09"
creators:
  - "Taylor, Janet"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Social inclusion"
  - "Family"
  - "Children"
  - "Longitudinal studies"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211275082
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3NBF6%22
---

  Life chances and social exclusion: 11 years on 

  Paper presented at 

  Ninth Australian Institute of Family Studies Conference  9-1 1 February 2005, Melbourne 

  Janet Taylor 

  Brotherhood of St Laurence 

  Contact 

  Janet Taylor, Research Coordinator  Brotherhood of St Laurence, 67 Brunswick St FITZROY 3065  (03)9483 1376 jtaylor@bsl.org.aii 

  Acknowledgment: Stage 6 of the Life Chances Study has been generously supported by  the H & L Hecht Trust, the Kingston Sedgefield (Australia) Charitable Trust, the Bokhara  Foundation and through the Family Relationships Services Program of the Federal Department  of Family and Community Services. Thanks also to Alex Fraser my fellow researcher in Stage 6. 

  1 

  Introduction 

  What happens to children who are disadvantaged as babies‘? Is their fate really determined in  their first year or two of life? Do families who suffer social exclusion remain excluded over  time? Such are the questions that longitudinal studies of children can address. 

  Reviews of long-term effects of early experience have shown that outcomes following adversity  are diverse and are dependent on subsequent life experiences (Rutter 1989; Bynner 2001).  Bynner (2001) draws together the concepts of social exclusion and of developmental psychology  to consider the literature on risk and protective factors. resilience and vulnerability in children.  He finds, from reviewing longitudinal studies, that the picture that emerges is one of 

  ‘predictability qualified by complexity’. He concludes that the social exclusion focus highlights  the importance of protective policy to combat social exclusion. 

  A paper presented at the Australian Institute of Family Studies conference in 1993 (Taylor 1993)  identified ten of the most disadvantaged children at the first stage of the Brotherhood of St  Laurence’s Life Chances study (when the children were about 6 months old) and revisited them  12 months later to see what changes had occurred in their lives. The present paper now takes the  opportunity to examine a longer time frame and to revisit these same children as 1 1  and 12 year  olds. 

  This paper  explores factors in the children’s disadvantage and their families’ social exclusion  examines changes over the years  asks what are the policy implications of the findings for social investment in the future of  our children. 

  The Life Chances Study with its combination of qualitative and quantitative data collected now  over 12 years provides an important source of data, both to inform new large-scale longitudinal  studies such as Growing Up in Australia and to raise issues for policy consideration. 

  The Life Chances Study 

  The Life Chances Study commenced in 1990 as a longitudinal study of I67 children born in  Melbourne that year. It aimed to follow the lives of those children over time and to explore a  wide range of factors which influence their life chances. including family income, health, family  relationships, social supports and ethnic background. The study is based on all babies born in  two inner suburbs in selected months. Mothers were contacted through the Maternal and Child  Health Centres which are notified of all births. Families in the study reflect their  neighbourhood’s diversity in income and education levels, occupations and ethnicity. Most  families have continued to be part of the study even if they moved away from the original area. 

  The families and children have been followed up in six stages to date, most recently in 2002  when the children were 1 1  and 12 year olds. The study included 142 children at this stage.  Extensive reports of the findings have been published for each stage (including Gilley 1993;  Gilley & Taylor 1995; Taylor 1997; Taylor & Macdonald 1998; Taylor & Fraser 2003). 

  While the published reports analyse the data for the whole sample, it was decided at the first  stage to identify ten of the most disadvantaged children and ten of the most advantaged. The  selection was made on a case study basis using both the quantitative and qualitative material  from the interviews with mothers. 

  2 

  We assumed that factors underlying disadvantage for the children at 6 months included  the child’s health or disability  the quality of care provided by the mother or primary care giver  a wider range of social and economic factors that influence the child directly or influence 

  the care given by the care-giver. 

  Difficulties in selection included the limitation of the data, based on the mothers’ comment in  one interview. 

  The identification of the most disadvantaged and advantaged children focused on issues the  study had set out to explore, such as family income, family stresses and health, but also included  problems that were not explicitly sought but were mentioned by some mothers, including  parental drug and alcohol abuse, domestic violence and gambling. 

  The following case study outlines the situation over time of one of the ten children identified as  most disadvantaged at 6 months: 

  Cuse study  Aged 6 months Jane (a pseudonym) was the second child of a 22 year old Australian mother in  poor health who had recently separated from her partner. The family were living in a high-rise  flat in inner Melbourne on a sole parent pension. As a baby, Jane had health problems (asthma 

  and bowel problems) and had spent 10 days in hospital with bronchitis. Her mother described  herself as very happy and managing quite well, however she herself suffered from asthma and  had been in hospital with pneumonia since Jane’s birth. Jane went into residential care at that  time. Her mother had limited education (year 9) and some literacy problems and little work 

  experience. (In later interviews it emerged that Jane’s mother also had a history of drinking from  an early age). She was getting some support from a family support worker and a social worker.  She wanted to move closer to her own mother in outer Melbourne but there was a two-year  waiting list for public housing there.  At I 8  months sfage Jane and her sister were in foster care because of their mother’s poor health 

  and unstable housing, the family having left the high-rise.  At 3 years Jane was living with her mother in a bungalow behind a relative’s house, having  moved five times since her birth She had had considerable health problems and had been on  medication for hyperactivity. She had been in respite care and foster care. Her mother would have 

  liked to be able to use child care but couldn’t afford it.  At 5 years Jane started school, and then changed school as her mother moved again.  At 6years, Jane’s mother died suddenly and she and her sister went to live with an aunt. The aunt  described Jane as very withdrawn: ‘It’s been a struggle’.  At I 2  years of age, Jane had been living with her father and his parents and brother for three years 

  in a small house they were buying in a housing commission area. She shared a room with her  grandmother. Her father had been on a sole parent pension for a while, but was now working  part-time on night shift. He was keen to be working but found shift work difficult as a sole parent  and saw little of Jane. Financially things had been ‘tight’. Her father said she was very quiet and  shy when she first came to him, ‘I couldn’t get a word out of her ... but she’s a completely  different kid now’. She continued to have health problems and had recently spent four days in  hospital with a bowel problem and had also missed the school camp because of an ear infection.  Jane was in Year 6 at the local state school (her fourth school). She participated in no organised  activities out of school, but she saw friends frequently. She spent occasional weekends with her  maternal grandmother or aunt. Her father commented ‘at the moment everything is going really  nice as it is ... I’m very lucky, I’ve got my parents helping me and I’ve only got one child’. He  said he was lonely as a single parent. However, he saw his financial situation as better than that of  the sole parents with three or four children who were his neighbours. He worried about what high  school would bring for Jane. Her older sister had gone ‘a bit wild’ as a teenager and he had not  been able to cope with her. 

  3 

  Jane was very reticent in the interview. When she talked about missing her 16-year-old sister who  now lived elsewhere she was in tears - the only child to cry during an interview Jane’s teacher  assessed her as somewhat above average at school; however the responses Janet gave us were  rather limited and did not seem to confirm this. Jane said she wanted to be a lawyer when she  grows up. 

  In brief, Jane’s early years were very disrupted and deprived, with many moves, low income.  health problems and limited care from her mother. In the last three years she has led a more stable  life although a fairly constrained life, with her father and with support of relatives. Positive  factors for Jane include her friends and her teacher’s assessment of her ability. However. her  father worries about how she will manage with high school. She still could be identified as one of  the ten most disadvantaged children in the study5 in terms of her unhappiness, health, and limited  family situation and remains quite vulnerable (to following her mother’s early school leaving and  child bearing). 

  The disadvantaged children ut 6 months  The ten children identified as very disadvantaged at 6 months of age were all in low-income  families (typically sole parent families or families with both parents unemployed) with a range of  additional stresses which the mothers said they were having difficulty managing (see Table 1 and  Figure 1). 

  Most of the ten children had health problems, as did most of the mothers. Eight of the mothers  described themselves as not happy since the baby’s birth, mothers of six of the children said they  had problems managing their baby. All but one mother reported marital problems, for some  including violence and separation, which affected their ability to care for their babies. From the  mothers’ reports, fathers tended to be absent or to ignore the child. All the families lived on low  incomes, all but one reliant on social security payments. Financial difficulties caused  considerable stress for the mothers and in some cases meant insufficient food or clothing for the  children. Other stresses related to unemployment, gambling, alcohol or drug abuse, housing and  legal problems and lack of social support. Lack of English was a significant dimension of  disadvantage for the recent migrant and refugee families. Seven of the families were from non-  English-speaking backgrounds (NESB). They included Vietnamese, Chinese, Turkish and Greek  couple. One child had an Aboriginal father. 

  The case studies illustrated a combination of income, employment, marital tensions and health  factors creating situations of disadvantage for the children, often exacerbated by lack of social  support from relatives or friends or mainstream services. Some factors affected the children  directly, some were mediated by their mothers. 

  The advantaged children at 6 nzonths  To highlight the differences in life situations of children born in the same place and at the same  time, we identified ten children among the most advantaged in terms of financial security  (families in highest income category), health, family relationships and social supports. In 

  contrast to the disadvantaged families, all fathers (and seven of the mothers) were employed. The  mothers typically described their babies’ health and their own as excellent, all saw themselves as  happy and all but one said they were managing very well. All described their children as ‘easier  than average’. Most fathers were very involved with the baby. Mothers also received good 

  support from relatives and friends with some having access to nannies for child-care. 

  The children at 18 months  Twelve months later there had been major changes in the lives of the disadvantaged children.  Two children were in temporary ‘care’, three couples had separated, one step-father was in jail.  At 18 months only one child was still with his father (and even this child had had separations due  to the child’s hospitalisation). In contrast the advantaged families were still faring well. 

  4 

  It had been hoped to identify factors that would alleviate disadvantage, however the families did  not experience significant improvements over the 12 month period. What would we find after 11  years? 

  Table 1: Number of children experiencing selected characteristics at 6 months of age  and at 11 years:  10 ‘most disadvantaged’ children at 6 months and 10 ‘most advantaged’ at 6 months 

  Disadvantaged Disadvantaged Advantaged Advantaged  6 months (N=l0) 11 years (N=8) 6 months  (N= 10)  1 I years (N=lO)  Low income 10 7 0 0 

  Sole parent 4 3 0 0 

  No parent employed 9 3 0 0 

  Child’s health fair 7 1 0 

  or poor 

  0 

  Child difficult 3 1 0 1 

  Primary carer not 8 5 0 

  happy 

  Primary carer with 6 0 0 

  problems managing 

  1 

  0 

  The disadvantaged children at 1 I and 12 years  Table 1 and Figure 1 outline some of the changes since the children were 6 months old. Table 1  presents selected indicators, while Figure 1 summarises the situation of each child. The study  had lost contact with two of the disadvantaged children when they were 5 year olds, by which  time one was in protective care interstate. Most of the children with whom contact was  maintained had quite disrupted lives: three had experienced the death of a parent. While only  half the children lived with both natural parents at 6 months, only one of these continued to live  with both parents throughout the next 11 years. However the fathers of three children who were 

  living apart at 6 months had returned to the families before the children had started school and  had remained with them. The situation in these families seemed to have stabilised to some extent  although they continued to experience financial and some health problems, both for parents and  children. Most parents assessed their children’s health as better than when they were infants and  fewer reported problems in managing their children. 

  All the children remained in the low-income category at ages 11 and 12, except for one child  whose mother, a sole parent with four children, had returned to full-time work on a medium  wage and continued in a precarious financial situation. More families had parents in paid  employment than when the children were babies, but their work tended to be low wage and part-  time and did not increase their income greatly. 

  5 

  Figure 1: Ten ‘most disadvantaged’ children at 6 months of age: changes over time 

  1 

  2 

  3 

  4 

  5 

  6 

  7 

  8 

  9&10 

  At 6 months old  The child of Australian  parents, the father receives  sickness benefit and has  problems with the police. 

  The youngest of four children  of a couple of NESB  background living on  unemployment benefit and 

  with serious marital problems. 

  The youngest of four children  of a NESB woman in poor  health whose violent husband  left some months ago. 

  The second child of a 22 year  old Australian mother in poor  health recently separated from  her partner. 

  The child of a 22 year old  Australian mother with a  history of drug and alcohol  abuse who faces a prison 

  sentence.  A child with health problems,  the youngest of four children  on an unemployed NESB  couple with extreme marital  tension.  A child in poor health who is  the only child of a recently  arrived NESB woman and her  elderly invalid husband. 

  A child in poor health,  youngest of four children of a  recently arrived NESB couple  living on the father’s very low  wage. 

  Twin babies in a NESB family  whose unemployed father has  left their exhausted and  depressed mother to bring up  four children on her own. 

  In between  At 18 months child in ‘care‘  temporarily. Parents separated  and father later died. 

  Couple separated at times.  Father died (drugs) when child  6. 

  Mother working full-time but  financial problems. 

  Father returned to the family  by the time the child was 4.  Father problems with work  injuries and unemployment. 

  At 18 months child was in  ‘care’ temporarily. Mother died  when child 5. Child lived with  aunt and then father. Child  withdrawn. 

  Step-father spent time in  prison, father died, child in  ‘care’. Last contact when child  aged 5 was in care interstate. 

  Mother said relationship with  father improved, child’s asthma  continued. Last contact when  child aged 5. 

  At some stages mother and  child separated from the father,  continuing lack of money for  necessities. Mother speaks no 

  English and hasn’t worked  since birth of child. 

  Both parents health problems,  father work injuries. Child’s  English limited. Financial  problems ‘not enough to pay  the bills’. 

  Father returned before children  aged 3. unemployed but then  with assorted low wage jobs. A  business venture failed 

  Continuing financial stress. 

  At  1 1  and 12 years old  Child living with mother and  older brother in country  town. child easy going.  doing well at school.  Child living with mother and  older siblings. Mother 

  working full-time, on  medium income but financial  problems. Child well  behaved but below average  at school. few friends.  Child living with parents and  5 siblings. Parents  unemployed. Some help  from relatives, financially  stable. Child doing well in  maths at school.  Child living with father and  grandparents. Less  withdrawn, some health  problems.  (Still most disadvantaged)  No contact. 

  No contact. 

  Child living with both  parents again but father not  close. child’s health only  ‘fair’, misses out because of 

  costs, nothing child likes at  home. Has needed help with  English at school.  (Still most disadvantaged)  Parents continue together  with four children. Family  situation improved, father  working, child finding  school easy. although has a  speech problem, health OK.  Parents and four children  still living together, father  working. Mother not happy.  Children well and happy but  miss out because of costs. 

  6 

  New areas of disadvantage emerged when the children started school. On average the children  with early disadvantage were doing less well at school from their teacher’s perspective at age 6  than their peers (Taylor & Macdonald 1998). The teachers’ reports of the disadvantaged  children’s progress as 11 and 12 year olds were not very different from those of the children  overall. The complexity of the comparisons are illustrated by some of the children from Chinese- 

  speaking families. As 1 1 and 12 year olds some were doing very well in maths but continued to  need extra help with English at school. Some of the parents reported racism at school. The  families’ continuing low income meant educational disadvantage as children missed out on  school camps and excursions and had problems paying for fees and uniforms. 

  The advantaged children at I 1  and 12 years  Table I indicates the continuing advantage for the children identified early as advantaged. All 10  children’s families remained on high incomes, all families had a parent in employment, all  remained in two-parent families although one mother had remarried. Some families were  experiencing difficulties, but not in the cumulative way of the disadvantaged families. One  mother described her child, a high achiever, as difficult; one father had mixed feelings about his  transition to role of full-time carer. One child had learning difficulties and his parents were  having marital problems, another child had developed health problems (allergies), one mother  had serious health problems. 

  Which children are the most disadvantaged at age I 1  and 12?  With the 142 children in the Life Chances Study aged 11 and 12, we sought to identify ten who  could be described as currently among the most disadvantaged, again taking a case study  approach and considering the combination of child-centred factors such as health and disability,  family factors affecting quality of care and wider social and economic factors. At this stage we  had not only the parents’ responses but the children’s perspective as well. 

  Those identified included two of the children who had been among the 10 ‘most disadvantaged’  at 6 months of age. They also included children with serious developmental delay, children  under Child Protection orders because of family violence, children with mothers threatening  suicide, a child whose mother had died, children who described themselves unhappy, children  with health problems, learning difficulties and lack of friends. The children faced multiple  dimensions of disadvantage. 

  To give an example of the combination of factors: one child who had developmental delay and  attended a special school had been recently removed from his mother on a Child Protection order  because of violence from her former partner and her drug use, and had been placed with his  unemployed step-father in temporary accommodation. 

  All but one were in sole parent families (four with fathers), all but one were on low incomes,  four of the children were from non-English speaking families. 

  R eJect ions  The process of selection highlighted two types of families whose children were particularly at  risk of disadvantage as infants:  families of young Australian-born single mothers in unstable relationships 

  larger non-English speaking families facing unemployment. 

  Over the 11 years of the Life Chances study most families of these types have remained on low  incomes, many have changed from sole parent to two parent families or vice versa. Some of  these families have stabilised, either as two parent or sole parent families. So called protective 

  7 

  factors have included social and financial support from relatives, continuing employment andor  regular income support payments. Some families and children have experienced considerable  disadvantage with parents unable to effectively care for their children because of injury, illness,  mental or physical, drug abuse, death and family conflict. 

  Research issues  Sample loss is a major methodological difficulty for longitudinal studies. The situation of the 10  very disadvantaged children in the Life Chances study illustrates both the impact of loss (2 of the  10 or 20 per cent) and also the challenge of trying to maintain contact with disadvantaged  families over many moves and also changes of primary carer. 

  In longitudinal studies, case studies can provide a significant tool for exploring the impact of  changes in children’s lives over time and can add to the richness of the data from the whole  sample. 

  This study suggests also the importance of having some open-ended questions that allow parents  to introduce their own issues. Sometimes these may be incorporated in later stages. For example,  in the early stages we did not ask direct questions about drug and alcohol use. 

  Implications for policy: disadvantage and social exclusion 

  Some aspects of the children’s disadvantage can be seen as personal, for example, related to their  health or behaviour, their parents’ marital disagreements or their parents’ lack of education.  However all these aspects exist in a social and policy context which can further exclude or  include disadvantaged families and their children. As Brynner (2001) notes, children suffer from  the social exclusion of their parents and this provides a basis for their own future exclusion later  in life. 

  One of the strengths of the concept of social exclusion in policy development is that it raises the  question of dynamics and of agency (Saunders 2003). A key question for this study is:  How can government pursue policies which will promote social inclusion rather than  exclusion for disadvantaged families and children? 

  The disadvantaged families in the Life Chances study are socially excluded on a number of  dimensions, including lack of resources such as adequate income support; availability of ‘good’  jobs (in terms of wages, permanence, and hours) for people with limited literacy and English  skills; adequate housing; affordable educational resources for their children which provide for 

  specialist assistance for children from non-English-speaking homes; effective drug and alcohol  treatment for parents of young children. 

  To conclude, four key policy responses are highlighted that could promote inclusion rather than  exclusion of disadvantaged children such as those in our study: 

  Current ‘welfare’ reform:  Adequate income supportjorjamilies: inadequate income is a major obstacle to inclusion.  With all the talk of ‘mutual obligation’, the adequacy of Centrelink payments for families is  not being addressed. Families whose only source of income is a Centrelink payment can 

  seldom make ends meet and provide what their children need. Their financial stress often  leads to family conflict.  Support (not coercion) for sole parents in finding training and employment: proposed  compulsory ‘activity testing’ for sole parents could act as a further layer of social exclusion.  Providing resources to sole parents facing complex difficulties (for example, lack of English, 

  8 

  depression, children with poor health) so they can choose to take timely opportunities would  be more effective than a simple requirement to be ‘active’. 

  Education and language policy:  Restoration of ,Tree ’ education: children are being excluded from full participation in  government schools by costs of fees, uniforms, camps and excursions. One recent suggestion  that would assist disadvantaged children is that those eligible for Health Care Cards be 

  exempt from voluntary fees at Victorian government schools (Weaving et al. 2004).  English language tuition: the policy focus on providing special free English tuition only for  new arrivals in Australia needs to be expanded. Some parents in the study, especially those  with minimal schooling, spoke little or no English after more than 12 years in Australia and 

  their Australian-born children still needed extra English assistance as they entered high  school. 

  The continuity of risk factors in families over time points to the need for policy responses to  combat social exclusion, not only to provide substantial support in the early years, but also to  recognise the need for continuing support of both parents and children. 

  References 

  Bynner, J 2001, Childhood risks and protective factors in social exclusion, Children and SocieQ,  v01. 15 pp. 285-301. 

  Gilley, T 1993, Access.for growth, services for mothers and babies, Brotherhood of St Laurence,  Melbourne. 

  Gilley, T & Taylor, J 1995, Unequal lives? Low income ana’ the l f e  chances of three year olds,  Brotherhood of St Laurence, Melbourne. 

  Rutter, M, 1989, ‘Pathways from childhood to adult life’, Journal of Child Psychology and  Psychiatry, vol 30, no. 1, pp 23-5 1. 

  Saunders, P 2003, ‘Towards a credible poverty framework: from income poverty to deprivation’  SPRC Discussion Paper no. 127, Social Policy Research Centre, University of NSW, Sydney. 

  Taylor, J 1993, ‘Life chances and disadvantage: young children in inner Melbourne’, paper  presented at Australian Family Research Conference, 17- 19 February, Sydney. 

  Taylor, J 1997, Kids and kindergarten: access to preschool in Victoria, Brotherhood of St  Laurence, Melbourne. 

  Taylor, J & Fraser A 2003, Life at 11 and 12: a report of the Life Chances Study (provisional  title). 

  Taylor J & Macdonald F 1998, Life at six: life chances and beginning school, Brotherhood of St  Laurence, Melbourne. 

  Weaving, M, Lloyd, G, Atkins, C & Savage, A 2004, The rising cost of yree ’ education: a  survey of Emergency Relief clients presenting at Victorian Community Information Centres,  .January - February 2004, Emergency Relief Victoria, VCOSS, Melbourne. 

  9 

