---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview with Kim Beazley and Robert McClelland, Tweed Heads, NSW, 9 June 2005: Airport security; tax cuts; Opposition front bench; QLD ALP conference; Chen Yonglin; Petro Georgiou’s private members bill."
date: "2005-06-09"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Mcclelland, Robert"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Airports"
  - "Tax rates and margins"
  - "Security measures"
  - "Queensland"
  - "Shadow Ministry"
  - "Proposed legislation"
  - "ELLIOT, Justine, MP"
  - "CHEN, Yonglin"
  - "GEORGIOU, Petro"
  - "Party conferences, State"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211279793
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5WAG6%22
---

 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON KIM C BEAZLEY MP   

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP WITH ROBERT McCLELLAND, TWEED  HEADS, 9 JUNE 2005   

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects: Airport Security;  Tax Cuts; Opposition Front Bench; QLD  ALP Conference; Chen Yonglin; Petro Georgiou’s Private Members Bill   

 BEAZLEY: This government’s been in power for 10 years now and they expect  us to believe they’ve only just discovered the possibility of criminal elements at  airports in the last little while.  They’ve been asleep at the wheel - this is a  government playing catch-up, running very fast to try to catch up to a problem  they should have dealt with ages ago.  And you’ve got a situation now where the  tourism industry, and we’re here in the Tweed, where there is a very heavy  component of the local work generated by tourism, confronting more impositions,  more expenses that they’ll need to confront and issues in relation to security  about which they need to be concerned.   

 The Government has put in place an investigation that is inadequately  empowered, as usual, and for four to six weeks so they fix the problem in that  time.  They actually had part of the solution there when Mick Palmer was the  Inspector of Transport Security.  Then they took him off the case to cover their  backs in the Cornelia Rau scandal.  One problem helped create another problem  in the Government’s incompetent management of these things.  This is becoming  a hallmark of the Liberal and National Government.  Brilliant political spin,  clothing themselves in righteousness when it comes to dealing with security  issues at least in their verbal presentation.  But you ask for a bit of delivery from  them and there’s nothing.  Failure, one problem after another emerges.  You  couldn’t tell that in the first few years, but you can tell it now.  It’s a government  asleep at the wheel and has been for a very long time.   

 

 JOURNALIST: Why do you think the polls have been showing in the last  couple of days an increase in the Howard Government then?   

 BEAZLEY:  They got a bounce out of the Budget, most governments do.   Polls -- there are going to be hundreds of them between now and the next  election.  People are not focused on how they’re going to vote in the next election  and they won’t focus for a very long period of time.  I think people are also sick of  poll driven politicians, I’ve got to say.  I think the public actually expects you to  say what you mean, and say what you think is important.  They will, in time, as 

 the election approaches, come to fix on more of (inaudible) --  and that’s what  I’ve been doing.     

 We’re taking a stand for example on tax.  We’re taking a stand for ordinary  Australians.  It’s not easy to cut through when the Government has such strength  in the capacity it has to dominate the news cycles and put its view across.  But, I  tell you, seven million Australians are being short changed by this ungenerous,  high taxing government.  Short changed in the changes they’re putting in place  now, and we’re going to fight it.  The Labor Party is going to work very hard to get  tax justice for the seven million Australians that have been very ill served by the 

 Government.   

 JOURNALIST: Peter Costello is saying that’s one of the reasons that your  popularity has dropped.   

 BEAZLEY:  He wouldn’t know.  He’s an arrogant man and he wouldn’t  know.  I can’t remember many budgets where the Government hadn’t  experienced an increase in the polls and generally an increase at least as large,  if not more, in the experience they’ve had this time.  But I’d say that’s irrelevant.   That’s not the point -- what’s the issue?  The issue is: have the tax changes  they’re putting in place, as the highest taxing government in Australian history,  have they actually dealt with the problem as far as the ordinary Australian is  concerned?  Well, they’ve lined their own pockets, they’ve had no problem with  that, but for the ordinary Australian taxpayer, $6.00 a week, fair dinkum.  They  can do better than that with the amount of money that they’re spending -- $24  billion comes off the bottom line.  That crowds out an awful lot of options for the  Government into the future over the next couple of years.  This is probably the  only major tax cut you’ll see for sometime now, with that $24 billion slashed off  the bottom line.  And, what do you get out of it?  Well $6.00 a week for those  people around the Tweed.  The Labor Party says: not good enough Mr Costello,  do better.  And we’ve got the amendments to help you do better and they’ll be  moved in the Senate next week.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, on the airport issue, what’s the right way to go  with in terms of airport security, what’s your alternative?   

 BEAZLEY:  They should have had in place that cooperation between the  Intelligence Services and the police services ages ago, and the Custom Services  that should have been there ages ago.  The second thing is they should have  had in place a proper Inspectorate, a proper resourced Inspectorate with an  expert at the head of it.  We’ve got no quarrel with Mick Palmer heading up a  Transport Security Inspectorate and you actually need it operating, you need it  well resourced, you need a canny fellow who knows something about the system  in charge of it and Mick Palmer qualifies in all those fronts, yet he isn’t there.   He’s not at his desk -- he’s at a desk he shouldn’t be at.  There should be a  judicial inquiry, not him (inaudible ) 

 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) say passengers coming in and out of Coolangatta  Airport, what have they got to fear under the Government’s (inaudible?   

 BEAZLEY:  Well what you’ve seen is a mess with people concerned  about whether or not their baggage is being tampered with, and you can see that  in these new little services that are being provided around the airports.  Get your  baggage wrapped in plastic and make sure you spend half a day at the other end  of your holiday unwrapping the bag when you get there.  I mean, this is because  the Government isn’t trusted.   

 McCLELLAND: We’ve had the ridiculous situation last week, we received a  briefing and I’m not telling any things that are secret here, but we specifically put  to John Anderson’s Department as to whether they were annoyed that they  hadn’t been provided with the confidential Customs Report into criminality at our  airport, including information that some involved in baggage handling were  implicated as being involved with extremists organisations.  They said they  weren’t concerned that they hadn’t been provided with a copy of that report,  because they saw their charter as looking at potential terrorism not criminality at  our airports.  So, you’ve have had a Minister who has specifically directed his  department to turn a blind eye to criminality at our airports.  When it hits the fan,  when the public expressed concerns, and indeed with their own hip pockets pay  for baggage wrapping, talk to the talk-back radio and so forth, he’s decided he’s 

 needed to act.  But it’s taken a pretty big whack from the public to get him to  acknowledge that if someone can place narcotics in a person’s bag they can  certainly place an explosive device.  It took a lot of pressure, pressure from the 

 Federal Parliament, our work in the Federal Parliament, pressure from the media  -- at least we’re seeing some action, but you’ve got to ask how fair dinkum when  their action is essentially a six week inquiry.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, I guess most Australians would think since  September 11 that those processes would have been in place and should have  been there already we’ve spent a lot of money on that sort of thing, to find out  that it’s not now, has the Minister got to go as a result of this, I mean someone’s  got to be accountable?   

 BEAZLEY:  Well the Government has to be accountable, and it is  ridiculous that they should have got to this pass and it’s also bad that with $10  billion realised for the Government from the sale of airports that they’d be looking  at dealing with the problem by another impost on passengers.  That is that is  adding insult to injury, as far as the average Australian is concerned.  But it is, it  beggars belief that the sort of coordination that the Americans immediately  identified as a problem after September 11, and which fits into the Australian  debate here, we were talking about the same sorts of things in Australia in the  aftermath, has evidently not reached via John Anderson into the way in which he 

 coordinates things in some of the most strategic parts of our infrastructure, our  transport infrastructure.     

 So, and he also had mechanisms there that actually might have helped in this  process, like that Inspectorate of Transport Security.  Well it took him 12 months  to put Mick Palmer in there and three months to take him out, and even though  that was obviously going to be the focal point of identification of problems of  coordination.  He removed him, and removed him to protect their back on  Cornelia Rau.  Now understand this: this actually requires a bit of explanation.   They didn’t want to go down the judicial road, and once they decided they didn’t  want to go down the judicial road of inquiry, because it would embarrass the  Minister, they were then short of people who they could use to conduct such an  investigation.  Mick Palmer, one of the few people around, that you could use  because of his police background and so expediently --  there are plenty of  judges around, or ex-judges -- not wanting to go down that judicial road where  there is a plethora of people who could help them, they go to an area where  there’s very few people who could help them, to wit, Mick Palmer and now it’s  created a problem for the rest of us in airport security.  This is bungling  government, this is incompetence and after 10 years it’s an indication that it’s  also arrogant.   

 JOURNALIST: Can this British expert, in four weeks, can he turn this whole  thing around, or again, is his inquiry just a bit of window dressing?   

 BEAZLEY:  It’s a very big risk if it’s window dressing.  He’s an expert,  there’s no question about that.  He’s not a bad man at all, but he walks into a  situation about which he knows little and is expected to provide a solution in four  or six weeks when what you’re supposed to have is an Inspector out there, all the  time, constantly giving reports, constantly looking at these things, constantly  identifying problems -- not a one off  -- but in permanent situ, doing the job. So,  as I said, I’ve got no criticism of this gentleman, who’s been brought out here as  a top notch expert, but given the time given what’s really needed it’s not the thing  that should be happening. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Would it be (inaudible)   

 BEAZLEY:  Increased cost has an effect, low in confidence has an  effect.  All these things impact on the mind of the public when they contemplate  the idea of travel.  So, anywhere there’s a tendency on the tourism industry,  three or four people make the decision they won’t go, that has an effect.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, a lot of commentators have been saying you  need to think about the future in terms of Labor’s front bench.  Could you talk a  little bit about your views on that and what role do you see for someone like  Justine, who won the seat up here and obviously would have to hold it?   

 BEAZLEY:  I’ll tell you what Justine demonstrates, which I think is a very  important thing, and that is this: firstly, you’ve got to be focussed on the seats the  Liberals hold.  There’s a bit of a tendency from time to time in the Labor Party to 

 focus on the seats that we hold.  Our major problem is not with the occupants of  the seats that we do hold, it’s an absence of seats.  To get back into office we’ve  got to take seats off Liberals and the Nationals.  Now, here we have the perfect  exemplar of what sort of candidates you need to do that.  Justine took the seat  off a National Party ministerial incumbent, no less.  So, what did Justine bring?   She brought a very nice personality, a very good mind, a very good heart and,  above all, a very good work ethic to her job.  She was on the case for a lengthy  period of time.  There’s a lesson in all that for the Labor Party that shows you the  sorts of candidates we need in order to be able to win the next election.  So, it’s  not without significance that we start off with our regional Shadow Cabinet  meetings here, because here there are a few answers to the issues that we must  confront. 

 

 JOURNALIST: What will you be saying to the Party faithful in Cairns on  Saturday?   

 BEAZLEY:  I’m going to talk about the Labor Party’s alternative agenda  for dealing with things that this Government is getting wrong.  You see, we’ve  had a good economy in this country.  It’s been a product of two factors: the  reforms of the Hawke and Keating Governments combined with the best terms of  trade we’ve ever had.  Now, it’s just beginning to dawn on those who comment  on Australian politics, but soon after that it will dawn on the Australian public, that  this Government have added nothing of value to that and it’s going down the  wrong track.  It’s going down the low wage track.  They’re the issues that they  confront while we in the Labor Party say that the reforms we need takes us up  the high skills road.  That’s what I’m going to be talking about to the Conference.   

 JOURNALSIT: Mr Beazley, sceptical voters are going to say, might say, that  why is the Government now bringing up this airport security, investigation inquiry  they’ve had all that time since September 11, why now, what are they trying to  hide?   

 BEAZLEY:  On this occasion I think they’re actually playing catch up.   Sometimes they’re big organisers of distraction, I don’t dispute that, for example,  on the tax issue.  Rather than debate the tax issue - because they desperately  don’t want to do that, they want to debate some procedural matter in the  Parliament.  That’s their normal form - get another issue going out there.  But in  the case of airport security, there’s a real problem here.  It’s emerged, basically,  because of the arguments around the Schapelle Corby issue, and it sort of  advanced from there, and as more and more came out --as the Government tried  to say that you were fine  --and more and more people came out there, some of  them anonymously, some of them up front, who were users of the system saying:  look fellows this ain’t true.  And then out there came this publication, this leaked 

 publication in The Australian from a Customs report which suggested that there  was a substantial problem there at Sydney Airport.  So, actually the airport  security stuff is not the way they’d want to discuss security.  Normally they’d  discuss security at the drop of the hat and put their spin on it, but do nothing  about it.  What they’re dealing with is the consequences of them not doing  anything about it, that’s at the Airport.  So, they’ve had to confront a problem and  they’re confronting it in their usual way -- spin, cover, (inaudible) counter-terrorist  airport expert, get him in, get him to cover the Government for the public distress  that’s out there, the concern that’s out there and hope that it goes away in  another month or so, so that their bungling doesn’t get exposed.  We say you  can’t operate like that.   

 JOURNALIST: With regards to the Chinese issue, do you believe that Mr  Chen now needs protection?   

 BEAZLEY:  We have said that, in the absence of any evidence to the  contrary, there’s a prima facie case for him to obtain protection.  We said that  despite the fact that we have tried repeatedly to get briefings from the  Government.  The Government has not given us those briefings.  Mr Rudd said  yesterday:  we can only start to assume they’ve got something to hide.  You  know, they won’t talk to us about it.  On the public facts, as we know them, it’s a  prima facie case.   

 JOURNALIST: What’s wrong with a permanent protection visa, it’s much the  same thing, isn’t it?   

 BEAZLEY:  You’ve got to go through the processes properly, analysing  the fellow’s situation and the arguments that are there associated with it, but the  arguments seem to indicate to us that he’s entitled to our form of protection here.   

 JOURNALIST: Is it a cruel policy?   

 BEAZLEY:  This is not an issue of cruelty, here it’s a question of whether  or not  he’s under threat and whether or not it is safe for him to go home and  making that judgement about that under the relevant bits and pieces of legislation  that are out there.  From all we see in the public domain so far, we say that  there’s a good case for him to stay.  We have had no briefing from the  Government to the contrary on that so, they’d better give us one.   

 JOURNALIST: Were you worried when Mr Downer, I heard him this morning  saying that he’s trying to advise him to go for a protection visa rather than  diplomatic immunity.  Are you worried that he’s pulling strings there?   

 BEAZLEY:  Mr Downer has certain responsibilities that flow through for  all people who seek protection and apply in the Foreign Affairs area.  There are  other responsibilities of course in the Immigration area.  I am not convinced that 

 Mr Downer is handling that terribly effectively.  I mean, as I found the other day, I  mean, when Downer comes out a few weeks ago and talks about the Labor Party  appeasers and cites the Petrov Affair as some example of that, those remarks  are insulting and false. Then he comes out and oh, I didn’t write a letter to the  Chinese Embassy to ask questions about this, it’s a bit embarrassing thing to do  and I would have thought that these are judgements that you arrive at yourself.   So, basically, Mr Downer is not doing his job on this.   

 JOURNALIST: Will you support Petro Georgiou’s Private Member’s Bill?   

 BEAZLEY:  We announced last week that we were supportive of the Bill  because, not reactively, but proactively, it seemed to conform to the views that  we expressed in the proper operation of the immigration and mandatory  detention systems. It looks to us as though Petro Georgiou’s Bill was in  conformity with large elements of the policy that we’ve put down.  You can’t  defend your country’s borders with a shambles, and the way in which the Liberal  Party now operates, the Liberal and National parties now operate with the  immigration program, it’s a shambles, in this part of it.  We think that the positions  we’ve put down on getting the people processed quickly, ensuring that people  don’t stay in detention for a very long time because they are processed quickly  and efficiently and getting kids out from behind razor wire, we have argued for a  long time this should be done.  We’ve been joined now by Mr Georgio on this.  This Bill has not hit the Parliament yet and we are waiting for it.   

 JOURNALIST: On tax, has Cabinet reached a decision on whether they’ll let  the tax schedule through the Senate?   

 BEAZLEY:  The position I made absolutely clear the other day was this,  we’re going to discuss the main issue first and that’s the issue of whether or not  the tax cut the people are getting are adequate -- and they’re not.  And that is  what we want the debate to be about.  We have said that after that debate is  over, we are happy to consider the procedural issues that are associated with the  schedule.  There’s plenty of time to do that before Parliament rises in two weeks  time and we will consider that afterwards.  We have said, emphatically, from the  day this rose as an issue, that we have not decided for or against that particular  proposition on disallowance and we will always and we can always be relied  upon to act in the national interest.  But the point that we make is this, and I think  people are now beginning to get this point too in the media scrutiny, (inaudible)  Costello’s out there today people start to put it to him.  The big issue next week is  going to be the Bill itself in the Senate.  And the question Mr Costello has to  answer is this: Mr Costello, why did you believe that the Labor Party’s proposition  which gives twice as much to seven million taxpayers as your proposition is not  acceptable?   Why won’t you give seven million Australians, under your proposal  who receive a paltry $6.00, a week a decent tax break?   

 JOURNALIST: Are you considering a disallowance motion? 

 

 BEAZLEY:  We will consider that particular proposition when the main  Bill is dealt with and all of it is going to be dealt with in the course of the next  fortnight.   

 

 ends   

 

 

