---
title: "Asylum seekers in Australia: policy and law: "the best of times, the worst of times?". Paper presented to LAWASIAdownunder2005"
date: "2005-03-22"
creators:
  - "Von Doussa, John"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Migration Act 1958"
  - "Human rights"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Conferences"
  - "Cases (Law)"
  - "Courts"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211277065
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/27WF6%22
---

  Asylum seekers in  Australia - Policy and Law  “The best of times, the  worst of times?” 

  Session 9.2 - Tuesday  22.03.2005 

  Speaker: John von  Doussa QC 

  Asylum seekers in Australia - Policy and Law  “The best of times, the worst of times?”  John von Doussa QC  President Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission 

  Contemplating the current state of the refugee debate in Australia one is irresistibly drawn  towards Charles Dickens’ famous opening paragraph in “A Tale of Two Cities”! It is astonishing  how contemporary the phrases still sound: 

  “It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the  age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief. it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the  season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the  winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us, we were all  going direct to Heaven. we were all going direct the other way- in short, the period was so  far like the present period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its being  received. for good or for evil, in the superlative degree of comparison only. ” 

  On one hand, since the end of World War II Australia has accepted more than 6 million new  settlers, more than 650,000 of whom were refugees. Australia presently has an offshore  humanitarian immigration program that is acknowledged as one of the more reliable, with 12,000  allocated places in 2003 - 2004. Australia IS a significant donor to UNHCR. It is also rightly  praised for developing a sophisticated “status determination system” for evaluating the claims of  people presenting themselves as refugees, of which the UNHCR’s Director, Department of 

  International Protection, Erica Feller, had this to say in 2001 : 

  (Its) status determination system has always been something of a model. As regards the  progressive development of refugee law principles. Australia is among the three States  that have formulated and implemented guidelines for evaluating gender related claims in  a refugee context. Equally important, Australia has been a key partner in achieving 

  durable solutions for refugees by providing a significant annual quota for resettlement  opportun ities. 

  On the other hand, there exists sections 189 and 196 of the Migration Act 1958 (Cth) which  requires all non citizens who do not hold a valid visa, including those who have arrived in  Australia by boat or air, to be detained until they are either removed from Australia or granted a  visa. This is a regime of mandatory detention. Since 1992 it has prevented Courts from releasing 

  any detained person on bail, however stringent the conditions, and regardless of age or health.  Asylum seekers who arrive without a visa remain in detention for the duration of their status  determination, including appeals. If their claims fail, they remain there until their removal can be  arranged to a country that will accept them. Sometimes such a country cannot be found. Section  273 of the Migration Act authorises the establishment of separate immigration detention centres. 

  It should be noted that out of UNHCR’s 29 developed countries for refugee purposes, Australia  along with Greece, Turkey and Poland are the only countries to keep asylum seekers in detention  camps. 

  Up until August 2001, the above regime rightly attracted domestic human rights concerns in some  quarters over issues of length of this mandatory detention, its possible arbitrariness, and about  conditions within the detention centres, but it was not a topic that attracted widespread publicity in  Australia, or international outrage. 

  However the appearance offshore of a cluster of small boats carrying more than 1200 people in  the period 2001-2002, and the August 2001 arrival of the Norwegian cargo ship MV Tampa near  Christmas Island, prompted a raft of legislative and administrative changes to Australia’s  processing of asylum seekers that certainly captured the attention of the local and international  community. The Tampa had on board 433 Afghan and Iraqi asylum seekers, rescued from  international waters after the foundering of their vessel. 

  2 

  In the wider context of an impending election and the post 11 September 2001 terrorist concerns,  the Government used the Tampa episode as evidence of the need to strengthen Australia's  border protection capacities, thereby reinforcing its sovereignty and its right to decide who should  enter its surrounds. Legislation was enacted which excised from the Migration Zone, certain  Australian off-mainland locations which were logical targets for boat people seeking asylum in 

  Australia. People apprehended in the excised zones were deposited for detention in Manus  Island and Nauru whilst others determined their status. ("Pacific Solution"). 

  Ms Erica Feller noted around that time: 

  Fears about irregular migration in general are, though, now starting to complicate refugee  protection in Australia. lmmigration department figures indicate that more than 7,000  people have arrived illegally in Australia by boat since 1989, with over 2,800 originating  from Iraq and Afghanistan. People traffickers have not found it too difficult to circumvent 

  routine migration controls, and political and economic instability in neighbouring countries  has fed into fears at the community level, as well as the preoccupations within the  Australian Government, about uncontrollable floods of foreigners. 

  There are many aspects of these policies which give rise to serious human rights concerns. No  doubt many will be discussed at this session. The following arguments pose a couple of issues  for consideration. 

  It is fallacious to link the issue of border protection and national sovereignty with the so-called  boat people. No-one disputes that Australia has the right to maintain the integrity of its borders.  Australia is a sovereign nation and it is entirely appropriate that the Government should make  laws concerning who can enter Australia and who can stay. But it is wrong to couple the integrity  of our border protection system with the small, sad flotilla of leaky boats with their desperately  fragile cargo of asylum seekers. 

  As Liberal backbencher Petro Georgiou put it so succinctly in the Sydney Morning Herald opinion  piece of 15 February 2005: 

  Some argue that boat arrivals have ceased because of our mandatory detention policy  and that if we were to relax that policy there would be a flood of unauthorised arrivals.  The evidence does not demonstrate this. Very few unauthorised boats and people arrived  in the decade before the Keating government introduced mandatory detention in 1992. 

  The greatest number of arrivals (41 75) occurred in 1999-2000, after the policy was  established. 

  Mandatory detention did not deter unauthorised arrivals. The flow of boats and refugees  stopped for reasons that include the changed political situation in Afghanistan and Iraq,  and the actions of Australia and other states in the region to combat people smugglers. 

  People fleeing to a western country to escape persecution are unlikely to be contemplating the  risk of detention on arrival at their destination, just as they are not deterred by the horrendous  risks from the modes of travel they are forced to endure. 

  The fact is that the number of unauthorised boat arrivals to enter Australia was small. In the year  2001-2002 there were 1,212 boat person arrivals. In 2000-2001 there were 4,141, in 1999-2000  there were 4,175 and in 1998-1 999 there were 921 

  From January to June 2001, 7,054 applications for asylum were lodged with Australia compared  to 33,285 in the United Kingdom, 40,786 in Germany and 18,882 in Canada in the same period. 

  The number of boat people arriving in Australia also needs to be contrasted with its total yearly  migration program of 85,000, excluding the 12,000 places in the refugee humanitarian program.  UNHCR figures indicate that in the ten years from 1991-2000, 765,290 people applied for asylum  in Germany, 542,220 in Britain, but only 93,630 in Australia. 

  3 

  At the very least, these figures indicate there is a lack of proportionality between Australia's policy  response to asylum seekers, and the degree of threat that their border violations present to the  fabric of Australia's society. 

  The shortcomings in the policy are now becoming all too evident. In Al-Kateb v Goodwin [2004]  HCA 37 we have a High Court decision that contemplates immigration detention that will only find  release through the graveyard. Re Wooley: Ex parte Applicants M27/2003 by their next friend GS  [2004] 49 has upheld the operation of the detention regime in relation to children, notwithstanding  that it contravenes basic requirements of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and attracts 

  the consequences revealed in the HREOC Report ' A  last resort?'The plight of Cornelia Rau has  re-enforced the conclusions of that Report about the inadequacy and inability of the detention  regime to provide for the health needs of inmates, most especially in the area of mental health. 

  With the benefit of time -and the hindsight that it brings - the harsh detention regime now appears  as a knee jerk reaction that went too far. The wider community and the media are at last  recognising this. It will only add to the shame of the mistakes of the past if the regime is simply  allowed to continue on. 

  If Australia were to return to the pre-1992 situation where the Courts had the power to release  detainees on bail, would that really put the integrity of border protection and the refugee  humanitarian program at risk? Courts are dealing with bail applications by alleged criminals day in  day out, setting all manner of conditions to ensure the safety of the community and the later  attendance of the prisoner at trial. It is unrealistic (and demeaning of the judiciary) to say the  courts cannot be trusted to exercise such a power in a manner consistent with the purpose of the 

  Migration Act. If the courts had this power children could be released into the community, usually  with their family. Detainees in need of medical treatment could be given freedom enough to get it. 

  This proposal would also require amendment to the Social Security legislation so that those  released were entitled to basic health and other benefits, but surely that would be much cheaper  on the public purse than keeping them in detention. 

  And what good purpose has been achieved by the Pacific Solution? Is there any good reason for  not abandoning it? 

  4 

