---
title: "Opening closed doors: parent support services for refugee families. Paper presented at the 9th Australian Institute of Family Studies Conference, 'Families Matter', Melbourne 2005."
date: "2005-02-09"
creators:
  - "Cahill, Ellen"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Service delivery"
  - "Equity"
  - "Sydney"
  - "Ethnic groups"
  - "Family"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Dept of Family and Community Services"
  - "Grants"
  - "Visas"
  - "Single parents"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211275145
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/P5BF6%22
---

  Families Matter 

  9th Australian Institute of Family Studies Conference  Melbourne, 9-1 1 February 2005 

  Opening Closed Doors: Parent Support Services for Refugee Families 

  Ellen Cahill, Co-ordinator Holroyd Parramatta Migrant Services. 

  Abstract 

  This paper describes the first stages of an innovative project, being conducted by  Holroyd Parramatta Migrant Services (HPMS) through funding from the  Department of Family and Community Services, Stronger Families and  Communities Strategy. The project is aimed at addressing a range of needs of  parents from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds (CaLD), particularly  sole parents and those on Temporary Protection Visas (TPV), who live in the  western suburbs of Sydney. 

  The main objective is to provide these families with access to services available  to the general community, as such families are often unable for varied reasons to  use such services. This will be achieved by providing a spectrum of services in  co-operation with other service providers, including social, recreational activities,  as well as educational and information workshops, with a focus on enhancing 

  parenting skills. The- long-term aim is to develop and strengthen the capacity of  highly vulnerable CaLD communities to create a safe and supportive  environment in which children are encouraged to realise their full potential. The  specific communities involved include young children and their families from  Afghani, Iraqi, Iranian, Sudanese, Eritrean, Ethiopian, Somali, Kurdish, Khmer, 

  Filipino, Tamil and Sinhalese backgrounds, as well as TPV holders and Sole  parents from these and other countries. This paper focuses on the development  of the service, in particular, the framework for service provision and evaluation,  as well as the strategies used to engage both communities and service providers 

  in the challenging task of working across boundaries in novel ways to meet the  needs of families unable to participate in mainstream services. 

  Introduction  HPMS is a community-based organisation funded by the Department of  Community Services of NSW, with other projects funded by FaCS, Department of  Immigration and Indigenous Affairs (DIMIA), Department of Education,  Employment and Training (DEET) and Holroyd and Parramatta Local Councils.  HPMS seeks to assist in the advancement of CaLD communities through  facilitating equal access, opportunity and participation for all, based on the 

  principles of social justice, access and equity. HPMS specifically addresses the  issues that small and emerging communities face when settling in Central  Western Sydney. The Interactive CaLD Family Support Services project is an 

  1 



  example of this. An initial explanation of one of the targeted communities will be  explored that is, refugee families. The project Interactive CaLD Family Support  Services, the rationale behind the project and the aims and strategies of the  project will be explained. 

  Refugee Families in Australia  Although there is limited amount of research available on refugees and parenting  after migration what is available highlights the following; that parenting skills may  be affected negatively and that the traumatic experiences and stress of settling in  a new country may exhaust emotional resources of refugee parents and impact  on the ability to parent effectively. ( Bashir & David et al, 2000). Other factors that  may affect settlement and parenting are larger families particularly with the  communities from Africa, the change in the roles and responsibilities of family 

  members with many families having to cope with the loss of the father, and  intergenerational conflict as the new culture clashes with the values of the  migrant culture. (Lea, 2004). In 2003 - 2004, DlMlA granted 11,227 offshore  visas, of these 70% were from African countries, 25% Middle East & Asia and  5% from Europe. 2,957 Settled in Sydney in 2004 and mainly in Central Western.  A large proportion of refugees settle in Central Western Sydney as there are  existing networks of families and communities, and their proposers are also living 

  in Sydney. There is also a perception of cheaper accommodation and availability  of employment. 

  Rationale for the Project  A previous research report by HPMS “We Don’t Have Sole Parents in Our  Community - We Only Have Widows” The Needs of Female Sole Parents  from a Non-English Speaking Background (Cheung, 2002) Major findings from  this report highlighted social isolation, income assistance, accommodation, 

  parenting, childcare, and access to relevant services as the major issues facing  sole parents from migrant and refugee backgrounds. As a result of this report  HPMS was granted a one off seeding funding from Department of Community  Services, NSW Families First Initiative, for the Interactive CaLD Sole Parent 

  Families Project. This project laid the groundwork in working with sole parents  from CaLD communities and assisted in the formation of support groups based  on the languages of Tagalong, Dari/Farsi, Chinese and Arabic speaking Iraqis.  One of the outcomes of this project was the request from these groups for more  on going support, particularly in the provision of training for facilitators to conduct 

  parenting skills workshops. 

  2 

  The Project - Interactive CaLD Family Support Project.  A two year project funded by the Federal Government Family and Community  Services Local Answers Initiative as part of the Stronger Families and  Communities Strategy. The aims of the project are; 

  To assist in decreasing social isolation experienced by  parents from CaLD communities particularly sole parents  and TPV holders.  Increase participation by linking to services, services  that are generally available to the wider community, in 

  Central Western Sydney, which comprise the following  local government areas of Auburn, Holroyd and  Parramatta.  To improve capacity within communities through the  creation of protective and nurturing environments that  enhance the development, growth, health and social  competencies of young children. 

  Target Groups consist of the following Afghani, Iraqi, Iranian, Southern  Sudanese, Ethiopian, Somalian, Kurdish, Khmer, Filipino, Tamil, Melanesian and  TPV holders and Sole Parents from within these target groups. 

  Strategies: The strategies used to achieve the aims are;  improving the social networks and links to services for  families from CaLD backgrounds including TPV holders  Offer alternative parenting practices for parents from 

  small and emerging communities.  The encouragement of the formation of partnership  alliances for small and emerging communities to access  existing networks of local service providers and develop 

  their own abilities for capacity building. 

  How are these strategies being achieved? 

  Social Networks:  Social networks are improved through involvement in recreational activities and  support groups. The parents and children are involved in the choice of activity 

  3 

  and recreational activities so far have included zoo trips, picnics, aquarium visits  and beach visits. The activities not only act to build on relationships with other  families but also offers an opportunity for the facilitators to discuss issues that  may be troubling the participants. For example a recent family activity involved  one father who acknowledged that he was taking primary care of all his five  children with the youngest at 8 months old because his wife was suffering  depression. The worker was then able to respond to this and organise for family  support and counselling. At another activity many of the mothers said that they  enjoyed relaxing and talking to other mothers while their children played happily,  it also gave them an opportunity to discuss together the problems that they were  experiencing and offer support to each other. At the end of the recreational  activities respondents feel more relaxed and are receptive to offers of assistance  to address their immediate needs and this type of discussion forms the basis for  the information sessions and parenting workshops. 

  Information Sessions  Recently a group of twenty Sudanese mothers attended a IO-week program of  information sessions. The main emphasis was as a support group that linked the  participants to various service providers through informal discussions held  weekly with the provision of childcare. At the first session a calendar of events  was set based on what the participants wanted or needed more information on.  The following service providers invited to meet the women included DlMlA on the 

  proposal support scheme, Western Sydney Tenancy Service on how to have a  healthy and stress free tenancy with your landlord, Refugee Health and  Blacktown Women’s Health Centre on women’s health. Immigrant Women’s  Speakout on keeping children safe and domestic violence and a Pediatric doctor  from Westmead Hospital on refugee children’s health. At one session the women 

  raised concern about disciplining their children, many of the mothers felt stressed  and had at least four to eight children per family. They were willing to look for  alternatives to assist them with having healthier relationships with their children.  It was suggested that a parenting program would be the next step and this was  received positively by the mothers. 

  Parenting Works hops  Parenting workshops will commence in March 2005. HPMS has in partnership  with Western Sydney Area Health Service Triple P Parenting Program, had five  facilitators trained from within the target communities of Tamil, Singhalese,  Arabic Speaking and Ethiopian. This will add to the capacity building of the  community by enhancing their existing skill set and facilitators for each target  group are progressively being identified and trained in programs that will then be  of benefit to their own community. 

  4 

  Capacity Building  Another example of capacity building and linking of the community to mainstream  services is in the form of the establishment of the Sudanese Women’s Welfare  Organisation of New South Wales. A group of Sudanese women wanted to form 

  an incorporated organisation to link up with service providers and to let the wider  community know of the issues they face as women in the Sudanese community.  This group will have their first consultation on February 16 with a wide range of  government departments, agencies, local government representatives, state and  federal members of parliament, community-based organisations and health 

  services registering to take part in the forum. This is an example of refugee  women from a small and emerging community acting collectively to highlight their  needs to government agencies and service providers in order to build on their  existing capacity. 

  Partnerships  This project and others can not be completed without the support and active  participation of partners. Some of our partners in this project include The  Association of Bhanin El-Minieh, Western Sydney Area Health Service Parenting 

  Program and Lone Parent Family Support Association. 

  Recording and monitoring  Recording of the project will include such measures as needs assessments,  parenting surveys, goal setting, and social capital measures based on the  principles of bridging, linking and building. For example, participation rate in other  community activities, how many from the group have the confidence to become  trained as facilitators or how many participants help out with recreational  activities. Monitoring and recording is an ongoing process that is reviewed and 

  modified as the project progresses. 

  ChallengesAssues  Some of the challenges and issues with the project include the expense of  recreational activities. The majority of participants do have large families, no  vehicles of their own, public transport is infrequent with long delays, difficulty 

  maneuvering prams whilst holding toddlers and bus charter is extremely  expensive. Their may be a change in the composition of the target group, clients  moving further out of Western Sydney as rentals get too expensive, or a change  in the countries from which refugees come, may occur. The parenting program  will need to be tailored so that it includes and is sensitive towards the different 

  parenting practices of each community. There is a definite lack of qualified  interpreters from small and emerging communities which does pose difficulties 

  5 

  when trying to organise information sessions around specific topics. One way to  overcome this, is as HPMS has done, is to encourage participants from within the  community to take training courses to equip them with the relevant skills to  improve on the capacity within their community. 

  Conclusion  In conclusion, social isolation is a major factor when working with small and  emerging communities and to some extent recreational/social activities assist in  turning this around. It also important in service delivery to think of creative ways 

  to work with small and emerging communities and to assist them to build bridges  to mainstream services. Encouraging existing capacity within small and emerging  communities so that they can contribute towards better futures for their children,  their own communities and for the wider community. 

  Bibliography 

  Bevan, K. (2000) “Young people, culture, migrations and mental health: A Review of the  Literature” in Deeper Dimensions-Culture, Youth and Mental Health Bashir, M & Bennett  (eds) NSW Transcultural Mental Health Centre.  Cheung, M (2003) “We Don’t Have Sole Parents in Our Community - Only Widows” The Needs 

  of Female Sole Parents from a Non Enalish Speakina Backaround, 

  Crisante, L. (2004). Parenting in cultural context:The role of parenting programs. Paper presented  at the Parenting Imperatives Conference, September, Adelaide, Australia. 

  6 

