---
title: "Inaugural Edward Said Memorial Lecture."
date: "2005-10-01"
creators:
  - "Fisk, Robert"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "SAID, Edward"
  - "Israel"
  - "Israel-Palestine conflict"
  - "Peace talks"
  - "Overseas item"
  - "United States"
  - "Political leadership"
  - "ARAFAT, Yasser"
  - "History"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211284111
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YPQH6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 INAUGURAL INAUGURAL INAUGURAL INAUGURAL     

 EDWARD SAID MEMORIAL LECTURE EDWARD SAID MEMORIAL LECTURE EDWARD SAID MEMORIAL LECTURE EDWARD SAID MEMORIAL LECTURE          

 

 

 

 DELIVERED BY DELIVERED BY DELIVERED BY DELIVERED BY       

 

 DR ROBERT FISK DR ROBERT FISK DR ROBERT FISK DR ROBERT FISK       

 

 

 FIRST OF OCTOBER 2005 AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE   

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 2 

 

 Copyright © The University of Adelaide 2005  

 Unless expressly stated otherwise, the University of Adelaide claims  copyright ownership of all material on this document. 

 You may download, display, print and reproduce this material in unaltered  form (attaching a copy of this notice) for your personal, non-commercial use.  The University of Adelaide reserves the right to revoke such permission at  any time. 

 Apart from this permission and uses permitted under the Copyright Act  1968  , all other rights are reserved. 

 Requests for further authorisations, including authorisations to use material  on this document for commercial purposes, should be directed to  copyright@adelaide.edu.au . 

 

 

 The text below has been transcribed form the audio recording of the lecture  and questions and answers session. Care was taken to accurately document  the lecture as it was presented. The help of Mrs Marilyn Purdy and Mrs  Kristin Munday are acknowledged.   

 

 

 

 Published by: The University of Adelaide  Editor: Dr Bassam Dally  Date: October 2005   

 

 

 For further information about the lecture please contact:  Dr Bassam Dally  Secretary, Steering Committee  Edward Said Memorial Lecture   The University of Adelaide  SA, 5005, Australia   

 Email: Bassam.dally@adelaide.edu.au   Tel: +61-8-8303 5397  Fax: +61-8-8303 4367 

 

 

 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 3 

 EDWARD SAID MEMORIAL LECTURE   

 Welcome to the inaugural Edward Said Memorial Lecture.  My name is Pal  Ahluwalia. I am the Professor of Politics at the University of Adelaide and I  am deeply honoured to be asked to introduce our distinguished speaker this  evening.  The lecture is sponsored by the Australian Friends of Palestine  Association and hosted by the University of Adelaide.  Given the response 

 tonight I am certain that this annual lecture which will be held around this  time every year will become an integral part of Adelaide's intellectual and  cultural calendar.  I would like to begin by acknowledging that this event is  being held on Kaurna Land and I have also been asked to request that you  please all switch off your mobile telephones.  At this time I would like to  introduce the chairperson of the Australian Friends of Palestine Association,  Paul Heywood-Smith QC, and invite him to say a few words.   

 Thank you Pal. The University of Adelaide is my University and I have over  the years been to Elder Hall many times. I can't think of an occasion where it  has been put to better use. I don't know what the view is like from down there  - but from here let me tell you it looks fantastic.  The Australian Friends of  Palestine Assoc AFOPA is delighted to be associated with this lecture and I  thank the University of Adelaide for allowing AFOPA to be a part of it.   Edward Said said to the US Congregational Sub-Committee on International  Relations in 1975, quote "Imagine to yourselves that by some malicious irony  you found yourselves declared foreigners in your own country. This is the  essence of the Palestinian's fate during the twentieth century". To be a friend  of Palestine is to be a friend of Edward Said. We live in unusual times; we live  in times when black is presented as white. Our government tells us that it is  right to invade this country and to occupy it and that that's fine because this  country is either this or that. Our government tells us that young Muslims are  attacking us not because of the policies of our government but because of a  political ideology of hate. Not withstanding that whenever representatives of  those people are asked, they invariably refer to our policies. In such confusing  times we rely upon certain people and rightly so. We rely firstly upon the  teacher, the academic, be he or she historian, scientist or philosopher. And we  rely upon his or her professionalism and integrity. We rely upon such as in  Edward Said. Secondly we rely on the journalist when we can because  unfortunately too often we are let down by mainstream Western journalism.  In 2004 in Glasgow, a survey was done of 300 young people concerning their  perceptions of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The results were shocking. The results  demonstrated that the youth of that city had little, if any idea of the  background to this definitive conflict of our time. As I move in Australian  society, particularly in my children's generation, it is apparent to me that our  young people are similarly disadvantaged. When one reads the news reports  of our journalists far too often it is glaringly apparent that the story is being  told by someone who has not the slightest idea about what the conflict is  about, its origins or its history. One journalist who we have come to rely upon 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 4 

 is the person who is about to address us, like Said we have come to rely upon  his professionalism, his objectivity, his integrity. Dr Fisk may be the subject of  adverse comment in certain quarters, I hope not. The University of Adelaide 

 will and has been criticised for presenting this lecture. The criticism will be  directed at the fact that AFOPA (The Australian Friends of Palestine  Association) is associated with the lecture. The criticism is unwarranted. The  first object of the constitution of The Australian Friends of Palestine  Association is this: quote "To promote peace in Palestine based on  international law and relevant UN resolutions". None of the other objects  approach or detract from that primary object. Let me tell you that when  AFOPA calls for an end to the occupation of the West Bank and Gaza that it is  not AFOPA which is out in the left field. AFOPA stands fairly and squarely  smack in the middle of the viewpoint of the community of nations. It is  Australia which, when voting on the floor of the General Assembly, chooses  to vote with the United States, Israel and the Marshall Islands against the  balance of the world community that is out of the ballpark. I have said almost  enough, I cannot pass up the opportunity however of thanking two fine  Australians who have done so much to make this event happen. There are  others who will be thanked but they will allow me to pick out the two that I  have and I wish to thank the University's and our own Dr Bassam Dally and  Houssam Abiad. Thank you.   

 [applause]   

 Thank you Paul. Before I introduce our distinguished speaker, I’d like to say a  few words about Edward Said who provided a great deal of inspiration to me  personally. Said was a great teacher, a kind person, a friend, a gifted cultural  critic. I co-authored the first book length study of Edward Said's intellectual  project and his impact on the contemporary cultural terrain, titled Edward  Said: The Paradox of Identity . But I’d like to begin by reading a quote from  Said's memoirs that illustrates the paradox of identity that continuously  confronted Edward Said. He wrote: "Thus, it took me about 50 years to  become accustomed to, or more exactly, to feel less uncomfortable with  Edward, a foolishly English name, yoked forcibly with the unmistakably  Arabic family name Said. True he says my mother told me that I had been  named Edward after the Prince of Wales, who cut so fine a figure in 1935, the  year of my birth, and Said was the name of various uncles and cousins. But  the rationale of my name broke down when I discovered no grand parents  called Said and when I tried to connect my fancy English name with its  Arabic partner. For years and, depending on the exact circumstances, I would  rush past Edward and emphasise Said. At other times I would do the reverse  or connect these two to each other so quickly that neither would be clear. The  one thing I could not tolerate", he says, "but very often would have to endure  was the disbelieving and hence undermining reaction: "Edward Said?"".   

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 5 

 There are many possible ways to describe Edward Said, none of them I'm  afraid are adequate. For so large was his impact that it reshaped the academic  terrain itself. But we can say this: that from a position of self exile and  dislocation, he produced the most complex and demanding body of work of  any post war cultural critic. Despite his academic achievements, Said was 

 perhaps best known as the voice and conscience of Palestine. Palestine itself  becomes an almost overwhelmingly repetitive theme in Said's work. Indeed,  the major corpus of his writing deals with Palestine and much of it is topical  and direct political commentary, very much in line with his stance on the role  of the public intellectual. Hence, we have to see Palestine as firmly connected  to the rest of Said's cultural theory. Although the issue of Palestine seems to  be of distinct interest, a separate and coherent body of commentary and  analysis in fact, it is constantly reflected in all his writing. Palestine forced  Said to rethink his literary theory, its urgency, its material reality, its political  reality, its location in the world, its ability to construct or become the focus of  the construction of his own identity. The paradox of Said's work then is a  considerable measure of its power, because such paradox locates his work  firmly in a world in which ideology has material consequences and in which  human life does not conform neatly to the abstract theory. I would now like to  read a message from Edward Said's wife, Mariam Said, that she sent on this  occasion. She says:   

 "My family and I wish to thank the University of Adelaide for  establishing this lecture in memory of my late husband Edward  Said. Special thanks go to Professor John Michael Innes who  initially got in touch with me and Dr Bassam Dally and the 

 steering committee whose efforts made this evening possible.  Edward was privileged during his long academic career to  deliver innumerable lectures all over the globe which he  believed not only challenged him to be creative and innovative 

 but also gave him an invaluable platform as a scholar to present  and test new ideas. The Christian Gauss seminar, in criticism at  Princeton University, was the first endowed lecture that  Edward gave. He delivered a series of lectures that introduced  the subject of Orientalism. Since at that time he was in the  process of writing the book. It was Said's wish to endow as  many lecture series in his name as possible because he wanted  to extend to brilliant young scholars all over world a precious  gift: a platform where the complicated process of intellectual  discovery may thrive. The Said family is delighted that  Adelaide University took the initiative in fulfilling Edward's  wish and are very pleased that Robert Fisk has accepted to  deliver the first lecture. We regret that none of us are able to be  with you physically on this day commemorating the second  anniversary of his death.  However, we will be with you in 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 6 

 spirit this evening and hope that this event will be the  beginning of a yearly lecture that will continue forever."   

 I would now like to introduce Dr Robert Fisk to deliver the inaugural Edward  Said Memorial Lecture.  Given the fact that this lecture is a sell-out and Robert  Fisk is widely known to Australian audiences who closely follow his work,  none of what I have to say will come as a surprise. Robert Fisk is undoubtedly  one of the world's foremost international journalists. In that true Said-ian  spirit he is best known for his ability to speak truth to power. He is the 

 Middle East correspondent for The Independent  in the UK, he has won  numerous UK foreign press awards. Often at the risk of his own life, he has  reported about international conflicts. He has resided in the Middle East for  many years and has covered virtually every conflict in the region including  the current war in Iraq. Amongst his various writings he is the author of two  books on Irish history as well as Pity the Nation , a book that traces the history  of the Lebanon war. His latest book The Great War for the Civilisation: The  Conquest of the Middle East  will be released later this month.  Without further  ado I invite Robert Fisk to deliver the inaugural Edward Said Memorial  Lecture.   

 [applause]   

 Thank you Pal. I am glad that Pal mentioned the mobile phones because in  Dublin in Ireland a few months ago, I said that anyone's mobile phone that  rang when I was speaking, they would be sold into slavery and immediately a  mobile phone rang and it was mine. So keep your phones on if you want,  there's no problem!    

 Ladies and gentlemen the last time I saw Edward Said I asked him to go on  living.  I knew of course about his leukaemia, he had often pointed out that he  was receiving state of the art treatment from a Jewish doctor in New York and  despite all the trash that his illness threw at him he always acknowledged the  kindness and honour of his Jewish friends of whom Daniel Barenboim, of  course, was amongst the finest. Edward was at the time dining at a buffet  among his family in Beirut, frail but angry at Arafat's latest surrender in  Palestine, Israel and Edward answered my question like a soldier: "I'm not  going to die", he said, "because so many people want me dead". I first met  him in the early years of the Lebanese Civil War. I had heard of this man, this  intellectual fighter and linguist, an academic and musicologist and - God  spare me for my ignorance in the 1970's - didn't know that much about him. I  was told to go to an apartment near Hamra Street in Beirut, there was  shooting in the street, how easily we all came to accept shooting in Beirut  then. When I climbed the steps to the apartment and heard a Beethoven Piano  Sonata, it wasn’t the  Moonlight  - nothing so popular for Edward - but I waited  outside the brown painted door for 10 minutes until he had finished. "You've  read my books, Robert, but I bet you haven't read my work on music" he once 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 7 

 scolded me and of course I scuttled off to the Librairie Internationale  in the  Gefinor building in Beirut to buy his definitive book to add to my collection.  His wonderful essays on the Palestinians, his excoriation of the corruption  and viciousness of Yasser Arafat and his entourage. His outraged  condemnation of the criminality of Ariel Sharon's regime.  He was not a  flawless man, was Edward, he could be arrogant with much to be arrogant  about. He could be ruthless in his criticism, he could be repetitive. He could  be angry to the point of irradiation, but he had much to be angry about. One  afternoon I went to see him at the Beirut home of his sister, Jean (a fine lady  whose own accounts of the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon, Beirut Fragments ,  is worthy of her brother's integrity) and he was half lying on the sofa. "I am  just a bit tired because of the Leukaemia treatment", he said, "I keep on going,  I'll not stop". He was a tough guy, the most eloquent defender of an occupied  people and the most irascible attacker of its corrupt leadership. Arafat of  course, as many of you would know, banned his books in the occupied  territories proving the immensity of Said and the intellectual impoverishment  of the Palestinian authority. At that first meeting in Beirut in the late '70s I had  asked Said about Arafat. "I went to a meeting held in Beirut the other day",  Said said, "and Arafat stood there and was questioned about the future  Palestinian state and all he could say was: "you must ask every Palestinian  child this question" Everyone clapped. But what did he mean? What on earth  was he talking about? It was rhetoric and meant nothing". After Arafat went  along with the Oslo Accords Said was the first, rightly, to attack him. Arafat  had never seen a Jewish settlement in the occupied territories, he said. There  wasn’t a single Palestinian lawyer present during the Oslo negotiations. Said  of course was immediately condemned. All of us who said that Oslo would  be a catastrophic failure were, as anti-peace and by viscous extension, pro-terrorist. Said would weary of the need to repeat the Palestinian story, the  importance of denouncing the old lies.  One of them which especially enraged  him was the myth that Arab radio stations have called upon the Palestinian  Arabs of '48 to abandon their homes in the new Israeli state. But he would  repeat over and over again the importance of retelling the tale of Palestinian  tragedy. He was abused by anonymous callers, his office was visited by a fire  bomber and he was libelled many times by Jewish Americans who hated that  he, a professor of literature at Columbia, could so eloquently and vigorously  defend an occupied people. An attempt was made in his dying days to  deprive him of his academic job by some cruel supporters of Israel who  claimed the same old mendacious slur: that he was an anti-Semite. Columbia,  in a long but slightly ambivalent statement, defended him. When the Jewish  Head of Havard expressed his concern about the rise of anti-Semitism in the  United States, by those of course who dared to criticise Israel, Said said,  scathingly, "A Jewish academic who's Head of Harvard complains about anti-Semitism?!" As his health declined Said was invited to give an EU lecture in  Northern England.  I can still hear the lady who organised him complaining  to me that he insisted on flying business class. But why not? Was a critically  ill man fighting for his life and his people not allowed some comfort across 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 8 

 the Atlantic? His friendship with the brilliant Barenboim and their joint  support for an Arab/Israeli orchestra, which of course now play regularly  together, was proof of his human decency. When Barenboim was refused  permission to play in Ramallah, Said rearranged his concert, much to the fury  of the Sharon Government for which Said has only contempt. The last time I  saw him, he was exultant with happiness at the marriage of his son to a 

 beautiful young woman. The time I saw him before, he'd been moved to  infuriation by the failure of Palestinians in Boston to arrange his slides for a  lecture on the right of return of Palestinians in the right order.  Like all serious 

 academics, he wanted accuracy.  All the greater was his fury when one of his  enemies claimed that he was never a true refugee from Palestine because he  was in Cairo at the time of the Palestinian dispossession. He had no truck  with sloppy journalism, take a look again at Covering Islam about the Iranian  revolution, and he had even less patience with American, television anchors.  "When I went on air", he told me once, "the Israeli consul in New York said I  was a terrorist and wanted to kill him and what did the anchor woman say to 

 me? "Mr Said, why do you want to kill the Israeli consul?"". How, Said asked  me, how do you reply to such garbage?   

 Edward was a rare bird; he was both an icon and an iconoclast. He was also a  rare historian.  I have been tracing over some of his work for the new book  that I have coming out and I have, like Edward, been digging and digging  and digging into the actual events of the Palestinian disaster and what went  before them in the '30's and I think I will miss very much hearing his dogged  and no doubt acerbic and very critical comments on my book. However, the  Arab-Jewish struggle, from the conflicting British promises of independence  for the Arab states and the support for the Jewish national home in Palestine, 

 to the establishment of the state of Israel on Palestinian land following the  Jewish Holocaust in the second world war, is an epic tragedy, who's effects  have spread around the world and continue to poison the lives, not only of  the participants, but of our entire Western political and military policies  towards the Middle East and the Muslim lands. The narrative of events, both  through Arab and Israeli eyes, and through the often biased reporting and  commentaries of journalists and historians since1948, now forms libraries of  information and disinformation through which the reader may wander with  incredulity and exhaustion.  As long ago as 1938, when the British still  governed Palestine under a League of Nations mandate, the eminent historian  George Antonius, the Edward Said of his time, was warning of the dangers of  too much reliance on the vast body of literature already in existence and his  words are no less relevant today. Listen to this: "It has to be used with care,  partly because of the high percentage of open or veiled propaganda and  partly because the remoteness of the indispensable Arabic sources has  militated against real fairness, even in the works of neutral and fair-minded  historians". A similar equality eviscerates the stream of day to day  information. Zionist propaganda is active, highly organised and widespread.  The world press, at any rate, in the democracies of the West, is largely 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 9 

 amenable to it. It commands many of the available channels for the  dissemination of news and more particularly, those of the English speaking  world. Arab propaganda is, in comparison, primitive and infinitely less  successful. The Arabs have little of the skill, polyglotic ubiquity or financial  resources which make Jewish propaganda so effective. The result is that for a  score of years or so the world has been looking at Palestine mainly through  Zionist spectacles and has unconsciously acquired the habit of reasoning on  Zionist premises. Those of you who had to listen to Palestinian authority's  spokesmen would agree with me that not much has changed.   

 Most of the last thirty years of my life has been spent cataloguing events that  relate directly or indirectly to the battle for Palestine, to the unresolved  injustices that have afflicted both Arabs and Jews since the 1920s and earlier.  British support for an independent Arab nation was expressed, of course,  when Britain needed Arab forces to fight the Turks. The Balfour Declaration  giving support to a Jewish national home was made when Britain needed  Jewish support both politically and scientifically during the First World War.   Lloyd George, who was British Prime Minister in 1917, would often fantasise  upon the biblical drama being played out in Palestine. He said that he wanted  Jerusalem for Christmas in 1917. He got it, of course, courtesy of General  Allenby and referred in his memoirs to the capture, by British troops, of the  most famous city in the world which had for centuries baffled the efforts of  Christendom to regain possession of its sacred shrines. Lloyd George, that he  should have reflected upon Allenby's campaign as a successor to the  crusades, regaining possession of powers of Jerusalem , was a theme that would  run throughout the twentieth century in the West's dealings with the Middle  East. It would find its natural echo in George W. Bush's talk of a crusade in  the immediate aftermath of the international crimes against humanity of  September 11, 2001. In those same memoirs, Lloyd George makes scarcely any  reference to the Balfour Declaration and then only to suggest that it was a  gesture made, of course, to reward the prominent Zionist Chaim Weizmann  for his scientific work on acetone, a chemical essential in the making of  cordite and therefore to the British war effort. Weizmann's name, Lloyd  George would enthuse, will rank with that of Nehemiah in the fascinating  and inspiring story of the children of Israel.  Nehemiah was responsible for  the fifth century BC rebuilding and restoration of Jerusalem. But at almost the  same time Lloyd George was writing this, in 1936, he was speaking far more  frankly about the Balfour Declaration directly in the House of Commons.  Here is what he said during a debate on the Arab revolt: "It was at one of the  darkest periods of the war that Mr Balfour first prepared his declaration. At  that time, the French army had mutinied, the Italian army was on the eve of  collapse, [and] America had hardly started preparing in earnest. There was  nothing left but Britain confronting the most powerful military combination  that the world had ever seen." (That was the German Empire and the  Ottoman, of course, Empire, which we were going to destroy - intended to -  and the Austrian Imperial Empire). "It was important for us", this is Lloyd 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 10  

 George, "to seek every legitimate help we could get. The Government came to  the conclusion, from information received from every part of the world, that it  was very vital that we should have the sympathies of the Jewish community."  We certainly had no prejudices against the Arabs because, at that moment, we  had hundreds of thousands of troops fighting for Arab emancipation from the  Turks. Under these conditions, and with the advice they received, the British  government decided that it was desirable for us to secure the sympathy and  co-operation of that most remarkable community, the Jews, throughout the  world. They were helpful to us in America to a very large extent and they  were helpful even in Russia, at that moment, because Russia was just about to  walk out and leave us alone. Under those conditions, we proposed this to our  allies. France, Italy and the United States accepted it and Jews with all the  influence they possessed responded nobly to the appeal that was made. The  French army's mutiny and the potential collapse on the Italian front it seems  had more to do with promises for a Jewish national home than did Nehemiah.  But now the Arabs were demanding, practically, that there should be no more  Jewish immigration, Lloyd George complained to the Commons. We could  not accept that without dishonouring our obligations. It was not as if the  Arabs were in a position to say that Jewish immigration is driving them, the  ancient inhabitants, out. But Lloyd George grasped, if with too little gravity,  where the problem lay: "The obligations of the mandate were specific and  definite. They were that we were to encourage the establishment of a national  home for the Jews in Palestine without detriment to any of the rights of the  Arab population. That was a dual undertaking and we must see that both  parts of the mandate are enforced". But of course, both parts of the British  mandate Palestine could not be enforced and Nazi Germany's persecution of  it Jews in 1936, which Lloyd George specifically mentioned would turn into  the Holocaust, would ensure the existence of an Israeli state of Palestine  whatever have the right to the Arab population. By 1938 George Antonius  was saying quite clearly that, I quote: "The establishment of a Jewish state in  Palestine or of a national home based on territorial sovereignty cannot be  accomplished without forcibly displacing the Arabs." Antonious wanted an  independent Arab state in which as many Jews as the country can hold  without prejudice to its political and economic freedom would live in peace,  security and dignity and enjoy full rights of citizenship. Fearing what he  called an unpredictable holocaust of Arab, Jewish and British lives, help for  the Jews of Europe, he said, must be sought elsewhere than in Palestine. I  quote Antonius again and, remember in 1938: "The treatment meted out to  Jews in Germany and other European countries is a disgrace to its authors  and to modern civilisation. That posterity will not exonerate in any country  that fails to bear its proper share of the sacrifices needed to alleviate Jewish  suffering and distress. To place the brunt of the burden upon Arab Palestine  is a miserable evasion of the duty that lies upon the whole of the civilised  world. It is also morally outrageous.  No code of morals could justify the  persecution of one people in an attempt to relieve the persecution of another.  The cure for the eviction of Jews from Germany is not to be sought in the 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 11  

 eviction of the Arabs from their homeland and the relief of Jewish distress  must not be accomplished at the cost of inflicting a corresponding distress  upon an innocent and peaceful population".  It's astonishing that such  remarks, so pressing to the view of the Palestinian disaster a decade later,  would have been written in 1938. Yet there were others who foresaw future  disaster and future history, in equally bleak terms. Few people remember or  have come across this quotation from Winston Churchill in 1937. Reflecting  upon the future, Churchill had written of the impossibility of a partitioned  Palestine and had far more prophetically talked of how: "The wealthy,  crowded, progressive Jewish state lies in the plains and on the seacoast, 

 Palestine. Around it, in the hills and the uplands, stretching far and wide into  the illimitable deserts, the war-like Arabs of Syria, of trans-Jordania, of  Arabia, backed by the armed forces of Iraq, offer the ceaseless menace of war.   To maintain itself the Jewish state must be armed to the teeth and must bring  in every available, able-bodied man to strengthen its army. But how long  would this process be allowed to continue by the great Arab populations in  Iraq and Palestine? Can it be expected that the Arabs would stand by  impassively and watch the building up of Jewish world capital and resources,  of a Jewish army equipped with the most deadly weapons of war until it was  strong enough not to be afraid of them? And if ever the Jewish army reach  that point, who can be sure that cramped within their narrow limits, they  would not plunge out into the new undeveloped lands that lie around them."  Winston Churchill, 1937. "If Palestine should be partitioned", Churchill  concluded, "I find it difficult to resist the conclusion that partitionist scheme  would lead inevitable to the complete evacuation of Palestine by Great  Britain." And so, as they say, it came to pass.   

 John Bagot Glubb commanding the Arab legion in 1939 would comment  movingly that the Jewish tragedy owes its origin to the Christian nations of  Europe and America.  At last the conscious of Christendom was awake. The  age long Jewish tragedy must cease. But when it came to the payment of  compensation in expiation of their past shortcomings the Christian nations of  Europe and America decided that the bill should be paid by a Muslim nation,  in Asia. In 1997 a Palestinian humanitarian group in Scotland decided to mark  the fiftieth anniversary of the UN Partition Resolution, the end of the British  mandate, the Israeli war of independence and the Palestinian Nakba by  publishing a day to day account of events in Palestine throughout 1948.  Largely drawn from the pages of the then distinguished British newspaper,  The Scotsman,  a project that sometimes yielded devastating results. Here, for  example, is a despatch from a special correspondent recently returned from  the Middle East which appeared in The Scotsman  on the 13 th  of September  1948: "A new danger to law and order is emerging in the Middle East. It  comes from a loosely formed association of Arab terrorist gangs of hot-headed, xenophobic, young men who have sworn to rid their countries of all  Westerners and, of course, particularly of British and Americans. Open  threats have been made to Europeans living in Damascus, Baghdad and 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 12  

 Cairo, oil men mostly but if they continue to have business relations with the  Jews they will be killed. The backbone of this new terrorist organisation is  provided by young Palestinian Arabs. They have seen their country overrun  and have lost everything they possessed - homes, property, money, jobs, they  have nothing further to lose.  They feel they have been let down by the British  and the Americans, by the United Nations and also to some extent by other  Arab countries. They now realise there is a grave danger that the present  situation in Palestine with the Jews in total possession of the best part of the  country would be generally recognised and legalised.”   Another disturbing light into the future was cast in an article by Patrick  O'Donovan which had appeared in The Scotsman  on the 14 th  of July 1948. “The  war began as a simple war of survival, or so it seemed to the Jews. There was  a set of figures that every little sunburned child knew by heart: 700,000 Jews  against 30,000,000 Arabs plus the support of Britain. It seemed a victory every  time a Jewish settlement survived an attack. But the Arabs proved less  effective and the Jewish consent to the continuation of the truce was flouted.  It makes no difference that the consent was certainly given in the knowledge  that the Arabs would first refuse. The Jews have been free from any obligation  to hold their hand.  If Count Bernadot’s efforts fail then the Jews will wage a  war which, frankly, will aim at acquiring a maximum of Arab land - much of  which will be retained because it will be empty of Arabs and occupied by  Jews. In Haifa they have opened a ghetto for the Arabs. Four of the main  streets have been wired off and, just like the Jews in medieval Cracow,  Christian and Muslim Arabs will sleep and live her under guard. Business  men can apply for passes if they wish to emerge during the day. It will be  hard to visualise a more subdued and frightened population than the Arabs  left in Israel.”  Although the extent of Palestinian dispossession often appears to be a newly  discovered fact of Middle East history, at least until new historians like Benny  Morris researched Israeli government archives of the time, the British press  reported the Nakba in graphic detail. On the 25 th  October, for instance, The  Times  of London reported from Beersheba that the Arab villages are deserted.  Their miserable houses had been looted and many are burned. The  inhabitants, estimated to be about 20,000 - a number which had been swollen  considerably by refugees from the north, had fled and no-one knows or  apparently cares where they have gone. It is obvious that most have fled in  panic leaving behind their cloaks, sheepskins and blankets - so necessary if  they were to survive the cold nights of the Hebron hills. In Beersheba itself,  once a thriving centre for camel trading, a few inhabitants remain and at  present members of the Israeli army are systemically looting those houses  which survived the bombing. It is perhaps an ancient and tacitly accepted  rule of war that troops should make themselves comfortable at the expense of  the vanquished. But it is difficult to excuse the behaviour of some who  ridicule Islamic devotions in a desecrated mosque. Holy books have been torn  and strewn about the floor. Such a scene is disappointing to those who had  gratefully the care taken by the Israeli army to guarantee the sanctity of 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 13  

 Christian holy places elsewhere and by those correspondents who today  visited the imperial war cemetery just outside this town. In spite of the  difficulties under which they worked, the Arab caretakers to the last  obviously attended the graves of the British and Australian soldiers who died  here in 1917 and English flowers are still blooming in the desert sands.    

 Desecration and murder were not tools of one side in this war. Of course,  when the Israelis captured east Jerusalem in 1967 they discovered that  Jordanian troops had used Jewish gravestones for lavatory floors. Ambushes  and killings cut down many Jewish civilians although Israel's advance into  the Arab villages of Galilee was accompanied as contemporary search in  Israel has proved by massacres and sometimes the rape of young women. But  if Israeli historians have proved the truth of this, Arab historians have largely  remained silent about their own side's inequities in this and other wars. In my  own book on the Lebanon war I have written at great length about the  Palestinian dispossession of 1948, the subsequent history of those Palestinian  homes that were vacated by their fearful inhabitants and the fate of the  750,000 Palestinian refugees and their millions of descendants today -many of  whom rot in the squalor of camps in Lebanon, Syria, Jordan and in the  occupied West Bank. Following their travail the task of reporting their  hopeless political leadership, their victimisation, most cruelly demonstrated  when they were turned into the aggressors by an all powerful Israel and later  an even more hegemonic United States. And their pathetic, brave and often  callous attempts to seek the world sympathy have been one of the most  depressing experiences in journalism.  The more we wrote about the  Palestinian dispossession, the less effect it seemed to have and the more we  were abused as journalists. For throughout these long years there was one  outstanding, virtually unchanging phenomenon which ensured that the  Middle East balance of power remained unchanged: America's unwavering,  largely uncritical, often involuntary support for Israel. Israel's security, or  supposed lack thereof, became the yardstick for all negotiations, all military  threat and all wars. The injustice done to the Palestinians, the dispossession,  the massacres, not only the loss of that part of Palestine which became Israel,  and is internationally recognised as such, but also the occupation of the  remainder of the mandate territory and the bloody suppression of any and all  manifestation of Palestinian resistance. All this had to take second place to  Israel's security and the civilised values and democracy which Israel was  widely promoted. Her army, which often behaved with cruelty and  indiscipline, was to be regarded as an exemplar of purity of arms and those of  us who witnessed Israel's killing of civilians were to be abused as liars, anti-Semites or, of course, friends of terrorism. Report the wanton use of violence  by Palestinians, aircraft hijackings, attacks on illegal Jewish settlements and  then inevitably suicide bombings on the innocent, the executioner with  explosive strapped to his or her body and that was terror, pure and simple,  dangerously present but comfortably isolated from reason, cause or history.  As long as they were accused of crimes that had been committed because they 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 14  

 hated Israel or hated Jews or were brought up as anti-Semites, despite being  Semites themselves, or paid to carry out terror or because they hated  democracy or represented evil, most of these explanations would later be  adopted by the Americans about their Arab enemies, then Palestinians were  outside the boundaries of reason, they were generically violent, they couldn't  be talked to, they could not be negotiated with. You cannot negotiate with  terrorists.    

 Terrorism is a word that has become a plague on our vocabulary. The excuse  and reason and moral permit for State sponsored violence, our violence which  is now used on the innocent of the Middle East evermore outrageously and 

 promiscuously. Terrorism, Terrorism, Terrorism has become a full stop, a  punctuation mark, a phrase, a speech, a sermon, the be all and end all of  everything that we must hate in order to ignore injustice and occupation and  killing on a large scale. Terror, Terror, Terror, Terror, Terror. It is a sonata, a  symphony, an orchestra tuned to every television and radio station and news  agency report, the soap opera of the devil served up on prime time or distilled  in wearingly dull and mendacious form by the right wing commentators of  the American east coast and, I am sorry to say by many of my American  colleagues, also by some of the intellectuals of Europe. Strike against terror,  victory over terror, war on terror, everlasting war on terror. Rarely in history  have soldiers and journalists and presidents and kings aligned themselves in  such thoughtless and questioning ranks. In August 1914 the soldiers of  Britain, France and Germany thought they would be home by Christmas,  today we are told we are fighting forever. The war is eternal; the enemy is  eternal, his face changing on our screens. Once he lived in Cairo and sported a  moustache and nationalised the Suez Canal. Then he lived in Tripoli and  wore a ridiculous military uniform and helped the IRA and bombed  American bars in Berlin. Then he wore a Muslim imam's gown and ate  yoghurt in Tehran and planned Islamic revolution. Then he wore a white  gown and lived in a cave in Afghanistan. And then he wore another silly  moustache and resided in a series of palaces around Baghdad. Terror, Terror,  Terror. Finally he wore a Kuffia head-dress and outdated, Soviet style  military fatigues, his name was Yasser Arafat and he was the master of world  terror. And then he was a super statesman and went to the Whitehouse and  then again he became a master of terror linked by his Israeli enemies to the  terror maestro of them all: the one who lived in the Afghan cave.    

 Arafat's greatest error, his support for Sadam [Hussein], was to give him his  greatest and hollowest victory. Financially cut off by the wealthiest gulf Arab  states, especially Kuwait itself of course, and derided by the world, Arafat  shared the fate of King Hussein of Jordan, who also supported Sadam. He  was now weak enough to be accepted as a peace partner of Israel. The  Palestinians were not at first allowed to represent themselves, remember!  President George Bush's senior, Middle East peace, was to permit the  Palestinians to attend the Madrid Middle East conference only as part of a 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 15  

 Jordanian delegation. A delegation, moreover, in which Arafat was very  definitely not invited to participate and the Israelis would have a veto over  those who attended. In his theatrically arranged Kuffia head-dress, his khaki  uniform and his silly pistol, Arafat was now a strangely dated figure. A  revolutionary from the past who would soon have to put aside childish  things. Even the word revolutionary sounded odd. Arafat's revolution was  now over. For the half million Palestinian refugees in Lebanon who could  now never return to their 1948 homes in what is now Israel. For the final  settlement of Oslo was scarcely going to allow them to return to Haifa,  Natanya and Galilee, it was a betrayal. I could accept, an Israeli soldier told  me as he was helping to impose another curfew on Hebron in early  September of 1993, compared to the others Arafat wasn't a bad terrorist. What  an inventory on the revolutionary life of Yasser Arafat. Revolutionaries are  supposed to be intellectuals, Rosbeair, Lenin, Marx, Trotsky, AtatÃ¼rk, Naser,  Castro, Guevara. They wrote books or talked ground philosophy amid their  struggles, not so Arafat. He could rarely be seen reading books, let alone  writing them. What he had however, was single mindedness, something to  which Edward Said always paid attention and paid tribute. There was a  certain self dedication in this and a lot of arrogance but it was a great  strength. From start to finish it was Palestine, Palestine, Palestine. For the  Palestinian poor of course, his uniform and head-dress, fancy dress to us  Westerners and to the Israelis were necessary. Part of the binding of the  spirits amid exile, but those spirits were now to be abandoned. A new  rationale had been laid out in the Middle East. One which on a far greater  geopolitical as well as geographical scale continues to this day. It goes like  this: America is running a peace process, anyone supporting it is a friend, that  includes Israel and for time being it included Arafat as well unless he was  forced to metamorphose which he was back into being a super terrorist. It  also included Egypt and Jordan and Saudi Arabia, our friends in the Middle  East. But any Arab who believed that the Arafat-Rabin agreement was flawed  or who believes today that Washington's monumentally ambitious and  hopeless plans for Iraq and the entire Middle East are based upon lies or  deceit, anyone who opposed this policy, objected to it, disagreed with it,  however non violently, or said anything that might damage it was treated as  an enemy or, more specifically in the words of the US press, an enemy of  peace. Thus, by extension, anyone opposing America's policy in the region,  which also means opposing Israel, is an enemy of peace. The all embracing  phrase leads to grotesque distortion. When those Palestinian protesters  demonstrated against the Israeli dynamiting and rocketing of seventeen  houses in the Tofa district of Gaza in 1993 for example, CNN showed a tape  of one of the young men stoning Israeli troops. I remember this because I was  filming the same scene with a film crew for Channel 4 in Britain. But CNN's  commentary described the young men as protesting at the peace process. You  see if he was fighting Israel the Palestinian must be an enemy of peace, even if  that had been his cause of complain it was clearly regarded as illegitimate, yet  it was the PLO-Israeli Oslo agreement that in many Palestinian eyes 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 16  

 permitted Israel to keep both troops and settlements in the West Bank. It was  Arafat, for tens of thousands of his detractors who legitimised the Jewish  settlements because American newspapers and television networks also did  not want to be regarded as enemies of peace. Many in the West still did not 

 realise just how disastrously Arafat's peace accord with Israel was  disintegrating. Under the Oslo agreement you may remember the occupied  west bank would be divided into three zones. Don't go to sleep because I was  tempted to when I had to read the Oslo agreement about ten times. Zone A  would come under exclusive Palestinian control, it is actually sad to read this 

 now. Zone B under Israeli military occupation in participation with the  Palestinian authority and Zone C under total Israeli occupation. In the West  Bank Zone A compromised only 1.1 percent of the land. Whereas in Gaza, 

 overpopulated rebellers insurrectionally and now abandoned by Israel almost  all the territory was to come under Arafat's control. He, after all, was to be the  policeman of Gaza. Zone C in the west bank comprised 60 percent of the land  which allowed Israel to continue the rapid expansion of settlements for Jews  and Jews only on Arab land. Arafat, as Edward Said was the first to point out  had already conceded Jerusalem. He had already agreed that it would be  discussed only during final status talks. It thus fell outside the zoning system  remaining entirely in Israeli hands.    

 The truth was that Oslo, far from holding out the possibility of statehood  from the Palestinians, allowed Israel to renegotiate UN security council  resolution 242. Whereas 242 demanded a withdrawal of Israeli forces from  territory captured during the 1967 war, Oslo permitted the Israelis to decide 

 from which bits of the remaining 22 percent of Palestine they would  withdraw. The zoning system represented this new Israeli reality. The Israelis  had the maps, Oslo, incredibly, was negotiated without proper maps on the 

 Palestinian side and the Israelis decided which zones would be given to the  Palestinians as a gift, you see, at once and which would be haggled over later.  Indeed a detailed investigation in 2000 of Israeli withdrawals under the  articles of agreement would prove that not a single one of these accords had  been honoured by the Israelis since the 1991 Madrid conference. I'll just,  because we need to get the record straight, tell you what happened. The Oslo  2 Taba agreement concluded by Rabin in September 1995, two months before  he was assassinated, promised three Israeli withdrawals from Zones A, B and  C. These to be completed by October 1997. Final status agreements Jerusalem,  refugees, water, settlements would have to be completed by October 1999 by  which time the occupation was supposed to have ended. In January 1997  however a handful of Jewish settlers were granted 20 percent of Hebron 

 despite Israel's obligation under Oslo to leave all West Bank towns. By  October 1998, a year later, Israel had not carried out the Taba accords. Israeli  Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, negotiated a new agreement at Wye-River dividing the second redeployment promised at Taba into two phases 

 but he honoured only the first of them. You can see how journalists get tired  of this stuff; I mean the New York Times is not going to worry. Netanyahu 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 17  

 had promised to reduce the percentage of West Bank land under exclusively  Israeli occupation from 72 percent to 59 percent, transferring 41 percent of the  West Bank to zones A and B. But at Sharam El Sheik in 1999, Ehud Barak, the 

 new Israeli prime minister, reneged on this agreement, made at Wye-River,  fragmenting Netanyahu's two phases into three, the first of which would  transfer 7 percent from zone C to zone B. All implementations of the  agreements stopped there. You can't really expect many journalists to go  through this but if you work it out you see what was happening. In the  meantime the number of settlers illegally living on Palestinian land had risen  in the seven years since Oslo from 80,000 to 150,000. Even though the Israelis  as well as the Palestinians were forbidden to take unilateral steps under the  terms of the agreement. The Palestinians saw this not without reason as proof  of bad faith. Little wonder that by 1999 Edward Said, who had for many years  shown both compassion and understanding for Arafat's brave role as the sole  representative of a forgotten and dispossessed people, felt able to describe the  Palestinian leader not only as a tragic figure but as the Petain of the  Palestinians. The moment the Oslo Accord was revealed, the Israeli Likud  Party foresaw the end of Jewish colonies on Palestinian land. Netanyahu  claimed that these Israeli islands isolated in the PLO Sea will not last long. He  need not have worried. On the 27th  September 1994, when one hundred and  forty Jewish colonies already existed in the West Bank but when the Oslo  agreement was only a year old, the Israeli prime minister, Rabin, approved  the construction of an extra one thousand apartments at the settlement of Alfe  Menash close to Jerusalem. By 1996, 86.5 percent of east Jerusalem had been  removed from Palestinian residents' control and use [and] 34 percent of east  Jerusalem was expropriated for the building of Jewish colonies. The Jerusalem  municipality announced plans to build another 70,000 new housing units over  the next ten years. Then came the opening of the archaeological tunnel from  the Wailing Wall which ran beneath Muslim east Jerusalem. Violent protests  against the opening of the tunnel which was paid for by the Israeli ministry of  religious affairs left 43 Palestinians and 11 Israeli soldiers dead. We know, of  course, the history of the rest of this illegal colonial expansion which  continued throughout the Oslo peace process without active encouragement  from within the United States. On the 18 th  of April 1997, the New York Times  actually carried a full page advertisement signed by ten Christian spiritual  leaders, including Pat Robertson and Gerry Falwel and all the rest of our  friends, all supporting the continued sovereignty of the state of Israel over the  holy city of Jerusalem. "We believe that Jerusalem or any portion of it shall  not be negotiable in any peace process". What did Arafat think when he read  this? He didn't read it, did he? Jerusalem must remain undivided as the  eternal capital of the Jewish people. This spiritual message, as it was called,  claimed that Israel had demonstrated sensitivities to the concerns and needs  of all Jerusalem residents including the Palestinians and Israel's right to  Jerusalem as a sovereign capital came by divine mandate. In due course, as  we know, Sharon himself abandoned the settlements in the dustbin of Gaza  but went on building as he does today in the West Bank.  

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 18  

 

 What does this really mean? The dispossession of the Palestinians and the  construction of settlements for Jews and Jews only on Arab land? In 1993 I  made a series of films called  From Beirut to Bosnia  which were intended to ask  and to explain why many Muslims in the region of the Middle East were  coming to hate and despise the West. Our second film was about the  Palestinians in both Gaza and West Bank and in one sequence we found a  man, a Palestinian living on a little bit of land in East Jerusalem, who was  trying to hold onto his land but had been given an order to quit and get out  because there was going to be an Israeli settlement, part of the MaÃ¡le  Adomim settlement which is now the focus of attention by both the  Americans and Israelis. I would like to show you this short sequence in order  to show those of you who haven't been to Palestine-Israel what it looks like  when the bulldozers arrive.   [Movie starts]  [Narrator voice (Robert Fisk)] Jerusalem, holy to Jews, Muslims and  Christians has been illegally annexed by Israel which still claims it to be its  eternal and unified capital. East of the city, outside the internationally  recognised border of Israel, only a little bit of the old rural Palestine remains  and the huge Jewish settlements built on Palestinian land are now cities. A  ring of Israeli concrete around Jerusalem. It takes a brave Palestinian to hold  out here, to cling onto his own land in the face of Israel's expanding  settlements. But in this little patch of orchard is a family that has refused to  leave its land, despite an order to get out. [Bulldozer Noise]   Robert Fisk (RF): what is happening Sulleman?   Sulleman Khateeb (SK): as you see they are taking the land here.   RF: but, when you see this what future is there for you. This land is gone.  How possibility you hope to keep your land in the face of this?   SK: because we still in the land, we have our house in the land covered with  trees, with walls [fence], it is a “live” land.   RF: it is a living land.   SK: it is a living land of course.   [Narrator]   Mohamed Khateeb and his son had been told to leave their home to make  way for a settlement for Jews, some of them from as far away as Russia.   [Bulldozer Noise]  RF: Sulleman how long has your family owned this land here?  SK: we own it as long as we live. It is inherited from our grandfathers and  fathers as well.  RF: how many years do you think that is, more than a hundred years?  SK: yes  RF: do you have the documents to prove this. Do you have the original deeds  and paper proving ..  SK: of course we have, we have documents from the ottoman period and from  the period of the British mandate also. 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 19  

 RF: and you have your tax forms and you have your documents showing that  this bit of land that we are on now ..  SK: yes, all of this yes  [Pointing to Mohamed Khateeb, MK] RF: why is he fighting fro his land? Ask  him would ya?  SK: because it is his house  [Interrupting] RF: would you ask him?  SK [speaking in Arabic, translation]: why are you fighting to keep the house?  MK [speaking in Arabic, translation]: of course I will fight as much as I can. I  will not let the house go at all [to be lost], our soles will go before our house  will go. It is my property, the property of my father, my grandfather and  great grandfather. What do you expect?  Um Suleman [mother of Suleman speaking in Arabic, translation]: it is not  enough [referring to surviving of the land], we cannot eat, drink or sleep. We  fill ill due to all this trouble. Despite all this, are we expected to leave our  home? Where would we go? Are we expected to go and live in other people’s  homes? He [her husband] is sick and needs support and we both are elderly  and sick. Is not this oppression?  RF: Suleman, what is this document we have here?  SK: a warning for us to leave the house.  RF: this is the official notice to quit.  SK: yes  RF: this is in Hebrew. Do you speak Hebrew?  SK: no, not very much  RF: what have you done with this document? Where is the original?  SK: ah, we gave to our lawyer Jonathan Kuttab.  RF: Kuttab  SK: yes  RF: and he is in East Jerusalem.  SK: Easy Jeruasalem  [Narrator] Although annexed by Israel the centre of east Jerusalem is still  ostentatiously Arab. Israelis fear they will be attacked here. Israeli taxi-men  don't like to drive on this side of the city.   [Arabic music]  RF [reading a sign on the wall]: Palestinian centre for the study of violence,  [laughing] that sounds promising. Jonathan Kuttab there is our man.  Jonathan Kuttab (JK):  he was given a charge sheet saying that he has to turn  over his property to the state. But you see it was needed for public purpose.  RF: public purpose, meaning?  JK: hospitals, schools, roads, something that benefits the community. So we  were told the public purpose was a special scheme for building your own  home. I said wonderful. He has been trying very hard to build a home for his  son on this land [getting permission to build] and was told you could not  build on it. So if now he can build on it he will be glad to build a unit, a single  apartment here in return for turning over his property. He does not want  money, but he wants to participate in this wonderful public scheme. 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 20  

 RF: and?  JK: well, he was told, I’m afraid you are not a member of the public we intend  to serve. Because the only people who are entitled under this program are  either new immigrants or those who have served in the army.  RF: but he cannot serve in the army  JK: he said our army; it has to be the Israeli army. If the purpose for which  this confiscation occurred is to serve Jews and Jews only and excludes him we  object.  [Mr and Mrs Khateeb chatting in the chook shed]   

 [Narrator] Above Mohamed Khateeb's home the settlements continue to be  built and among the settlers moving in are Europeans. Sonya Layani was  born in France.   [Sonya and a man speaking in Hebrew]  [RF speaking in French and discussing the price of the houses in the new  settlement with Sonja Layani]  [Car noise]   [Narrator] Mikey Molad is head of the settlements resident's association.   Mikey Molad (MM): Arabs and Jews and..., here I’ll let you understand a little  bit about the geography. Over here where the minaret is the mosque is a  village is outside of Jerusalem.  RF: and obviously is an Arab Muslim village  MM: it is an Arab Muslim village called Chesmay, in front of us you see build 

 your own house scheme, where on the right of it we see an Arab house and he  is was owner of part of the land and he wanted to buy ..    [Narrator] Mr Molad has been following the story of Mohamed Khateeb and  the Palestinian's efforts to keep his land.  MM: …so we went to court  RF: because  MM: because this is part of my land and I’m willing for it again but I want the  right to buy on it and its in court and we will wait and see …  RF [interrupting]: why won’t you let him?  MM: because he is an Arab not Jewish  RF: do you think it is fair it is still in the courts. Shouldn’t the Israeli just say  fine this man wants to be with us!  MM: if you talk fairness maybe you are right but we live in a society that  there are certain laws and if I would have been him I won’t even try to go and  live within dense Jewish settlement it won’t fit and there will be problems.    [End of movie, Robert Fisk speaks to the audience]   

 I have to tell you, ladies and gentlemen, that when that series of films was  shown on the Discovery Channel in America after the first showing, twice on  each side of the United States, Israeli lobby groups attacked it saying it was  anti-Semitic and there were no further showings in either Britain or America.  We had hoped, of course, that Mohamed Khateeb might be able to keep his  home with the publicity that we tried to generate. Discovery is a well watched 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 21  

 channel around the world particularly in the United States. He was thrown  out of his home and with his old, elderly wife went to live in that village  called Chismay which as Mikey Molad, the leader of the settlements  committee pointed out, is outside Jerusalem. Another family gone.    

 The pumpkin, you see, of the Oslo agreement could never be turned into the  golden carriage of peace. But it took the collapse of the Arafat Barak talks at  Camp David in 2000 to prove this true. Even then Clinton was reduced to  claiming that the Oslo negotiations were based on UN Security Council  resolutions 242 and 338 which is not what Oslo said at all. And even Arafat  must have realised that the end had come when Madeline Albright made her  preposterous offer of "a sense of sovereignty over Muslim religious sites in  Jerusalem". Only the silly villages that Arafat might have controlled outside 

 his would-be capital would have virtually full sovereignty according to the  Americans. There then followed the wilfully misleading leaks to the effect  that Arafat had turned down 95 percent of Palestine. In reality around 64 

 percent of the 22 percent of Palestine was left. Barak would not give up  Jerusalem or abandon the settlements. Arafat would not make the concession  of ceding Israeli control over all of Jerusalem. So the sons of Abraham  acknowledged what so many Israelis and Palestinians knew all along: that  Oslo didn't work.    

 Clinton predictably saw fit to praise the stronger of the two parties, spoke of  Barak's courage and vision, but merely of Arafat's commitment. So much for  America's role as honest broker of the Middle East peace. Offered virtual  sovereignty to secure virtual peace the Palestinian leadership, corrupt in  defeat and undemocratic, preferred failure to humiliation, at last. But is  Palestinian now just a dirty word or is Arab the dirty word? Let's start again  with Edward Said who wrote among many other books, Orientalism,  the  ground breaking work which first explored our imperial Western fantasies 

 about the Middle East. After he died of leukaemia, Zev Chafets sneered at  him in the New York Daily News  in the following extraordinary words. "As an  Episcopalian, Said is ineligible for the customary seventy two virgins, but I  wouldn't be surprised if he is honoured with a couple of female doctoral  graduates". According to Chafets, who said the New York Post  spent thirty  three years in politics government in Jerusalem in journalism in Jerusalem,  Orientalism , Said's book rests on a simple thesis: Westerners are inherently  unable to fairly judge or even grasp the Arab world. Said, he said, didn't blow  up the marines in Lebanon in 1983, he certainly didn't fly a plane into the  World Trade Centre, what he did was to jam America's intellectual radar.  When I read this vicious obituary I recalled hearing Chafets' name before - so  I turned to my Beirut files and up he popped in 1982 as former director of the  Israeli government press office in Jerusalem. He had just published then a  book falsely claiming that Western journalists in Beirut, myself among them  of course, had been terrorised by bands of thugs and alleging in the words of  one US journalism magazine, that, the American press is engaged in a 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 22  

 conspiracy to defame Israel. So I got the point. You can kick a scholar when  he is dead if he is a Palestinian and kick a journalist when he is dead if you  want to claim he was murdered by Palestinians. Sean Toolem, according to  Chafets, an Irish journalist who was murdered in Beirut, was killed because of  what he wrote about the PLO. Actually Toolem was killed by a man whose  wife he was having an affair with. But nonetheless, journalists and scholars  are basically of the same chain of being at the moment. And now, as you  know, the same sick fantasies have been taking hold in Australia where that  determined effort was made by Israel's supposed friends to prevent 

 Palestinian scholar, Hanan Ashrawi of all people, from receiving the 2003  Sydney Peace prize. As you know too a Jewish writer in Sydney bravely  defended her, not least because the local Israeli lobby, in Sydney appeared to  have deliberately misquoted an interview she gave to me more than two  years ago. Distorting her words to imply - which she didn't - that she was in  favour of suicide bombing. Ashrawi is not in favour of these wicked attacks. 

 She has fearlessly spoken against them. She has said that she is willing to  devote her life to peace and justice with Israelis and Jews but, just as she was  abused when she spoke at Colorado University in 2002, so she was smeared 

 here in Australia by local lobbyists. Sydney University of course had already  withdrawn the use of its great hall for the presentation of the Peace Prize and  the Lord Mayor of Sydney, Lucy Turnbull, had dissociated the city of Sydney  as sponsor of the prize for the presentation.  How much longer must this go  on? Ashrawi, I noticed, was now being called by Mark Stein in, of all places,  the Irish Times  as an ageing bespoke terror of “apologist”. As a recipient of a  comparatively modest bunch of hate mail each week and to two American  readers I repeat, no, my mother was not Eichmann’s daughter she was in the  RAF in 1940. I am beginning to think this intimidation and filth is getting very  nasty indeed.  And it is getting worse. Said's work, as many of you may  know, was denounced in testimony to the US Congress by Dr Stanley Kurts  who claimed that the presence of post colonial history in academic circles  have produced professors who refuse to support or instruct students  interested in joining the state department or of course American intelligence  services. So now the house was proposing to set up an oversight board in the  United States with appointed members from Homeland Security, the  Department of Defence and the US National Security Agency that will link  university department funding on Middle East studies to students training for  careers in national security, defence and intelligence agencies. I have a feeling  Orientalism  won’t be on the book list. As Professor Michael Bedner of the  History Department of the University of Texas at Austin said: "The possibility  that someone in US Homeland Security would instruct college professors on  the proper patriotic American friendly textbooks that may be used in class  scares and outrages me". So is it goodbye to the life work of Said and goodbye  to peace prizes for Hanan Ashrawi? Goodbye to Palestinians in fact. Then the  radar really will be jammed. So my last words to you tonight. Watch out.  Thank you very much ladies and gentlemen.  [applause] 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 23  

 

 Questions and Answers 

 

 Pal Ahluwalia : Robert has very kindly agreed to take a few questions  and if  you would identify yourself he will ah  ask that person to come up to the  microphone and   RF: … first I’m going to have a drink of water if you don’t mind (gulp).   No  one’s going to ask a question, that’s great.  Anyone who puts a hand…   there’s someone over there, if you could come up to the mic which I think is    there you are you’ve got  a mic beside you.   

 Jack KING:  my name is Jack King.  I’ve been to the Middle East  three times   on peace missions.  I met Mr Arafat in 1991, he gave me his kuffia in  Bahgdad, I also went back in 2001 on a peace mission  with other mostly Arab  and er …  so I have an interest  I’m just describing…   

 RF:  uh huh   

 King:  … peace in the Middle East.  Now, when you consider all the facts that  you’ve revealed to us today,  what hope, what strategy can you envisage  could lead to peace in Palestine.  Is there any hope, can you see any strategy  on the horizon.   

 

 RF:  full implementation of   UN Security Council Resolution 242 which calls  for the withdrawal of Israeli  forces from lands occupied in the ’67 war,  in  return for the recognition of all states in the area which includes Israel.  I 

 think that remains the only only possible hope for peace.   

 [applause]   

 …the problem I think is   that you know after Oslo when the Palestinians  were injected with hope, many of them effectively said O.K. we’ll forget the  Palestine we lost.   Israel exists, we’ll accept 242.  They believed they were  going to get 242.  They were not of course, and I know Palestinians in Gaza as  well as in  the West Bank  who did accept the partition of Palestine, that’s  what we’re  talking about  and who no longer will do so.  They say O.K. if we  can’t have 242 we want  Haifa,  we want  Tel Aviv,   and that’s the problem  that the  injection of hope  has given way too early, if you like a poison that  nobody believes in hope anymore.  Look at Mr Khateeb, I don’t know if he’s  still alive.  I did go and see him after his ejection.  And that was Oslo  uhm, 

 but  242 is the only hope,  ah if you actually talk to Israelies, I don’t mean  spokesmen and members of the Knesset and certainly not the Sharon govt.  a  lot of them actually still say that 242 is not such a  bad  idea providing they  were safeguarded.  At the beginning of January of last year, there was a  public opinion poll in Israel in   (2.45)  which  more than ½ those people who 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 24  

 were asked about 242 said that they would accept international protection.   This is not what the Israeli  Govt. say, we don’t want the UN, we don’t want  the UN, but that’s what the Palestinians‘ve been asking for.  If the Americans  would commit themselves to be along the Green Line, the real Green Line not  the wall and the Palestinians could have that land back,  but you see Bush   announced the other day that there were new realities the Palestinians had to  accept , he was talking about that settlement,   MaÃ¡le Adomim  which I  showed you on the film.  In other words he was  himself Bush saying no more  242. So, no more 242 no hope.  (3.24)  That’s the answer to your question.     

 There’s a gentleman at the back over here.   

 [Inaudible] …Would you be able to explain what’s happening to the  Bedouin   South of Beersheba  with regards to their lands and the settlements in that  area.   

 RF:   I’m sorry I’m going to disappoint you.  I haven’t been South of  Beersheba  for two years and I’m the wrong person to ask .  I don’t know the  answer to your question.  I read the papers  on that including my colleague  Donald McIntyre in Jerusalem  on that.  Forgive me for not being able to 

 answer your question.  After that there probably won’t be any more questions  for me.    

 Yes, down here     

 Frederick TOBIN:  Robert,   Frederick TOBIN.  Robert, on our website we  have a panel of 4 items, each one looks different but it’s the same, it’s  Palestine. The first one indicates the size of Palestine, firstly with the green  colour … are you familiar with that map of Palestine?    

 RF:  repeat which map it was again..   

 FT:  it’s the one map where it indicates before the settlement, before Israel was  founded and after.   

 RF:  yes yes, I know the maps, not on your website but …   

 FT:  what’s your attitude towards this one state solution?   

 RF: well, I know what Edward Said’s attitude was.   …uhm, look if you look  through a Jewish perspective, not an Israeli one but a Jewish one and you do  believe that Israel is the last defence of the Jewish people, even if it happens to 

 be the most dangerous place for them to go much of the time, uhm I think  Israelis will not accept one state   and probably if I was an Israeli I wouldn’t  either.  But, I think the only hope is 242 which implies, though it does not say,  two states.  Ahm, I don’t think the one state is going to happen.  There are of 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 25  

 course leftists among the Israelis who  would support it  but  um I don’t think  it’s a going concern if you talk to the people on the bus from  Ben Gurion  Airport to Jerusalem or to Haifa uhm they wouldn’t wear it and therefore  I  think it genuinely is  not a starter.   I’m sorry to say that because you know 

 Arafat  used to believe in it.  The first time I ever interviewed him in 1981, he  used to, he always did the same, he would produce  a  Palestine pound note  from the British mandate and say “look look we can live together,  look it’s in  Hebrew here and in Arabic there”, same note.  And then he’d talk about how  wonderfully the Jews and the Arabs used to get on in British mandate  Palestine which was untrue, they didn’t.  Ahm, one of the problems of the  people who espouse the one state solution is they look back mythical religious  views of what Palestine was like after the British arrived and the problem is  you’ll find Arabs particularly who’ll say , Oh we used to  get on very well  with the Jewish doctor down the road.  Or the Israelis will say   I don’t know  why the Palestinians dislike us, we used to get on so well in 1935,  and for  several weeks in my car I was driving between the different locations where  people had told me about this and it was true that occasionally Arabs would  go [to] Jewish weddings and Jews would go to Arab funerals but by and large  there was great hostility between the 2 communities in the 30’s  and this  image which is projected of this mythical friendship and love being destroyed  by world war 2 and the British, the Americans and everyone else, ahm I think  is a very dangerous one and  I don’t see a one state solution.  I may be wrong  but I don’t.   

 Ah,  yes.    

 Robert Lawton: ah Robert my name is Robert Lawton.  One problem we have  in this country is that we have very little…   

 RF:  …you have several problems in this country   [Laughter]   

 RL:  what I’d like to talk to you about is the fact that we get very little ha  information about the internal politics of  Israel itself  and it’s presented in a  very monolithic fashion.  I know that that isn’t necessarily the case and that in  your last answer you touched just briefly on the views of some leftists within  Palestine.  I’m interested in possible political realities and changes in the  Israeli policy over say the next  ten or 15 years as best you can see them.  It  seems to me we’ve got leaders like Netanyahu coming back for a 2 nd  bit of the  cherry & I’m just wondering how much longer are we going to go before we  get  new leaders…   

 RF:  well everyone thought we had a new leader in Ehud  Barak  but he  turned out to be an old leader didn’t he?  Ahm, you know we Westerners,  when we go to Israel,  and this happens to me when I land at Ben Gurion  [airport], we all want to go and find those Israelis  who we know  will agree 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 26  

 with us because then we can all believe in the mythical Israel that really does  believe in purity of  arms and does want peace and will accept that the  Palestinians have a right to a state and so we go off to Mapam  and all the  other parties and I think it is actually a very unrealistic thing to do cos if you  then go and talk to people in cafes in Tel Aviv  you hear a different story.  Uhm and look you know  what Arafat’s rule, I’m not totally unsympathetic to  Arafat, I thought his death was pathetic and tragic but  Arafat’s rule and his  behaviour, his speeches, did a lot to undermine  Israeli trust in Palestinians,  unfortunately.  The idea that if he speaks in a mosque and says we’re all  going to Jerusalem, and the Israelis are not going to understand the Arabic  is  ridiculous of course they understood it.  Ahm, I think the real change might  come in the United States, not because the American govt will suddenly  acquire  courage, it doesn’t have any  on that front,  but the American Jewish  community is changing a  lot.  Read  Rabbi Lerner’s   Tikkun  magazine and  you’ll see that.  More and more Jewish Americans believe and of course  they’re being abused by Likuddists in the States, that the Palestinians have  suffered a great tragedy  and should have a state and they believe in 242  and  they say so publicly now.   They now have the same difficulty of getting in the  New York Times as Noam Chomsky has.  Ahm but as long as that continues  that is the one sort of political  hope for move at the moment.   But in a way  you see, if you’re in Israel you come to believe that the whole labour Likud  uhm battle doesn’t really involve the Palestinians at the end of the day they’re  all building settlements at the same rate.  I mean I know that Melbourne and  Adelaide are divided between Likuddists and the Labor party  but I don’t  think when you get  to Israel they really seem so different.  Ahm, you know  Rabin, the wonderful peacemaker and Nobel  you know Laureate  holder  with Arafat, he was the man who said break their bones,  ahm telling Israeli  soldiers to break the legs of Palestinian who were throwing stones.  Uhm I  don’t know I think Israel still has to undergo profound political changes   before it proves to be the country we would like it to be.  Of course they  would say, Oh you want us to give them more land eh Bob?  Yes 242 does  require that but Bush has now said effectively that the largest settlements will  remain,  and that means that Jerusalem has gone and I don’t know if Bush  understands what  he’s saying  in the practical sense on the ground.  But,  having just come from Iraq, it doesn’t only apply to Palestine.  Uhm, there  ain’t much hope at the moment.  Internally I don’t see the changes in Israel,  but I  do among the Jewish American community in the United States.   

 PL:  we’ve got a question up here, up here.   

 RF:  I can’t even see p there but go ahead.    

 …[inaudible]…  Thank you for a brilliant lecture,   

 RF:  you’re the first lady who’s  asked a question   X_ laughs,  RF thank you.   

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 27  

 Jane Sloan :  My name is Jane Sloan, ah, Professor Stuart Rees  is a friend of  mine,  he’s the Dir. of the Sydney Peace Foundation and of course the Sydney   Peace Foundation hosted the Sydney Peace Prize where Hannan Ashrawi     spoke and he received death threats as a result of his position and in  defending the decision to appoint the Sydney  Peace Prize to Hannan  Ashrawi , so too did the companies that were sponsoring that Sydney Peace  Prize and it was as a result of public pressure that the University  of Sydney   withdrew, as you said,  the availability of the Great Hall for her lecture. I just  want to say that I think that it’s really important that we acknowledge the  moral courage that people, including the University of Adelaide has shown in  staging this lecture tonight and I think   

 [Applause]   

 and I think we should all be writing to the university and praising them for  this decision because it seems too often that  it’s just the complaints  actually  lead  to  banning certain people presenting and ah er  it really seems  important that we applaud  the moral courage when it’s shown.  I’d also like 

 to hear from you what you think we could do  at a personal level to really  show our own moral courage  in the face of so much adversity.   

 RF:  uhm, go on writing letters to the newspapers, uhm, meet journalists and  try to persuade them to write  fairly on the Australian press, uhm, (audience  noise, RF chuckles), no I read the Australian press unfortunately for me.     

 Yah, do you remember that wonderful  exchange between Kathryn Greiner   and  Stuart Rees  over the whole question of Hannan Ashrawi  .  Can I read  you the 3 critical paragraphs, the actual quotes on the telephone?   

 KG was the former chairwoman of the Sydney Peace Foundation.    

 Greiner:  I have to speak logically,  it’s either Hannan Ashrawi  or the Peace  Foundation. That’s our choice Stuart,  my distinct impression is that if you  persist in having her here they’ll destroy you.   (Aside - they’ll)  Rob Thomas  of the City Group is in trouble for supporting us and you know Danny Gilbert  (Aside: Australian lawyer) has already been warned off.  

 

 Stuart Rees:  you must be joking, we’ve been over this a hundred times, we  consulted widely, we agreed the jury’s decision made over a year ago was not  only unanimous but that we would support it together.   

 Greiner:  but you’re not listening to the logic.  The Commonwealth Bank is  highly critical. (Burst of laughter). We couldn’t approach them for financial  help for the school’s peace prize.  (Aside: you see how it works).  We’ll get no  support from them.  The business world will close ranks, they’re saying we’re 

 one sided,  that we’ve only supported Palestine.   

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 28  

 

 Yes I think we should admire  Professor Stuart Rees.  We all get this same  thing as well.  Uhm, you know I don’t know,  I get more and more letters  from our readers in Britain and our readers in America ‘cos you know they  read on the internet  which I don’t use by the way, and, nor email, erm and  what they’re all saying is that there’s a detachment now between the sort of  democracy they believe in and what they get .  That the electors are no longer  obeyed by those they elect.   And this is a problem here too I know, it’s  certainly a problem in Britain.  I mean the Tory party has gone so much across  to the Labor Party that the press are the only opposition left in Britain.  And in 

 America it doesn’t matter very much whether you vote Democrat or  Republican because once they get into congress they’re all going to say the  same thing.   It’s a big problem and what you do individually I don’t know.  I  mean, I say writing to the press, demonstrations are not in theory terribly  democratic, uhm, but you all have a voice and universities have a voice.    Ahm, I guess lectures like this aren’t a bad idea, preferably without me, but  when I arrived in Australia  yesterday morning in the early hours I didn’t  realise it would take so long,  it ‘s my first visit, and I decided that we should  never have invented Australia  (laughter), but I don’t really know the answer  to your question  because I’m sitting in the Middle East in the middle of the  heat  and I just get all these letters from all these people basically saying the  same thing  what can you do.  Now I’ll tell you what I think you should do  actually,  I think you’ve got MPs and I think you should lobby them and  lobby them and lobby them.   I mean I was saying to 2 Australians of Arab  origin and 2 more today, it seems only in this new generation that Australians  of Arab origin as Americans of Arab origin have actually got up off their  knees and started to form groups which can put a point of view different  from the normal one in the Middle East, the one that George Antonius  was  talking about in 1938.  And it took people of Arab descent a long long time to  get their act worked out.  You know when I first went to the United States to  give lectures when I was invited by you know an Arab society or a Middle  East society, it was so badly arranged there was no organisation behind it and  the various students were all arguing with each other, you know the ones  from Syria, the ones from Iraq, e.t.c.  I think things have changed there but I  think people need to have lobby groups which are not run by  uhm  you  know people who  necessarily  come from the region.  I think it’s very  powerful to have groups of people who say we want to see this happen  because we don’t want injustice.  Not because it will affect them personally or  their family but because they don’t like injustice.  To that extent a powerful  lobby group which advocates an end to injustice in the Middle East, not the  Arab Australian community society for X  might be impressive.  But, that’s  about as far as I can go because I don’t  live in Australia &  I don’t like flying  so far to get here  either.  [crowd laughter]   

 Can’t see, oh there’s lots of people now, oh there’s someone down there.   

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 29  

 Adrian Miller:  Ah, Dr Fisk thank you very much for your work  and the  integrity of your work over many  years.  My name is Adrian Miller  and I’m  a member of the Greens.  With the Democrats we’re the true opposition  in  this country because the major parties are very similar.  Uhm today in one of  our well our only national ah paper which is a Murdoch paper  The  Australian, Clinton was reported to say that if he was in power for only  another 6 months he could have achieved peace in the Middle East , I’m  wondering what your response might be to that.    

 RF: He had a long time to do it anyway and he failed.  Ahm, every state  department  official, every Pentagon general, every ex-White house official  and advisor always says after they’ve left power, what they should have said  while they were in it.  … inaudible,  except Clinton, he came out of power,  (chuckles) and then blamed the Palestinians on Israeli TV.  No but, over and  over again you hear the Brazinskys, you hear the James Bakers,  the George  seniors  and they all come out and they  cease to have power and they can’t be  bothered by lobby groups any more, telling the truth.  What a pity they can’t  do it while they’re in there.  Tony Blair will do the same in due course, believe  me, when he relieves us of the reins of his power; ah he’ll come out and give a  very powerful speech about  the Palestinian tragedy and how  perhaps we  did get it wrong in Iraq, but in power it’s like a crustacean you cannot move  these people and its only when the president of the United States not the ex-president  says these things that they matter.      

 Anybody with a mic can go to this gentleman here.   

 [Inaudible]    

 RF how much longer can?   

 Ralfe Clark: How much longer can American client regimes in Egypt, Jordan  and  Saudi Arabia  and the Gulf States stay as is and if they change and  become far more fundamentalist or more hostile to the United States with an  overthrow of their governments  will that finally push the Americans to have  to seek a settlement  between the Palestinians and the Israelis?   

 RF: I think you fundamentally; I won’t say misunderstand, but get wrong, the  structure, the political system in the Middle East.  They’re not going to  change,  and they’re not meant to change,   and we don’t want democracy in  the Middle East.  We want to go on chopping up the Middle East like we did  after the 1 st World War.   Mubarak has produced this ridiculous situation  where  he’s going to have real democracy  but his party is going to chose who  can stand against him in presidential elections.  Ahm, and indeed we may see  his son Gamal  in power.  Why should the Americans change the Saudi  regime,  why should  … they want to keep them  powerful and they will do  so.  You know the whole purpose of the setting up of the Middle East  after 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 30  

 the First World War was to chop up  all these areas.  The great tragedy of the  Americans and it is a tragedy is that at the end of the First WW  all the  American diplomats in the Middle East , I mean they were Consuls of course  to the Ottoman Empire which was still dying and all the NGOS,  American  NGOS  wo of course were missionaries, they all said to the State Dept.  and to  the White House, Woodrow Wilson,  we should chop Turkey off and create  one modern Arab state  and France and Britain of course; uhm didn’t want  that.   We wanted to chop them all up and then they could have to rely on us  to defend them.   It’s a very sad thing that in 17 months after the end of the 1 st  WW , the victors drew the borders of Northern Ireland,  Yugoslavia and most  of the Middle East .  I’ve spent my entire professional career in Belfast, Bosnia  and most of the Middle East  and since my father was a soldier in the 1 st WW  much older than my mother I often say thank you dad, thank you very much  indeed.  Just look what your generation did.  That’s why  I called my new  book the Great War for Civilisation  because when he died aged 93 in 1992  on  the back of his 1 st WW campaign medal it said the great war for civilisation.   That’s, … in fact I’ve put , on the English edition, … that’s his medal.   

 But, going back to your original question, I keep saying to people I don’t  know, I wish I could give you a better answer.  Uhm, these states are not  meant to go democratic, they’re meant to stay as they are.   If we had  democracy in Egypt, the Muslim Brothers would be in power.    Of course  they would, but they’re going to remain technically illegal and all these  states   with their “states of emergency”  which every 3 years they say that they’re  going to end but they don’t; all these states effectively drive opposition 

 underground by saying your can’t have public demonstrations or public  meetings.  So the only place you can have your public meeting is in the  mosque.   Of course, that’s how the JamÃ¡a Islamiya   started in  Egypt  and  therefore they’re always going to say look we’ve got Islamic extremists, we  can’t raise the state of emergency we can’t have total democracy  like in the  West,  OH look what might happen!  And the message gets through, and  that’s the way the system operates unfortunately.     

 [Inaudible question  from audience]   

 RF:  when was the last overthrow in the Middle East?   

 [Inaudible reply]   

 RF:  “naah”      

 [Inaudible response]   

 RF:  Yes well not really, they wouldn’t like to hear that it’s outside the Arab  world.   There’s a lady down here who wants to ask a question.  A lady in red,  is anyone with a mic for her?     

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 31  

 

 [Inaudible response]   

 RF:  OK and then will come to you  afterwards.  OK go ahead.   

 

 Sue Gilbey:  My name’s Sue Gilbey  and I’d just like to ask what you  think  about a view tha Alan   Dershowitz,  in his book   Why Terrorism  Works  advocated & that was to  publicly announce that  as  a deterrent for  suicide  bombers that you could hang their parents or or murder the mother or or at  least…   

 RF…execute was the word he used   

 SG:  yes execute, yeah yeah…   

 RF: …mm granny first or the children yeah, that’s right  I know…  SG:  …mothers first generally .  It was generally mums but if there wasn’t a  mother or a sister would be an effective deterrent as well.  I was wondering  what your view was on that.    RF:   Ah it’s very Alan   Dershowitz, very Alan   Dershowitz,  I have clashes  with him on the radio  from time to time. He once said on the night of  September 11 2001, he said I was a dangerous man because I  was asking the  question why, which you mustn’t do   I was a dangerous man, I was anti-American  & that was the same as being anti-semitic.  And that’s my view of  Alan   Dershowitz,. The big thing about September 11 you see, is you mustn’t  ask the question why.  If you have a crime, well you don’t have crimes in  Adelaide, if you have a crime in Australia,   the first thing the cops do when  they arrive is  to look for the motive, but when we had you know the greatest  crime in humanity  in the United States the one things we were not allowed to  do was to look for a motive  because the pilots & hijackers were Arab and  they came from the Middle East and  we mustn’t sort of say Middle East  is  there a problem out there?  That’s Alan   Dershowitz, for you.     

 Is there  mic for this lady?    

  [Inaudible]   

 RF: It’s the thick end.    

 Audience female:  First of all I’d like to say thank you so much  for  the talk.   It was just brilliant to have someone such as yourself come  and speak, we’re  so so thankful to you for coming.  Uhm I’d like to ask you what your  perspective is on  the terror laws which have been recently  passed in  Australia  and also in the UK & the US and it seems that within  this debate  that  when we talk about lobbying our politicians  and the government and 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 32  

 wanting change  that this is happening right at this moment and it’s going to  affect significantly the civil liberties of people in Australia & in the western  world  & somehow we seem to be sitting quite silently and letting this  happen.  What’s your view on this.     

 RF:  Well I’ve only been reading in the last 24 hours  how exciting your terror  laws are  because in Beirut I’ve got other things to think  about  & I have in  Baghdad too.  I know a little bit about our own.  Yeah, the trouble is we  introduce these laws or our governments do which we love to elect and  within a matter of months some clever policeman has decided to misuse them   for other purposes within the peace community, keeping the peace.  Uhm,  I  don’t know, we had an 82 yr old man  who yelled nonsense at Jack Straw  and  who got almost charged under the anti-terrorism law  (chuckles) well done  Tony Blair, no wonder  he apologised. Uhm,  I don’t know  you see are they 

 going to use them to  try & touch us is the question isn’t it ah  that comes  through our minds.  I don’t know,  uhm I was a bit worried frankly when in  an  audio tape which I could have lived with out, just before the presidential  election in the United States last year uhm Osama Bin Laden suggested that 

 Robert Fisk was a neutral  reporter who could in some way pass  on Al  Qaida’s,    [Laughter]  …who could in some way pass  on Al Qaida’s views to the White House  & I  could see every computer in homeland security  burning red, (laughs), uhm,   Oh god, anti terror laws  are so boring because what it is you see is it is part of   the culture of making you frightened.  That’s what it’s about, a culture of fear.   When Bush said  that Sept. 11 th  had changed the world forever, it was a lie.   I’m not going to let Sept 11 th  change my life.  I’m not gonna let, forgive me,  19    Arab murderers  change my world.  Bush said they would.  They won when  he said that.   They won, that was the intention.  Ahm & America went along  with it.  The whole institution of homeland security is what Bin Laden  would’ve wanted  & once you inject people with fear , most of them will go  along with anti-terror laws.   They’ve got children, they don’t want to be on  the London tubes  on July the 7 th .  They don’t want to be in the twin towers  anywhere  & they’ll go along with fear.  I mean Arab leaders do the same as 

 well that’s the emergency  laws which the Arab world is so blessed with and  loves so much.  Ahm, that’s how you do it , make people frightened.  The  only hopeful thing is that, uhm,  is that when people are no longer afraid,  they will never be injected with fear again.  I mean one of the things that’s  happened in the Middle East is that  more & more people are speaking out 

 they’re not  so frightened of the Mochabarat [secret service] & the secret  police  & the torture chambers.  Ah what happened in  Lebanon in ’82 was   very important  the Lebanese stopped being frightened  of the Israelis & once  you stop being frightened you cannot be injected with fear again.  But, before  you’re frightened you can be  injected with fear  & that’s what your 

 government has successfully done in Australia.     

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 33  

 [Clapping]   

 [Inaudible]   

 Ah can you put the mic up again,     

 [Inaudible] … I was wondering if you could comment    

 RF:  I’m not hearing you sorry.   

  Francis NATHAN:  My name is Francis Nathan & I was wondering  if you  could comment on the increasing support of  the Christian fundamentalist   organisations in America for the state of Israel.   

 

 RF:  [laughs],  yeh, I gave a lecture in Berkley  not long ago and the Christian  fundamentalists were outside waving Israeli flags, they weren’t members of  the American Jewish community, they were Christian fundamentalists so I  went & stood beside them  and a lovely picture appeared in the local paper  in  which Bob Fisk is standing among all these Christian fundamentalists  protesting against Bob Fisk’s lecture.    [Audience laughter]  Look it’s a very funny situation because obviously  the  Christian  fundamentalists believe  that the Jews’ll have to convert to Christianity  &  those who don’t die at the battle of Armageddon.  Look, many of the lectures,  more than half the lectures I give in the United States are actually organised  by Jewish Americans.  The last time this happened and I had a fundamentalist  demonstration outside, it was in Las Vegas,  I went up to Jeffery  who is  Jewish  who was organising it and by chance the lecture was in a church  which had been lent to this institution which was an academic institution  for  me to talk in.  So I brought Jeffery into the  church I said look I’m going to   introduce you to the stations of the cross, you may need to know about this if  these guys win you know (laughs) He understood the point.   (30.22)It’s a crazy situation.  You can find this Christian embassy operating in  Jerusalem  I can’t think its going to last but its doing quite well  at the  moment.  I mean they actually have weekly meetings  at the Israeli Embassy  in Washington or in the Israeli Consulate in New York  for Christian  fundamentalists  & sort of  Likuddists come together  uhm very weird isn’t it  but  there have been you can see strange alliances  in the Arab Muslim world  but that’s   sure a strange alliance for Israel .   

 Houssam Abiad: I want to be a little bit selfish just want to bring up Iraq   RF: I thought you might.    HA: I mean besides the rise in petrol which we’ve all felt  on the pocket of a  do you think ah  the existence of the American troops and the Australian  troops in Iraq  will last longer as being that’s the first bit of the question  and  the 2 nd  bit is it helping the situation? 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 34  

 

 RF: Having the Americans in Iraq?   HA: and the Australian do you believe its helping?  RF:  Look you’ve got a very small contingent allegedly guarding Japanese  who don’t carry any guns haven’t you.  That’s basically it.  [Applause]   … And the Japanese I promise you, will leave.   And when they do you will  leave too. Erm, no the Americans is the issue. Not even  the Brits are in  trouble at the moment.   What my sort of equation is that I said this at an  interview with The Age yesterday, I think it was yesterday, uhm, the  Americans must leave Iraq,  and the Americans will leave Iraq and the  Americans can’t leave Iraq and that is the equation that turns sand into blood  and so many commitments have been made, democracy,   freedom, the new ,    etc etc etc, the path  to freedom…   

 [Interjection  words inaudible]   

 RF; can I just finish speaking for a moment… that what is happened  (interjection continues)  is that you cannot  at the moment get any kind of  future political path inside Iraq as long as American forces remain  but they 

 cannot leave in case the Iraq they have left behind will not be the Iraq they  want  and you cannot have anyone in Iraq believing in  the present  government however elected it was  as long as it accepts the American  presence.  Uhm, one of 2 things has got to happen, 1 is that the Americans  will start to negotiate with the insurgents.  They already are in a small scale in  places like Mosel,   & 2  if they really ant to get out they’ll have to persuade  and it won’t take much  persuading, an elected government of Iraq to tell  them to  leave.  The, they say victory, we’re leaving it’s a democratic  government.   Heaven knows what happens afterwards, the insurgents’ll be  in power I imagine,  be partly in power at least.    

 But the real danger in Iraq at the moment , you see is that we’re living on 2  forms   

 [… interjection]   

 we’ve got on the one hand,    [interjection]  we’ve got 2 levels of reality ,  I’ll just keep on talking and you’ll hear me over  the mic.  We’ve got the reality of the streets,  which is Iraqis  who are fearful  for their families, their kids going  to school being kidnapped, sold into to   prostitution, no electricity, no food, no money  & suicide bombers  and we’ve  got the other level of unreality,   who are the various officials living in the  Green Zone, the former republican palace of Sadam Hussein  who are talking  about paths to freedom and  elections and constitutions & constitutional  referendums etc  etc.  I promise you that   Iraqis I their homes are not 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 

 35  

 discussing constitutional referendums  & this is the problem. But in our part  of the world, uhm helped thanks very much to journalists  we’re still  encouraged to believe the mythical level the unreality is what’s actually  what’s happening in Iraq.  Uhm, an Iraqi woman came up to me last night  in  Melbourne said you know I actually  believed what I was told and I went  there in February 2004  and it was so awful I could only stay 10 days.  I said  that’s a long time to stay in February 2004.  And one of the problems at the  moment in Baghdad is that there is in existence what I call hotel journalism   and that’s  that many of my colleagues, not all,  the Guardian still travels and  the Independent  correspondent Patrick  Ckovern  & I still do; but that more  & more journalists like the AP,  Associate Press correspondents, they live  behind armed walls in hotels with armed guards.  So, they can’t go outside,  they don’t go outside, they don’t go on the streets; they get Iraqis to go on the  streets & come back & tell them what they see.  But you’ve got to go out in 

 Baghdad to understand what’s actually happening, you’ve got to go out into  the real world.   

 I’ll give you a little story, it’s actually quite funny,   there’s a restaurant called  Ramiah  Well it was called Ramiah  & it had a red neon sign & it always had  good Lebanese red  wine, you know it had an international menu and the  other day  on the last trip to Baghdad  I told my driver whose my weather  vane of fear, do you think we could go to  Ramiah  I’ll do it in ½ an hour, get  there eat & come out .  & he said, “Inta Majnoon?”, you’re crazy.  But we did  for ½ an hour and it was not the Ramiah anymore.   It now had a green neon  sign   with a Koranic title and the menu was no longer in Arabic, French and   English.  It was only in Arabic & of course there was no Lebanese red wine        It had been Islamicised, and that’s what’s  happening in Baghdad.  But it  doesn’t get reported because we don’t go to lunch anymore.  That’s just a little  microcosm of a story to show you.     

 One final thing  about Iraq and the whole thing about  what’s going to  happen & so on, for my book I was researching the British arrival in Iraq.  We  were kind enough to invade Iraq in 1917, after being told, by the way, by  British intelligence in Basra  that we would be welcomed. Ahm, Iraqis who  were fighting in the Ottoman army  were sent off to prisons in India where  they were abused,  no photos in those days of course. Ahm, when we arrived  in Baghdad,  uhm, the British commander put up a poster on the streets, a  copy of which I have in my home it’s on the wall while I’ve been writing my  book   which begins, it’s to the people of  the Muhafazat [districts] of Baghdad   & it begins in Arabic & English:  “People of  Baghdad we have come here not  as conquerors  but to free you from generations of tyranny”.  By 1920, there  was a full scale insurgency going against British forces and the first attack by  the British was made against insurgents in Feluga after a British officer had  been killed at a place call Abu Ghuraib, the British then surround Najaf  &  demanded  the surrender of a Shiite cleric who was also involved in the  insurgency.   British intelligence    & I’ve seen the paper, in Baghdad,  told the 

 

 Copyright, The University of Adelaide 

 36  

 Ministry of War in London  that terrorists were crossing the border into Iraq  from  the French mandate territory of Syria.  And just to finish the story,  Lloyd George,   our favourite Prime Minister,   stood up in the House of  Commons in 1920 & said,   if British troops leave Iraq, there will be civil war.     

 I leave you with that thought.   

 [Applause]     

 Pal Ahluwalia:  it remains for me to just say on behalf of  the Australian  Friends of Palestine and  the University of Adelaide, thank you Robert for this  wonderful lecture and we hope to see you all here for the next  lecture, ah,  Edward Said Memorial  Lecture next year.   

 RF:  Thank you very much.   

 [APPLAUSE]   

 

 [end of questions and answers session]   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

