---
title: "PM fails to meet backbenchers on Migration Bill."
date: "2006-08-03"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211296388
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2HGK6%22
---

  J. AUSTRALIA & Peter Andren MP - Independent Member for Calare 

  L%>>XWL! 

  M  e 

  d 

  a 

  R  e 

  1 

  e 

  a 

  e 

  1 

  S 

  3 August 2006 

  PM fails to meet backbenchers on Migration Bill 

  The Government has scheduled its obnoxious Designated Unauthorised Arrivals  Migration Bill for debate in the House of Representatives next week without seeking  further talks from dissident government backbenchers, according to independent MP  Peter Andren. 

  “Despite indications from the government at the close of the last parliamentary  sittings in June that talks with the concerned backbenchers would take place during  the winter break, there have been no further negotiations’ Mr Andren said. 

  “Not only that, but plans are now afoot to try and withdraw preselection of one of the  courageous backbench MPs, Judy Moylan, for daring to speak out on the  government’s inhumane immigration policies over recent years. 

  “With debate scheduled for Tuesday it seems the House of Representatives is again to  be treated with contempt by not receiving even the courtesy of a government  response to the Senate inquiry into the bill, which unanimously condemned the  legislation. 

  “This piece of legislation breaches our international obligations on at least four  fronts, notably its intent to turn back any further asylum seekers from West Papua  and make them return to the place of their persecution. 

  “In addition the bill provides for the outsourcing of our refugee responsibilities to a  cash-bribed Pacific island of Nauru which is not a signatory to the UN Refugee  Convention, deliberately removing asylum seekers from their rightful access to  proper medical and legal services. 

  “This is the ‘Appease Jakarta’ legislation and the government stands condemned for  wiping out recent gains in refugee treatment by acceding to Indonesia’s dictates. 

  “Unlike the post-Tampa and September 1 1 period when most Australians, sadly,  supported the government’s refugee policy, I predict a majority of Australians will be  appalled at this new Pacific solution, particularly in its treatment of children and West  Papuans. 

  “If this bill is rushed through the House next week, I hope the courageous dissident  Liberals receive strong public support and that enough Senators find the courage to  vote against this disgrace of our national character and international responsibilities,”  Mr Andren said. 

  For further information: 02 6332 6229 or 0419 612 891 

