---
title: "Keeping the peace: avoiding the cost of conflict in humanitarian aid: Speech to the International Alert Series: The Big Issues, Adelaide: 3 October 2006"
date: "2006-10-03"
creators:
  - "Hawke, Bob"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Humanitarian aid"
  - "International relations"
  - "Israel-Palestine conflict"
  - "Terrorism"
  - "Peace"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211298912
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YA3L6%22
---

 SPEECH BY THE HON R J L HAWKE AC  

 TO THE 

 INTERNATIONAL ALERT SERIES:  THE BIG ISSUES 

 "Keeping the peace; avoiding the cost of conflict in 

 humanitarian aid" 

 ADELAIDE, 3 OCTOBER 2006 

 

   I  congratulate  World  Vision,  AusAid  and  the  

 Hawke  Centre  for  their  imagination  in  establishing  this   International Alert Series - in their words - "as a means to  identify ways in which people can act and advocate for a  change  to  current  conditions  in  order  to  create  greater   freedom,  justice,  peace  and  opportunity  for  everyone  in   the world."  This is indeed a worthwhile, I would say noble,  objective and I am of course proud of the association with  it of the Hawke Centre at the University of South Australia.   

 

   If we are to address the issue of the avoidance 

 of  conflict  it  seems  to  me  there  is  one  essential  starting   point.  While traditional sources of conflict will remain, eg  ethnic rivalries, there is no doubt that we now live in a new 

 world  where  the  threat  of  terror  and  "the  war  against   terror" constitute the gravest source of substantial conflict  and indeed widespread conflagration.  I intend therefore in  the  brief  time  available  to  go  to  this  question  and  to   advance  two  practical  proposals  that  I  believe  are   fundamental  to  meeting  this  challenge  and  around  which   all  men  and  women  of  goodwill,  irrespective  of  party  or   faith can coalesce in support and persuasion.   

 

   The elements of instability- and the implications  for  appropriate  action  -  in  this  new  world  have  changed  

  2

 dramatically from the parameters to which we had become  accustomed  during  the  long  period  of  the  Cold  War.    During  that  period  the  threat  was  constituted  by  an   hegemonistic nation-State - the Soviet Union.   States and  forces of differing political persuasions were united against  a  threat  which  was  equally  offensive  to  the  Judaeo-Christian and the Islamic religious traditions.  The menace  of  Soviet  communism  made  allies  of  Bin-Ladens  and   Bushes.   

 

   But  with  the  dissolution  of  the  cement  of  anti-

 Sovietism,  restrained  hatreds  were  released  and  have   been  violently  manifested  from  September  11th  2001  in   New  York  and  subsequently  in  Bali,  Madrid  and  London.    This new conflict situation differs from the Cold War in two  fundamental  respects.   First,  at  that  time  the  enemy  was   identifiable  within  precise  geographical  boundaries  -  now   the  enemy  is  amorphous  and  not  capable  of  such  ready   identification.  Second, during the Cold War the concept of  Mutually  Assured  Destruction  (MAD),  while  not  morally   elegant,  was  practically  effective  in  ensuring  that  no  one   on  either  side  pushed  the  nuclear  button  in  the  well-grounded  apprehension  that  to  do  so  could  bring  about   their  own  demise.   Today,  significant  elements  of  the   terrorist  movement  not  only  do  not  have  any  such   apprehension  but  positively  welcome  a  glorious  passage   to paradise.   

 

   We  are,  in  consequence,  in  a  situation  where  

 there is no accumulated body of knowledge, no text books  written from decades of experience on which to draw on in  waging this new war.  And without attempting to make any  political point-scoring - for this is not the platform for such  an  exercise  -  I  believe  this  is  the  basic  reason  why,  by  

  3

 fairly  general  consensus,  mistakes  have  been  made  thus   far in the war on terror.   

 

   In  all  of  this  uncertainty  two  points,  I  believe,  

 stand out.  First, the forces of terror designate the United  States, the world super-power, and those deemed to be its  supporters  as  the  "enemy"  for  having  no  respect,   understanding  or  sympathy  for  Islamic  people  and  their   aspirations, and indeed for contemptuously acting against  those interests.   

 

   Second,  whatever  may  be  said  or  done  in  an  

 attempt  to  correct  this  extremist  representation,  which   resonates  in  so  much  of  the  globe,  nothing  effective  can   be  done  in  this  direction  while  the  festering  sore  of  the   Palestine  problem  continues.   This  issue  is  used  to   encapsulate  and  dramatise  the  "enemy"  syndrome  with   America and its deemed supporters cast as the villains.   

 

   It  is  imperative  therefore  that  an  entirely  new  

 approach  be  formulated  to  the  Palestinian  question,  an   issue which in any case cries out for resolution in terms of  the  aspirations  of  the  Palestinians  themselves,  and  the   security  of  Israel  and  the  region.   I  do  not  argue  that   resolving this issue resolves the challenge of international  terrorism  but  that  it  is  a  sine  qua  non  for  meeting  that   challenge.   

 

   The only proposition that can be advanced with  any  certainty  concerning  the  Israeli-Palestinian  crisis  is   that  everything  that  has  been  tried  to  this  point  has  not   worked,  and  that,  if  anything,  the  situation  is  now  worse   than  it  has  ever  been.   The  hurdy-gurdy  of  hatred  has  

  4

 spun  on  remorselessly  with  increasing  causalities  and   diminishing  hope.   The  cycle  of  hatred  and  violence,  I   repeat,  can  only  be  broken  and  a  positive  outcome   achieved by radically new thinking.   

 

   The  deficiency  of  every  past  proposal  

 addressing  this  issue,  including  the  so-called  Road  Map,   has been the exclusive or virtually exclusive concentration  on political matters to the exclusion of questions going to  the creation of a viable economic entity in Palestine. 

 

 

   In  looking  for  historical  support  for  such  an  

 approach  we  can  do  no  better  than  look  to  immediate   post-war  Europe  and  the  Marshall  Plan,  named  after  the   then  Secretary  of  State,  George  Marshall.   In  an  act   displaying  a  generosity  of  spirit  and  enlightened  self-interest  unequalled  in  the  twentieth  century  the  Truman   Administration  poured  billions  of  dollars  into  creating   viable  economic  entities  in  the  war-torn  countries  of   Western  Europe.   In  addressing,  practically,  the  needs   and aspirations of the peoples of those countries it did as  much  to  meet  the  threat  of  Soviet  hegemony  as  any   military outlays.   

 

   There is a general recognition, including among  the majority of Israelis, that the Palestinians are entitled to  their  own  independent  State,  an  outcome  that  was   envisioned  by  the  1947  United  Nations  Resolution   enabling  the  creation  of  the  State  of  Israel.   But  the   political  shell  of  a  State  lacking  a  viable  and  vibrant   economy is a recipe for even greater disaster.    

 

  5

     Palestinians,  particularly  young  

 Palestinians,  exist  in  a  dysfunctional  economic   environment  with  virtually  no  hope  of  employment  or   maintenance,  let  alone  improvement,  of  their  living   standards.   This  is  a  breeding  ground  for  despair  and   worse - while there is no hope among the young for jobs  and the constructive development of their talents there will  be no shortage of recruits for the martyrdom of the suicide  bomber.   

 

   What  is  required  now  is  the  equivalent  of  the  

 Marshall  Plan   The  United  States  should  take  the  lead,   with the support of Europe, the moderate Arab States and  Israel in making an unequivocal commitment to a massive  supply of capital, technical and educational expertise and  equipment  dedicated  to  the  creation  of  an  education   system and an economic structure that will give the reality  of hope to the Palestinian people.  

 

 

   The  World  Bank  should  provide  the  delivery  

 mechanism  and  technical  assistance  for  the  

 implementation  of  this  program  and  there  should  be  co-operation through the W.T.O. to provide a period of most  favoured  access  to  export  markets  for  the  products  from   the new economy.  The genuine commitment of the United  States  and  other  donors  should  be  communicated  and   detailed  to  the  Palestinian  Authority,  the  leaders  of  the   militant groups and, through television and other media, to  the people of Palestine and the region.   

 

   Nothing  could  do  more  to  change  the  anti-

 American  mind-set  of  so  much  of  the  Muslim  world  if   America  were  to  take  the  lead  in  such  an  initiative.   The   financial  and  technical  capacity  of  the  United  States  and   others  to  meet  the  requirements  of  this  initiative  is  not  in  

  6

 question.  What is required is the will and the imagination.   It  is  easy  enough  to  list  the  difficulties  that  may  lie  in  the   path  of  carrying  through  with  the  initiative,  but  that  is  the   counsel  of  despair  and  hopelessness.   If  genuinely   embraced,  I  believe  this  concept  can  mark  the  beginning   of  a  sea-change  in  the  poisonous  atmosphere  of  hatreds   and  misconceptions  that  threaten  the  very  stability  and   existence of the world as we know it. 

 

 

   I  have  spoken  about  this  concept  now  to  a  

 range  of  leaders  around  the  world  including  the  then   deputy  and  now  Prime  Minister  of  Israel  Olmert,  the  late   President  Arafat  and  many  others.   I  particularly  thank   Alexander Downer for his support and his facilitation of the  meeting with Arafat.  I would urge all of you to press upon  your Federal parliamentary representatives the desirability  of  the  Australian  government  using  its  warm  relationship   with the US administration to advance this proposition.   

 

   But you may well ask what is it that we can do at 

 a  personal  level  to  make  some  positive  contribution   towards helping to face these dangerous new challenges  of  our  times?   I  would  suggest  it  would  begin  to  make  a   huge  difference  in  our  country  if  men  and  women  of   goodwill  like  yourselves  were  to  make  a  personal   commitment,  individually  or  with  a  group  of  others,  to   engage  in  and  promote  dialogue  and  social  intercourse   between  Muslim  and  non-Muslim  members  of  our   community.   

 

   There  is  a  far  too  easy  tendency  for  non-

 Muslims  to  stereotype  all  Muslims  in  terms  of  fanatical   Islamists  who  invoke  their  God  to  justify  the  killing  of   innocent  people.   And  no  doubt  Muslims  will  have  a  

  7

 tendency to think unwell of us as they see the President of  the United States invoke his God to justify his counter-war  on terror which has seen the loss of tens of thousands of  innocent  lives  in  Iraq.   There  must  indeed  be  much   perplexity in heaven.     

 

   But  we  need  not  be  perplexed.   The  more  we  

 meet  together  and  genuinely  welcome  each  other  the   more  likely  it  is  that  we  can  dispel  misunderstandings  or   potential  animosities.   For  the  truth  is  that  the  

 overwhelming  majority  of  Muslims,  like  the  rest  of  the   community  have  the  same  aspirations  for  a  peaceful  and   stable  environment  within  which  they  can  achieve  an   improving  standard  and  quality  of  life  for  themselves  and   their children.   

 

   My  friends,  the  dimensions  of  the  humanitarian   challenge already facing the world are huge.  Twenty-eight  countries  are  host  to  over  ten  million  refugees  with  more   than  two-thirds  of  that  number  being  in  countries  with  a  

 per capita income of less than $2000.  In addition, within  another  twenty-seven  countries  there  are  twenty-one   million persons internally displaced by persecution, armed  conflict or widespread violence.  These are the most poor  and  wretched  of  our  world,  to  the  alleviation  of  whose   plight  these  great  organisations  World  Vision  and  AusAid   -  and  others  -  are  dedicated  and  they  deserve  our  full   support.   

 

   My  fear  is  that  we  are  facing  the  possibility  of  

 potentially  cataclysmic  events  that  could  vastly  multiply   these already daunting figures.  We are at a unique point  in history.  The technological genius of man has given us  an  opportunity  unparalleled  in  history  to  either  a)  lift  the  

  8

 standard  and  quality  of  life  of  all  people  in  a  way  never   before  achievable  or  b)  to  make  civilised  life  between   nations virtually impossible.   

 

   Let us do what we can in our own way, however  small, to tilt the world towards reason.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 R J L Hawke 

