---
title: "Parliament a sham of democracy: Andren."
date: "2006-06-20"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211294553
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/321K6%22
---

 Peter Andren MP - Independent Member for Calare   

 M   

 20 June 2006

 Parliament a sham of Democracy - Andren.    

 The cynicism and hypocrisy of the government in curtailing debate in the House of Representatives  on so-called urgent legislation has been exposed tonight with bills returned from the Senate with  amendments that won’t be considered until August, according to Member for Calare, Peter Andren.   

 “Only last week we had fuel tax legislation gagged and rushed through the House with no  opportunity for members to move any amendments, then today, the related fuel excise bills returned  with Senate amendments that won’t be considered until after the winter break,” Mr Andren said.   

 “The past week and a half of parliament has been an absolute travesty of democracy. We have seen  a gagging of debate on issues as critical as renewable energy, fuel tax concessions for rural business  and aboriginal lands rights in the Northern Territory.   

 “The government is also ready to gag debate on the banishing of refugees to Nauru if and when its  highly contentious Migration Bill gets the approval of dissident backbenchers.   

 “Today I moved a motion calling on the parliament to deplore the government’s abuse of  democratic processes in the House of Representatives.   

 “Of course I was also gagged after I read the details of the motion, but I had time to record on the  Hansard that ‘this is a dictatorship by the executive. This is a sham of democracy…’ before  government minister Tony Abbott moved the gag to save further justified embarrassment. 

 

 “In more than 10 years in parliament I have not witnessed the sustained abuse of parliamentary  processes that has occurred over the past fortnight.   

 “My motion today also condemned the majority of the media for its failure to critically examine the  erosion of democratic processes in the House of Representatives.   

 “Indeed the vast majority of the press gallery wandered off immediately after question time, as if  this daily circus is the only thing happening in the parliament.   

 “Today I called on the government to recognise the absolute right of all members - within  reasonable arrangement - to properly debate and seek to amend all legislation before the house.   

 “The government has refused to allow any non-government member to move amendments to any  legislation and today moved its own amendment to a renewable energy bill during a summing up  speech by the junior Minister for Veterans’ Affairs! 

 

 “The government should review its legislative program, extend the sitting program into July and  cancel overseas junkets until all legislation is properly debated as our constituents expect,” Mr  Andren said.   

 For further information:  Peter Andren - 02 6277 2341 or 0419 612 891/Tim Mahony - 0427-480-825.   

 

 

 e 

 d 

 i 

 a 

 

 R  e 

 l 

 e 

 a 

 s 

 e 

