---
title: "Asylum seekers tip of West Papua volcano - Andren."
date: "2006-01-19"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Papua"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Northern Territory"
  - "Regional conflict"
  - "East Timor"
  - "Comparisons"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211288687
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1YII6%22
---

 Peter Andren MP - Independent Member for Calare   

 M  e 

 d 

 i 

 a 

 

 R  e 

 l 

 e 

 a 

 s 

 e 

 

 19 January 2006 

 

 Asylum seekers tip of West Papua volcano - Andren   

 The arrival in northern Australia of 43 asylum seekers from West Papua should be  recognised by all Australians as a cry for help, according to Independent Member for  Calare Peter Andren.    

 “While we eventually played a belated role in securing the freedom of East Timor  from Indonesian repression, we have consistently turned our backs on the plight of  the West Papuans,” Mr Andren said.       

 “We supported a sham UN-sponsored referendum in 1969 that handed West Papua to  the Indonesians after it was abandoned by the Dutch.    

 “If we really care so much for the East Timorese, who were similarly abandoned to  the Indonesians by their Portuguese masters, then we should take every step possible  to win independence for the West Papuans. 

 

 “The message from the asylum seekers at Weipa, who include independence activists  and political leaders, is to “save the West Papuan people’s soul from genocide,  intimidation and terorist (sic) from the military government of Indonesia”.    

 “This is no exaggeration: since the so-called Act of Free Choice referendum of just a  1000 hand picked voters, several hundred thousand West Papuans have died in the  struggle for independence - at least equal to the 200,000 East Timorese losses in their  fight for freedom. 

 

 “Australia has not only turned a blind eye to West Papua, as it did for 25 years in East  Timor, but is renewing its military ties with the Indonesian military, including the  notorious Kopassus special forces unit held responsible for the assassination of West  Papuan independence leader Theys Eluay in November 2001.    

 “These arrivals on our northern shores bring a cry for our help, and the government  must now confront its shameful policy of see-no-evil, hear-no-evil, speak-no-evil in  regard to West Papua,” Mr Andren added.    

 For further information:  Peter Andren - 02 6332 6229 or 0419 612 891/Tim Mahony - 0427 480 825.   

 

 

