---
title: "Religion and politics in the Howard decade."
date: "2006-03-03"
creators:
  - "Warhurst, John"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Liberal Nationals Coalition"
  - "Christianity"
  - "Voter behaviour"
  - "Religion in politics"
  - "HOWARD, John, (former PM)"
  - "Conferences"
  - "Anniversaries"
  - "Privatisation"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211290328
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8IYI6%22
---

   1 

  Religion and Politics in the Howard Decade   

  John Warhurst 

  Australian National University   

  The Howard Decade Conference  Canberra, 3 March 2006   

  

  Introduction   

  This paper sets out to be comprehensive; therefore it discusses a variety of aspects of  religion and politics in the Howard decade. The rel igious factor generally means a  number of things in political analysis. One is the political activity of churches, the  organized face of religion, and the attitude of gov ernments towards those churches.  Another is the relationship between  religious affi liation and parliamentary  representation. A third is the relationship between  individual religious belief and the  voting behaviour of citizens in elections. This pap er covers all these aspects and more,  and tries to convey the overall flavour of religion  and politics during the decade. But it  does not discuss the spiritual/religious dimension of the politics of Indigenous land rights.   

  Religion and politics has a long history in Austral ia, most of it associated with  Christianity (Hogan 1987; Thompson 1994). In modern times the phrase has been used  about four themes. The first is the incorporation i nto s. 116 of the Constitution of a  particular relationship between church and state an d the subsequent interpretation of that  section by the High Court (Coper 1998). That sectio n reads: 

  The Commonwealth shall not make any law for establishing any religion, or for  imposing any religious observance, or for prohibiti ng the free exercise of any  religion, and no religious test shall be required a s a qualification for any office or  public trust under the Commonwealth   

  The second theme is the general association between  each of the major political parties  and particular Christian denominations, leaders and  followers. The third is the particular  association between each of the major political par ties and the members of particular  Christian denominations in voting at elections. The  fourth is the lobbying activities of the  churches, often about so-called moral issues, but a lso about the politics of education and  other economic and social policies.   

  In discussions of the religious component of Austra lian politics in modern times most  attention has been given to the link between denomi nations and parties in voting and  representation, Catholics with Labor and Protestant s with the Coalition, as well as the 

   2 

  denominational character of the Labor Party Split o f the 1950s that produced the  Democratic Labor Party. Judith Brett, for instance,  begins her survey of the literature as  follows:  It has long been recognized that the foundation of the Australian party system had 

  a religious dimension, with an affinity between the  main Australian nonlabour  parties and Protestantism and between the Labor Par ty and Roman Catholicism  (Brett 2002: 39)   

  This was the standard characterization of religion and politics that Marion Maddox  (2001:2-6) set out to move beyond in her early work . Since then she has become the  major analyst of religion and politics in contempor ary Australia (2005). It is also the view  that Brett has set out to revise by emphasizing the  positive connections between  Protestantism and the Coalition parties (2002 and 2 003). Nevertheless, with church-state  constitutional politics focused largely on educatio n and the DOGS affair and pressure  group politics concentrating on conservative religi ous lobbying, party politics took centre  stage. Little attention was paid to personal religi ous belief outside these parameters,  perhaps because it was assumed, conscience voting a part, that party discipline over-road  individual beliefs. Political leaders rarely chose to wear their religious faith on their  sleeves in an ostentatious way, reflecting not only  the pitfalls of party politics in a  sectarian climate, but also Australia’s political s tyle and culture.   

  Voting and Religion in the Howard Decade   

  After John Howard’s first victory in 1996 one of th e Liberal Party’s first claims was that  the government’s higher vote had reversed a number of its historic electoral weaknesses,  including a weakness among Catholics, by then Australia’s largest Christian  denomination. This was a new development (Bean 1999). Andrew Robb, then Liberal  Party federal director, claimed that “a 9% deficit among Catholic was turned into an 11%  lead’ (Robb 1997, p. 40). By the 2001 election the Australian Election Survey reported  that the Coalition still led Labor among Catholics by three points (45% to 42%) (Bean  and McAllister 2002). In 2004, while Bean and McAllister point out that Catholics are  more still likely to vote Labor than other denomina tions like Anglicans and Uniting  church members, the Coalition led Labor among Catholics by nine points (50% to 41%)  (Bean ad McAllister 2005: 323-24). The old alliance  between Catholics and Labor may  still have some have some relative strength, but in  absolute terms it has gone.   

  Throughout the Howard decade the Coalition has also enjoyed a striking electoral lead  among those who attend church regularly. Research into voting in previous decades  showed a similar, though not so clear pattern (Bean  1999). This phenomenon holds  across all denominations. By the 2004 election the Coalition lead Labor among regular  churchgoers (at least once a month) by 22 points (5 5% to 33%), while its lead among  those who never attended was just seven points (46% to 39%) (Bean and McAllister  2005: 324). This combination of strong support among church-goers and better  performance among Catholics has been an important element in Howard’s dominance,  and was to become the subject of political debate.   

   3 

  Changing Denominational Composition of the Political Parties   

  The Howard government is the first federal Coalitio n government in which Catholics  have played a major role. While this fact has been commented on from time to time  (Warhurst 2001; Yallop 2002), sometimes it is submerged under the exaggerated  concentration on the religious affiliation and pers onal religious background of one of its  senior ministers, Tony Abbott (Duffy 2004). This co ncentration culminated in the  February 2006 debates about the ‘abortion drug’ RU486 (see below). It is at its peak at  the time of writing.    

  Historically Catholic representation in the Coaliti on parties was minimal, almost non-existent. Rydon (2002: 39) notes “the almost neglig ible Catholic component of the non-Labor parties” in her survey of the Commonwealth parliament from 1901 to 1980.While  representation of Catholics in the Fraser ministry (1975-83) was still minimal, though it  did include Philip Lynch, Fraser’s deputy for a tim e, it had jumped dramatically 13 years  later in both the Liberal and National parties. Nat ional party Catholics included two  Deputy Prime Ministers, Tim Fischer and Mark Vaile, and the McGauran brothers from  Victoria. Senior Liberal Party Catholics have inclu ded Tony Abbott, Brendan Nelson and  Kevin Andrews to name just some current senior ministers. Prominent earlier Catholics  included Senate Leader Fred Chaney (1983-90) and Communications minister, Richard  Alston, Resources and Energy minister, Warwick Parer, and Aboriginal Affairs minister,  John Herron. By 2006, Catholics included new minister, Senator Santo Santoro, and up  and coming parliamentary secretaries such as Robb himself, Malcolm Turnbull and 

  Christopher Pyne. One step behind were senators George Brandis and Brett Mason.  Prominent in another way has been Senator Bill Heffernan, the Prime Minister’s  outspoken NSW party ally and one-time parliamentary secretary.   

  By contrast, the place of Catholics in their ‘tradi tional’ party, Labor, seemed much  diminished and less obvious despite Kim Beazley’s f ellow-travelling with the church.  Many of them appeared to be isolated in the Catholi c right faction, especially the NSW  Right, and the party’s culture and history did not encourage them to emphasise their  religious belief, because it stirred internal party  divisions and conflict. Most of the  leading humanists are in the Labor Party and severa l of them formed a cross-factional  Humanist Group in September 2000 to counter what they saw as the growing influence of  religion in parliamentary debates and decisions (Au stralian 16-17 September 2000)   

  What if any policy impact has this ‘catholicisation ’ had? There should be no uncritical  assumption that the increasing presence of Catholic s among Coalition parliamentarians  and growing Catholic voting support for the Howard government automatically meant  growing “Catholic influence” whatever that might mean. By way of comparison the  evidence suggests that the Labor Party did not favo ur Catholic interests directly during  the years of Catholic ascendancy in that party. In fact, the Catholic campaign for state aid  for its schools came to fruition not through the La bor Party but with the assistance of the  Liberal Party and the Democratic Labor Party (Hogan 1978). It was the Catholic Social  Studies Movement, led by B. A. Santamaria, and the DLP not labor that were seen as  evidence of church intrusion into Australian politi cs. However, it is argued that the 

   4 

  previous Catholic affinity to Labor has been a cons ervative influence in general on Labor  policies, especially through its opposition to soci alism (Thompson 1994).   

  Catholic Liberals, despite comments by Abbott about “catholicization” are inclined to  downplay the possibility of a particular Catholic i nfluence on their party. The policy  consequences of this shift has drawn attention main ly in relation to moral issues such as  euthanasia (Andrews) and abortion (Abbott), though it has led to an uneasy relationship  between these ministers and their church. David Mar r, in his celebrated attack on  religious influence in contemporary politics, is no t primarily concerned with Catholic  Liberals (Marr 1999). His targets are rather the Ca tholic bishops, former chief justice 

  Gerard Brennan and Independent Senator from Tasmania, Brian Harradine. But Marr  does allege:  Conservative Catholics have joined the Liberals and  have made the Coalition side  of politics more conservative as a result (Marr 199 9: 218). 

  

  Catholic influence is probably more about social co nservatism than bricks and mortar.  Nevertheless, the Howard government has continued Labor’s support for private  denominational schools, including the striking by t he minister, Nelson, of a very  favourable deal for Catholic schools with the Natio nal Catholic Education Commission in  2003. But one might have expected some moderating Catholic influence on social  welfare policies, of the sort evident in Harradine’ s refusal to support the taxation reform  package in 1999 and perhaps in Senator Barnaby Joyce’s (Catholic) concerns about the  2005 industrial relations reforms.   

  Greater attention has been given to the apparently greater role within the party of  evangelical Christians, also with a conservative mo ral agenda. Here attention has been  focused on the role within the party of the conserv ative faction, the Lyons Forum, a  faction in which Catholics have played a part but a ppear not to have been the driving  force (Maddox 2001: 199-244). The Lyons Forum actively pursued family-friendly  policies and appears to have been at its height in the first and second Howard  governments before some of its activists were eithe r defeated (its chairman, Chris Miles,  Braddon, Tasmania was defeated in 1998) or promoted into the ministry (Andrews in  2001).    

  In the third Howard government attention was focused more on the religiosity of leading  government figures, including Treasurer Peter Coste llo (a Baptist) and Nationals’ leader  John Anderson (an Anglican). This religiosity was d emonstrated in part by the apparent  courting by Costello, in particular, of leading eva ngelical churches, such as Hillsong in  Sydney (Maddox 2005: 163-164). By the time of the 2004 federal election it was this  relationship, and the rise of the Family First part y (see below) that attracted most  attention (Maddox 205a; Manning and Warhurst 2005).   

  Public Presentation of Religious Beliefs   

  More than any other federal government the senior members of the Howard government  have been active, in word and deed, in emphasizing (or at least being open about) its 

   5 

  religious credentials and beliefs and in emphasizin g the positive contribution of Christian  values to Australian society. One has only to compa re the approach of Howard-Anderson-Costello-Abbott, for instance, to Fraser-A nthony-Lynch to see that this is true  (Mutch 2004: 15-16).   

  The reason for this change over time is unclear and  might include a mix of favourable  international and domestic context together with th e particular personalities that just  happen to have emerged in leadership positions in t he Coalition. Howard himself has not  been the leading figure in this development, despit e the attention given to his personal  Methodism-cum-Anglicanism.    

  Nevertheless, whatever its origins, this has occurr ed to the extent that following the 2004  federal election it drew a response from Labor in t he form of Foreign Affairs shadow,  Kevin Rudd, who formed a party discussion group on religion, faith and values to educate  Labor colleagues and to warn them about allowing the Coalition to capture the growing  religious vote (Compass 2005). Rudd and other Labor figures, while revealing a typical  Labor wariness of the mix of religion and politics,  believed that “the Coalition is intent  on exploiting religion for political purposes” (Mar tin Ferguson) (Weekend Australian 27-28 November 2004). At the 2004 election the contrast with Labor had been made 

  somewhat clearer because Labor leader, Mark Latham, was a declared agnostic (Compass  2004; Maddox 2005a: 47; see also Latham 2005: 113-14). By 2005 the new Labor leader,  Kim Beazley, a Christian himself, had overcome his traditional aversion to mixing  religion and politics by speaking about his own fai th at an Australian Christian Lobby 

  conference in Canberra.   

  The second aspect of the public presentation of rel igious beliefs is more debatable in my  view. In her major work Marion Maddox (2005) argues that, just as in the USA, the  government has been speaking in code about matters such as values in education to  attract the support of religious believers as well as others who would not identify with a  church. It does this, argues Maddox, through “ambig uously Christian rhetoric” and “a  carefully pitched Christian right ‘dog whistle’ str ategy” (Maddox 2005a: 46-47). She  emphasizes Howard campaign strategies borrowed from the American religious right,  and supported by home-grown conservative religious activists and think tanks.   

  Government Appointments   

  The most controversial Howard government appointment in this context was that of  Archbishop Peter Hollingworth as Governor-General in June 2001 (Irving 2004:87-90).  Hollingworth at the time of his appointment was Anglican Archbishop of Brisbane.  Opinions vary markedly on the constitutional propri ety and/or political sensibility of  Howard’s choice (Maddox 2005: 310-11), but it certainly drew further attention to  church-state issues. Some argued that it was contra ry to the spirit of s. 116, while  Maddox convincingly argued that it was absolutely i n accord with the “no religious test”  segment of that section. Hollingworth was the first  member of the clergy to be appointed  Governor-General, though such appointments had been made in other countries and as  Governor by Australian states. Howard defended the appointment by reference to the 

   6 

  varied religious affiliation of previous Governors- General, such as the well-known  Catholicism of his predecessor, Sir William Deane, and the Jewish faith of Sir Zelman  Cowen.   

  The appointment should be seen as an attempt to cou nter the outspoken Sir William  Deane, whose social comment on Indigenous rights had a clear Catholic inspiration           (Stephens 2002). Furthermore, it was a counter-bala nce to the criticism the Howard  government was receiving for church leaders, includ ing other Anglicans. Later, in 2005,  at a time of considerable church criticism of the g overnment’s industrial relations  package, Howard appointed a prominent conservative Anglican layman, Prof. Ian Harper,  to head the Fair Pay Commission (Sydney Morning Herald 12 October 2005). Harper  soon rejected criticism of the industrial relations  reforms by the Anglican Archbishop of  Sydney, Peter Jensen (Sydney Morning Herald 14 October 2005).   

  

  Public Policy Debates and Conscience Votes in Parliament   

  The Christian churches played a significant public role in numerous policy debates,  including taxation reform, the treatment of refugee s and asylum seekers, and industrial  relations reform. These partisan issues are discuss ed in the sections that follow.   

  In this section attention is drawn to the role of t he churches in issues that were resolved  by the parliament in the traditional non-partisan w ay, by use of the free or conscience  vote. The first was the euthanasia issue in the fir st Howard term, 1996-97 (Maddox:  2005: 50-65), and the second was the issue of the s o-called “abortion pill, RU-486, in the  fourth Howard term, 2005-06.   

  There are similarities between the two cases beyond  the use of the conscience vote and  the party divisions that inevitably followed. The f irst involved a successful private  members’ bill moved in the House of Representatives by Kevin Andrews to overturn  euthanasia legislation introduced by the Northern T erritory government. The second  involved a cross-party private members bill introdu ced into the Senate by four women,  Lyn Allison (Democrats), Claire Moore (Labor), Fiona Nash (Nationals) and Judith  Troeth (Liberal) to overturn the ministerial contro l over RU486 exercised at the time by  Tony Abbott, the Minister for Health. Howard personally supported the first and opposed  the second (while the Opposition Leader on each occ asion, Kim Beazley, supported  both). The parliamentary debates each had strong re ligious-secular overtones, though this 

  was only part of the story and many other themes al so featured. Notably each generated  enormous religious (primarily but not solely Cathol ic) pressure group activity closely  associated with Catholic parliamentarians in both p arties, Labor as well as Liberal, and  Catholic church leaders. In 1996 it was the Euthana sia No! campaign and in 2005 it was  Australians against RU-486 (for a full page adverti sement by the latter see Australian 8  February 2006).   

  There are also differences, beyond the different ou tcomes. The euthanasia issue contained  an important states-rights element. It also had les s far-reaching connections to related 

   7 

  issues, while RU486 was linked to attitudes to ‘lif e’ issues such as stem cell research,  access to IVF, and cloning. The abortion issue, exe mplified by the four movers of the  bill, contained a much more explicit gender dimensi on, despite a suggestion that female 

  parliamentarians were also more pro-euthanasia (Bro ughton and Palmieri 1999). In 2006   only three senators out of 25 voted against the pri vate members bill.   

  In 2005 the issue of religion surfaced to an extent  rarely seen in Parliament (Shanahan  2006; 2006a). Abbott accused his opponents of a “ne w sectarianism” because they were  implying that a catholic could not be Minister for Health: “The last time this kind of  sectarianism and alleged inability of a minister to  carry out their duty in the national  interest was in 1916 at the time of the conscriptio n debate. I thought we had moved on  from there” (quoted in Shanahan 2006). Among those seeking change Senator Kerry  Nettle (Greens) was photographed wearing a YMCA T-shirt with the slogan “Mr Abbott,  Get your rosaries off my ovaries” (Herald Sun 10 Fe bruary 2006). This T-shirt became a  particular focus for the debate about the intersect ion between religion and politics,  including claims that it was offensive to Catholics  (Pearson 2006; Shanahan 2006a).   

  Faith-Based Delivery of Government Services   

  

  Privatization of the delivery of government service s has enabled some churches and  charity groups to successfully tender to participat e in the delivery of government  programs in several fields, including relationship counselling. As far as services to the  unemployed were concerned this opportunity arose with the privatization of the  Commonwealth Employment Service and its eventual replacement by the Job Network  program. Various church agencies were involved such as the Salvation Army’s  “Employment Plus” program.   

  Controversy followed in December 1999-January 2000 over allegations that both the staff  employment practices and the client practices of th ese Christian agencies might breach  the separation of church and state and infringe the  non-discriminatory nature of the  delivery of secular government services. The critic s included not only the Labor  Opposition and the Democrats but also Jewish community representatives (Sydney  Morning Herald 21 January 2000). Tony Abbott, Minister for Employment Services at  the time, jumped to the defence of the agencies and  charged critics with religious  intolerance (Australian 8-9 January 2000).   

  The controversy extended to the churches themselves, some insiders doubting the  wisdom of such a close association with government (Grace 1999; W.Brennan 2000).  Insiders were worried that the churches’ critique o f the government might be  compromised. In the case of the Catholic Church, it s agency Catholic Welfare Australia  was responsible both for the management of Centacare’s Job Network contracts and for  critique of government welfare policies.   

  Church Leaders and the Howard Government   

   8 

  The main Christian churches, Catholic, Anglican and Uniting, represented by the  statements of their leaders and leading agencies, h ave become a consistent element of the  opposition to the Howard government on some of the major issues of the decade (This  and the following section draw on my earlier work i n Warhurst 2004, 2005). This  statement needs qualification as it does not apply to all church leaders, some of whom,  such as the Salvation Army’s Major Brian Watters, have accepted government  appointments and some of whom have been most supportive pf particular public policies.  Catholic Cardinal George Pell of Sydney, for instan ce, offered critical and timely support  for the governments taxation and education policies  respectively just before the 1998 and  2004 federal elections (Warhurst, Brown and Higgins 2000; Warhurst and Manning  2005). At the time of the 2004 federal election he was joined by the Catholic Archbishop  of Melbourne and the Anglican Archbishops of Sydney and Melbourne. It does not apply  to all policy areas either. In the traditional area s of personal morality the churches have  generally supported government attempts to maintain the status quo, or at least to resist  moves in alternative directions. This included not only euthanasia and abortion (above),  but also same sex marriages. The federal parliament , led by the government but with  Labor support, made clear its opposition to same se x marriages just before the 2004  election.   

  But overall the assessment is correct and it predat es the Howard government. There has  been considerable church criticism of federal gover nment economic policies from the  time of the major statement, Common Wealth for the Common Good, by the Catholic  bishops in 1992 (Australian Catholic Bishops Confer ence 1992). The churches have been  consistent critics of the attachment of both major parties to market-dominated economic  rationalism as an approach to policy-making, as wel l as to particular economic and  financial policies, such as taxation reform. While generally unsuccessful and often  unacknowledged (Warhurst 2003), the churches have been one of the last of the 

  traditional institutions to resist the allure of th e economic nostrums of the so-called New  Right. There has been considerable church criticism  of social policies, such as mandatory  detention of refugees and asylum seekers, and infri ngement of Aboriginal rights (F.  Brennan 1998 and 2003). In foreign policies the chu rches have questioned Australian  military commitments to the Gulf and Iraq wars.   

  Some of this church criticism has been central to e lection debates and to the campaign  between the government and the Opposition. In the l ead up to the Howard decade the  churches were leading critics in 1992-93 of the the n Opposition leader, John Hewson’s,  Fightback! policies, especially the introduction of  a GST on food and essential services.  The tenor of church opposition continued when Howard moved to introduce a GST in  1998. Only then-Archbishop Pell demurred from the unified Catholic opposition on that  occasion by arguing that there was no single Cathol ic position (Warhurst, Brown and  Higgins 2000).   

  The most recent example occurred with industrial re lations reform in 2005. The Catholic  bishops, joined by many other Christian leaders suc h as the new Anglican Primate,  Archbishop Philip Aspinall of Brisbane, were united  in their concerns. Bishop Kevin  Manning of Parramatta expressed the wish that “in t he new legislation, our cherished 

   9 

  tradition of solidarity, mateship and fairness woul d not be dealt a blow in the name of  productivity and profits”. Pell was concerned that the reforms would effectively reduce  minimum wages and urged much wider consultation before the legislation was passed  (Catholic Weekly 10 July 2005).   

  The criticism was not solely of the Howard government, though this did little to mollify  Coalition members. Opposition to economic rationalism pre-dated the Howard decade  and applied also to the Labor Party. In 2003 Austra lian Christian leaders, joined by  Jewish and Muslim leaders, called on all state and territory leaders (all of them Labor) as  well as the prime minister to develop a national st rategy to reduce poverty This call was  repeated by Bishop Christopher Saunders of Broome, on behalf of the Australian  Catholic Social Justice Council, in May 2004. Saund ers argued that “We cannot be  content with our nation’s economic performance while so many are unemployed or  underemployed” (Australian Catholic Social Justice Council 2004). In June 2004 an  interfaith coalition of mainstream Christian church es also launched an anti-poverty  election campaign (Canberra Times 25 June 2004).   

  The Howard Government and Church Leaders   

  Paradoxically perhaps, given the general positive s tance of Government leaders towards  personal religious belief and towards the place of Christianity in the formation of  Australian national identity, the relationship betw een the Howard government and most  major Christian leaders has been strained to breaki ng point. According to the government  they have been speaking out of turn.   

  Howard has argued on principle of the churches that : “Their primary role is spiritual  leadership, which I respect and support”. He added;  I think church leaders should speak  out on moral issues, but there is a problem with th at justification being actively translated  into sounding very partisan”. At the same time, Feb ruary 2004, he said: “It’s a difficult  area. I don’t deny the right of any church leader t o talk about anything. But I think from  the point of view of stresses and strains when the only time they hear from their leaders is  when they are talking about issues that are bound t o divide their congregations”. He  implied that Coalition supporters would be particul arly offended by such criticism of the  government: “Some of the church leaders have been particularly critical of our side of  politics [and] they end up offending a large number  of their patrons” (Herald Sun 16  February 2004).   

  Such reflections by Howard followed numerous flare ups in the relationship since 1996,  including suggestions by back benchers that, becaus e of church support for Aboriginal  native title, rural churchgoers punish their church es by withdrawing financial support.  They also followed some attempts to mend the relati onship by some closed-door  meetings between church leaders and their co-religi onists in the ministry. But there is  little evidence in any improvement in the relations hip during the decade, and it was still  being fought out ferociously on both domestic and i nternational issues.   

   10  

  Foreign Minister Alexander Downer’s Sir Thomas Playford Memorial Lecture,  “Australian Politics and the Christian Church”, in 2003 is the most considered and  extensive elaboration of the Coalition government’s  position and can thus be used as an  exemplar (Downer 2003; reprinted in Sullivan and Leppert 2004: 13-20); Maddox 2003). 

  Downer’s lecture, delivered with obvious feeling, b rings together many criticisms, some  by prominent conservative journalists, of church so cial justice statements over several  decades. The lecture was damning, disdainful and ve ry personal in its critique of church  leaders who have spoken out against the government’s Iraq military commitment. His  targets included Archbishop Peter Carnley of Perth,  then Primate of the Anglican Church,  Downer’s own denomination, and the then president of the Uniting Church, Professor  James Haire.   

  Downer argued that the church leaders had misplaced priorities, caused perhaps by their  unhealthy attraction for personal publicity. He per ceived “the tendency of some church  leaders to ignore their primary pastoral obligation s in favour of hogging the limelight on  complex political issues”. It seemed to him that to o often “the churches seek popular  political causes or cheap headlines. And this tends  to cut across the central role they have  in providing spiritual comfort and moral guidance t o the community”. And again, “Apart  from disdain for traditional pastoral duties and po ntificating self-regard, how best to  explain the clerics who issue press releases at the  drop of a hat on issues where the mind 

  of the church itself is unresolved or not yet engag ed?”   

  The priorities of the church leaders were not to Do wner’s liking: “Those clergy who have  lost sight of the fundamentals have filled the vacu um with all manner of diversions. For  some, social work has become the be-al and the end- all. Environmental issue, feminist  and gay agendas and Indigenous rights provide const ant grandstanding opportunities”.   

  Downer regarded the tone of the criticism of church  criticism as intemperate. Here he  was referring particularly to comments by James Hai re. “I find the accusation of political  depravity-not just misguidedness in particular poli cies, mind you, but depravity-profoundly personally offensive as well as foolish.  That he was attacking both the major 

  parties is no comfort”.   

  He accused church leaders of having an anti-government agenda and of playing party  politics: “Most intoxicating of all, and most divis ive for their congregations, is overtly  partisan politicking”.   

  Finally, Downer accused his church opponents of misplaced certainty and ignorance. He  complained that “political and social judgements ar e delivered with magisterial certainty,  while utterances on fundamental Christian doctrines  are characterized by skepticism and 

  doubt”. He concluded: “The greatest challenge today  for leaders of all religions is to  forego the opportunity to be amateur commentators on all manner of secular issues on  which they inevitably lack expertise, and instead t o find the spark of inspiration to give 

  our lives greater moral and spiritual meaning”.   

   11  

  Downer’s statement remains representative. There has been no defence of the church  leaders or rebuttal of Downer’s position from withi n the government, despite the number  of Christians in its ranks.   

  Family First Party   

  The emergence of the new Family First Party (FFP) at the 2004 federal election was just  one aspect of the relationship between the Howard g overnment and evangelical  Christians (Stewart 2005). Despite the success of F FP it remains a less significant  phenomenon than the direct influence of evangelical  Christians within the Coalition.  Evangelical lobby groups, like the Australian Chris tian Lobby, are another element of  this evangelical story.   

  Leading ministers in the Howard government have clearly felt more at home with the  individualist aspirations and traditional family va lues contained in the messages of the  newer evangelical churches than with those of the m ore critical mainstream church  leaders. Moreover these churches have been growing quickly, though from a small base,  and could offer visiting political speakers large a udiences. For these reasons, the  Treasurer agreed to speak in 2004 and 2005 at the a nnual Hillsong conferences in  Sydney. As the 2004 election approached, considerable attention was focused by the  media on the growing alignment between the newer Christian denominations, generally  referred to as Pentecostal Christians, and the Howa rd government. In particular,  confirmation of the link was found in the suburban Sydney seat of Greenway, where the  Liberal Party’s candidate Louise Markus was a Hills ong staff member. Markus was to  win the seat from the Labor Party.   

  Family First had no national profile until shortly before that federal election, but had held  a seat in the South Australian state parliament sin ce its formation in 2002 (Manning and  Warhurst 2005). It boasted a strong supporter base among Pentecostal Christians,  especially the Assemblies of God churches. During t he election campaign the Coalition  agreed to exchange preferences with FFP and Howard personally encouraged the link.  FFP refused to give preferences to a lesbian Libera l candidate and to one or two sitting  Liberal MPs who supported same sex marriages. The exchange of preferences assisted  the Coalition, while FFP won a Senate seat in Victo ria on the basis of a 1.9% primary  vote and lucky preference deals with Labor and the Democrats among others.   

  The subsequent relationship between FFP Senator Fielding and the government has been  fraught. Fielding, while providing the decisive vot e to overturn compulsory student  unionism, has become a critic of the government on a number of issues including family-unfriendly industrial relations reforms. It remains  to be seen whether FFP is a party with  growth potential or a flash-in-the-pan. But for the  time being its growth and the  Democrats’ decline alters the minor party balance i n the Coalition’s favour.   

  

  

  

   12  

  Islam   

  The significance of the small and fragmented Islami c community in Australian politics  has largely followed September 11 2001. During the last four or five years the emphasis  in government pronouncements about Judaeo-Christianity as the centre-piece of  Australian values and identity may have served to i ncrease the isolation and alienation of  that community. At times, government leaders such as Peter Costello drew implicit  negative comparisons between Islam and Christianity (Mutch 2004: 16).   

  Apart from matters of security and terror the Musli m community has made few  interventions in public policy. Nevertheless, they share common conservative social  values with Christians. They also share common inte rests with low-fee Christian schools 

  and welcomed Labor’s education funding plan in 2004.   

  Conclusion   

  Not for the first time religion has had a heightene d profile in Australian politics during  the Howard decade. Just as in the 1950s Labor Split  (Costar, Love and Strangio 2005) the  overall impact of religious intervention appears to  have favoured the Coalition parties. In  fact, some elements of the story, such as the growi ng presence of Catholics in the Liberal  Party, are actually a long-term consequence of the Labor Split.   

  Nevertheless, the last decade is a more interesting  story. During the Howard decade the  influence of religion has been markedly more varied  and has crossed denominational  boundaries from the mainstream to the newer evangelical churches. Furthermore, religion  and personal religious belief has been much more pu blic. A cultural change has occurred.   

  

  

  John Warhurst  School of Social Sciences  Faculty of Arts  Australian National University  Canberra ACT 0200  John.Warhurst@anu.edu.au    

  6213 words   14 February 2006 

   13  

  

  

  REFERENCES   

  

  Australian Catholic Bishops Conference, 1992 , Commonwealth for the Common  Good . A Statement on the Distribution of Wealth in Aust ralia, Collins Dove, Melbourne   

  Australian Catholic Social Justice Council, 2004, “ The human costs behind the official  unemployment rate”, A Pastoral Letter for the Feast of St Joseph the Wo rker , 1 May   

  Bean, C., 1999, “The Forgotten Cleavage? Religion and Politics in Australia”, Canadian  Journal of Political Science , 32, 2, June,   

  Bean, C., and McAllister, I., 2002, “From Impossibi lity to Certainty: Explaining the  Coalition’s Victory in 2001”, in J. Warhurst and M.  Simms (eds), 2001: The Centenary   Election , University of Queensland Press   

  Bean, C., and McAllister, I., 2005, “Voting Behavio ur: Not an Election of Interest  (Rates)”, in M. Simms and J. Warhurst (eds), Mortgage Nation: The 2004 Australian   Election , API Network, Perth   

  Brennan, F., 1998, The Wik Debate: Its Impact on Aborigines, Pastoralists and Miners,  UNSW Press   

  Brennan, F., 2003, Tampering with Asylum , University of Queensland Press   

  Brennan, W., 2000, “Our quango which art in employment”, Sydney Morning Herald , 6  January    

  Brett, J., “Class, religion and the foundation of t he Australian party system: a revisionist  interpretation”, Australian Journal of Political Science , 31, pp. 39-56   

  Brett, J., 2003, Australian Liberals and the Moral Middle Class, Cambridge  University Press,   

  Broughton, S., and Palmieri, S., 1999, “Gendered co ntributions to parliamentary debates:  The Case of Euthanasia”, Australian Journal of Political Science , 34, 1, pp. 29-45   

  Compass, 2004 “ What our leaders believe”, Australi an Broadcasting Corporation,  Sydney   

  Compass, 2005, “Kevin Rudd and the God Factor”, Australian Broadcasting Corporation,  Sydney   

  Coper, M., 1988, Encounters with the Australian Constitution , CCH 

   14  

  

  Costar, B., Love, P., and Strangio, P (eds)., 2005,  The Great Labor Schism” a  retrospective , Scribe, Melbourne   

  Downer, A., 2003, Australian Politics and the Christian Church , The Sir Thomas  Playford Lecture, University of Adelaide Liberal Cl ub, 27 August   

  Duffy, M., 2004, Latham and Abbott , Random House Australia, Sydney   

  Grace, D., 1999, “Preaching the gospel of the Job N etwork”, Sydney Morning Herald ,  30 December   

  Hogan, M., 1978, The Catholic Campaign for State Aid , Catholic Theological Faculty,  Sydney   

  Hogan, M., 1987, The Sectarian Strand: Religion in Australian History , Penguin,  1987   

  Irving, H., 2004, Five Things to Know about the Australian Constitution , Cambridge  University Press   

  Latham, M., 2005, The Latham Diaries , Melbourne University Press   

  Maddox, M., 2001, For God and Country: Religious Dynamics in Australian Federal   Politics , Department of the Parliamentary Library, Canberra    

  Maddox, M., 2003, “God, Caesar and Alexander”, AQ: Journal of Contemporary   Analysis , September-October, pp. 4-9   

  Maddox, M., 2005, God Under Howard: The Rise of the Religious Right in  Australian  Politics , Allen and Unwin, Sydney   

  Maddox, M., 2005a, “Interlude: One Country under Howard”, in P. Browne and J.  Thomas (eds), A Win and a Prayer: Scenes from the 2004 Australian Election ,  UNSW Press, Sydney   

  Manning, H., and Warhurst, J., 2005, “The Old and New Politics of Religion”, in M.  Simms and J. Warhurst (eds), Mortgage Nation: The 2004 Australian Election , API  Network, Perth, pp. 263-270   

  Marr, D., 1999, The High Price of Heaven , Allen and Unwin, Sydney    

  Mutch, S., 2004, “Religion in Australian politics: a surfacing debate”, AQ: Journal of   Contemporary Analysis , September-October, 15-20   

  Pearson, C., 2006, “Bigotry makes a rebirth”, Weekend Australian , 11-12 February 

   15  

  

  Robb, A., 1997, “The Liberal Party Campaign”, in C. Bean et al (eds), The Politics of   Retribution , Allen and Unwin, Sydney, pp. 34-41   

  Rydon, J., 1986, A Federal Legislature: The Australian Commonwealth Parliament  1901 -1980 , Oxford University Press, Melbourne   

  Shanahan, D., 2006, “Abbott condemns ‘sectarian’ critics”, Australian , 9 February   

  Shanahan, D., 2006a, “Morally issues can’t be ducke d”, Australian , 10 February   

  Stephens, T., 2002, Sir William Deane: The Things that Matter , Hodder, Sydney   

  Stewart, C., 2005, “God gets a stake in affairs of state”, Australian  5-6 February   

  Sullivan, F., and Leppert, S., (eds), 2004, Church and Civil Society: A Theology of   Engagement , ATF Press, Adelaide   

  Thompson, R., 1994, Religion in Australia: A History , Oxford University Press   

  Warhurst, J., 2001, “Labor loses its Catholic Grip” , Canberra Times , 6 August   

  Warhurst, J., 2003, “Catholics and Wealth Distribut ion: The Voice of the Church”, in A  Fair Society ? Commonwealth for the Common Good: Ten Years On , Catholic  Social Justice Series, 46, Australian Catholic Soci al Justice Council, Sydney   

  Warhurst, J., 2004, The Church and Public Debate: Reflections on Speaking Out in  an  Election Year , Catholic Social Justice Series, 50, Australian Ca tholic Social Justice  Council, Sydney   

  Warhurst, J., 2005, The Churches, Our Governments and the Common Good , The  Seventeenth Concannon Oration, Concannon College, University of Southern  Queensland, Toowoomba, 30 August   

  Warhurst, J., Brown, J. and Higgins R., 2000, “Tax Groupings: The Group Politics of Tax  Reform:, in M. Simms and J. Warhurst (eds), Howard’s Agenda: The 1998 Australian   Election , University of Queensland Press, Brisbane   

  Yallop, R., 2002, “Catholics cross the floor”, Australian , 27 September 

