---
title: "A fairer balance between industrial relations and the economy: address to the National Press Club, [Barton, ACT]: 13 September 2006."
date: "2006-09-13"
creators:
  - "ACTU"
  - "Combet, Greg"
source: "COMBET, GREG"
subjects:
  - "Collective bargaining (Industrial relations)"
  - "WorkChoices 2005"
  - "Barton"
  - "ACT"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211298259
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WCZK6%22
---

 

 A Fairer Balance Between Industrial Relations  and the Economy   ACTU 13 September 2006 

 A speech by Greg Combet, ACTU Secretary, to the National Press Club outlines  how the Howard Government is losing the debate over its IR laws and failing to  address the real economic challenges facing Australia.  

 A Fairer Balance Between Industrial Relations and the  Economy 

 Greg Combet, ACTU Secretary Address to the National Press  Club, 13 September 2006 

 

 

 The Howard Government is losing the debate over the new industrial relations  laws not only because the laws are unfair. It is also losing because it has been  dishonest. It has failed to argue a case for the changes, choosing instead to try to  deceive people about the effect of the laws, and the motivation for them. 

 Here are some of the facts about the new IR laws. 

 The Government's new IR laws 

 Millions of people employed in businesses with less than one hundred staff have  lost protection against unfair dismissal. And as a consequence, they can be  sacked arbitrarily without any opportunity for independent review or redress. 

 Workers in businesses with more than one hundred staff can also be unfairly  sacked provided their employer cites operational reasons for doing so. And those  same operational reasons can be and have already been used to sack people and  offer them their job back on inferior terms and there are a couple of people who've  come all the way from Cowra today, one of whom was one of the meat workers'  delegates at the Cowra Abattoir and it's exactly what happened to them. Sacked,  twenty offered a job back, thirty percent pay cut. 

 In addition, the laws of course have changed the way in which minimum wages  are set in Australia and now the wages of more than 1.5 million people who  depend upon minimum award pay increases, they've effectively been frozen and  their ability to keep up with rising prices and interest rates is now in the hands of  this rather opaque and I think unaccountable institution called the Fair Pay  Commission. 

 Now this organisation touted that it was going to consult with minimum wage  workers in the new approach by going out into the community and talking to them  about their experience of life. When it came down to it they outsourced that role to  a public relations firm. 

  

  In addition, the laws of course have made very significant changes to the safety  net that has operated in work places for many years. The award safety net of pay  and employment conditions has been usurped by only five minimum standards.  This puts overtime pay, penalty rates, annual leave loading, public holidays,  allowances, career structures, the right to training, regular pay increases and a  host of other employment rights up for grabs. And it's the law of the jungle, if you  don't have the bargaining power to hold onto those things, you may well lose  them. They're no longer guaranteed. 

  Collective bargaining has been deliberately undermined in the laws in favour of  John Howard's individual employment contracts. The so-called AWAs, Australian  Workplace Agreements. 

  Now these things allow business to unilaterally determine people's pay and  employment conditions and deny people a say. There are some people here today  who've been employed by a contractor to the Defence Department and the  contractor's been re-let to a new organisation, Serco Sodexho. Some of those  people have worked for many, many years in the Defence Department including  entrusted positions. Positions which require them or oblige them not to disclose  the nature of some of their work. The new contractor has come in and said if you  want to keep your job now that we're taking over, you better sign this AWA, one of  John Howard's contracts and along the way you better cop a ten percent pay cut.  Three to five thousand dollars a year less for people who have loyally and  respectfully with dignity gone about doing their work in a responsible way, that is  how they are treated under the laws and that is precisely how the individual  contracts work. 

  There's no pay increase in those AWAs for five years other than what is provided  for by the Fair Pay Commission. They are denied the right to have a say and to  bargain. A specific and graphic example here in Canberra of how the laws are  affecting many people. 

  When these sort of problems arise of course the laws make sure that the Industrial  Relations Commission has no power to deal with them. It can't guarantee a fair go  for everyone any more. There's no where to go to resolve disputes. We've had  disputes recently, particularly in Melbourne at two large employers, where  delegates have been targeted for either redundancy or dismissal. Ordinarily a  dispute over such a situation might be able to go to the Industrial Relations  Commission for mediation and hopefully arbitration to resolve it, to test the  motivations of the employer and to ensure that fairness is delivered to the  employees and the employers. 

  Under the new laws, there's no alternative other than what was done in both of the  cases that come to mind at Amcore and at Boeing where the employees could see  the injustice of what had been done and they had no alternative other than to take  unlawful industrial action and put themselves and their savings and the Union at  considerable risk. 

  Union representation is directly attacked by the laws. Even the making of a claim  on behalf of workers for unfair dismissal to be included in a collectively bargained  agreement or an AWA, even making a claim that the employer not sack someone  unfairly is unlawful under the new laws and we can be fined up to thirty-three  thousand dollars for making such a claim and the employer can be fined up to  thirty-three thousand dollars if they agree to it.  

  Other things treated in this way are if we seek a role for a Union to represent  employees in a dispute settlement procedure, that's illegal. Thirty-three thousand  dollar fine. 

  If we ask for the right for employees to attend a training course in health and 

  safety or anything else, literacy, numeracy, you name it. If that course is run by a  Union, it is unlawful for us to ask for the right for employees to attend such a  course and we can be fined up to thirty-three thousand dollars. 

  Union activity in the building industry I think has been effectively criminalised. To  gather evidence of an offence, and it's not too difficult to offend the laws, the  Government can now haul people in for a secret interrogation. They can be  imprisoned for contempt for up to six months if they don't attend the interrogation,  if they don't answer questions, or provide documents, they can similarly be  imprisoned or if they disclose the content of the questioning to others including  their family, they face the same risk. 

  There is no right to silence under the building and construction industry laws for  workers, no protection from self-incrimination. This is treatment akin to alleged  terrorists and it's a breach of human rights and democratic principle and what's the  justification for it?  

  There is none. 

  The labour market shake up has also been complemented by abuse of the  Government's guest worker visa programme. Temporary migration visas are being  issued without sufficient opportunity being afforded to Australian citizens or  residents for the positions which are available. In some cases, foreign workers,  guest workers are exploited and paid substantially less than Australians and are  accommodated in unacceptable circumstances. 

  Overall these laws have gone too far and I think every fair minded Australian  person would agree. They have handed too much power to employers to yield  over employees.  

  The laws put downward pressure on the take home pay of many people,  particularly the low paid and this in truth is a key element of the economic  rationale behind the laws, a rationale that the Government doesn't want to talk  about.  

  The threat of the sack in combination with the power to impose individual  contracts is enabling the systematic intimidation of many employees to accept the  dictate of the employer and I cited the practical example a moment ago of the  employees in the Defence contracting position. 

  I recognise, and I've dealt with many people in the business community over a  long period of time now. I now there are many good people in the business  community who share very similar values to those that I'll talk about shortly. And I  know that many employers respect and value their employees. And I know that  many of them will not be motivated to use these new powers. 

  But the pressure in a competitive market position brings about behaviour to drive  down costs and that dynamic is already taking hold as a consequence of the new  laws. You might be the nicest person as an employer but if your competitors are  using the laws to drive down their costs, their unit costs, then you may well be  compelled to do the same. 

  The Government's own office of Employment Advocate has surveyed AWAs since  the new laws came in, surveyed the individual contracts and this is the evidence  they gave to a Senate Committee. Every AWA, the Office of Employment  Advocate examined (excuse me) removes at least one key award condition and  almost one in five of the AWAs eliminate all award conditions. Two-thirds of the  AWAs remove penalty rates and the same number get rid of annual leave loading.  More than half abolish shift penalty rates. A third cut overtime pay and more than 

  forty percent remove the public holiday entitlements the Government promised  would be protected by law.  

  As to the Government's argument that AWAs generate higher pay, this has all  been sort by workers and employers in a free situation of choice leading to higher  pay and productivity, the Office of Employment Advocate of course reported that a  fifth - over a fifth of these new individual contracts do not provide for any pay  increase at all. And of course these agreements, many of them run for up to five  years. 

  Now we know and we never claimed, that the sky is not falling in, a refrain that we  hear from the Prime Minister quite frequently. The sky's not falling in. The IR laws  are doing their work. But the IR laws are hurting many people. We never claimed  the sky would fall in. We're not fools but we know that changes like this will hurt  many people and the longer these laws are in place, the more people will suffer as  a consequence and they need to be properly argued and justified.  

  People's concerns are being borne out by their experience. It is indisputable that  people are being unfairly sacked and we have brought many cases to public light.  1.5 million people, it is indisputable that their pay is effectively frozen at this point  in time. One and a half million people and their independents. People are being  told if they don't sign the contract they won't get the job. That is a policy in the  Prime Minister's Department and Kevin Andrews' Department. You cannot get a  position there unless you sign an individual contract. 

  Some employers are indisputably targeting Union activists. AWAs are indisputably  removing overtime pay, penalties and public holidays. We have one hundred and  seven workers in Western Australia from the building and construction sector who  face fines of up to twenty-eight thousand eight hundred dollars each for taking  industrial action where they have no alternative in their view and I support them,  where they took industrial action to defend a delegate, a Union delegate, who had  been sacked. And ultimately in resolution of that dispute months ago we got the  issue heard in a private arbitration and it was found the delegate was unfairly  dismissed and arrangements were made to rectify it. Months later the  Government's Agency comes in and serves writs on a hundred and seven people  who now face fines. An action that we don't believe the construction contractor  involved supports. 

  ABS figures recently showed that increases in average weekly earnings for  workers have fallen to their lowest level for seven years and some economic  commentators have attributed this to the new laws and in particular the loss of  penalty rates. 

  That is some of the reality for working families under the laws. 

  But rather than accept that, accept any evidence of the injustice of its laws, the  Government has waged a smear campaign against the ACTU and worse, against  people who are ordinary working people who have appeared on our TV ads. It has  been asserted that we have mis-represented the position. 

  I want to say something to you very clearly here today. We have mis-represented  nothing. Nothing. And we stand by our TV ads and we stand by the people who  had the courage to get up and appear in those ads. 

  I expect the Government, as pressure increases in coming months will likely  intensify their smear campaign and I ask people to consider something. Just bear  in mind a few things about the performance of this Government which I think has a  disreputable history.  

  It lied about refugees throwing their children overboard. 

  It took the country to war over weapons of mass destruction that did not exist. 

  It makes the incredible claim that it knew nothing about AWB payouts to Saddam  Hussein despite repeated top level warnings into the Prime Minister's office.  

  And it spent 55 Million dollars of our money on patently deceitful ads to promote  their IR laws. 

  In the last election campaign it made misleading claims about interest rates.  Claims that we now know were of grave concern to Ian MacFarlane, the Governor  of the Reserve Bank, who only in recent days has indicated what he thought about  those allegations. 

  I'd like people to carefully consider the form of the players in this debate. People  should not be conned by the Government and we will not be intimidated by the  Government.  

  Union values and beliefs 

  Our campaign against these laws is going to grow and intensify because our  opposition to the IR laws is not confined to the specific elements of the IR  legislation. Our opposition is far more fundamental.  

  We have got different values, different beliefs and we've got a more positive  vision, not only for industrial relations but for the economy and the Australian  society. Unions do not want to go down the US road of widening inequality,  working poor, social dysfunction. We're opposed to the entrenchment of even  more power and wealth at the top of the tree. We are opposed to the increasing  alienation of people from the decisions which effect them in their workplace and in  their livelihoods.  

  We're fighting for a more fair and just society, one where the benefits of economic  prosperity are more fairly shared. We are fighting to ensure that people have  reasonable rights to mitigate the abuse of power by big business and we are  fighting for democratic rights and principles to improve the quality of Australian  democracy. We believe and we assert that economic prosperity can be achieved  in harmony with decent employment rights and the observance of democratic  principles. We do not accept that economic competitiveness can only be achieved  at the expense of people's rights at work.  

  And this I think gets to the heart of the debate about the Government's IR laws. If  the Government had the decency and the honesty and the courage to argue its  case it would surely assert that the employment rights it has abolished are not  economically sustainable. That is effectively what they are saying. It would assert  that business must be awarded the freedom to adjust to competitive pressure,  unencumbered by Unions, collective bargaining, obligations to treat people fairly,  or by minimum pay and employment conditions established by independent  institutions. Effectively the Government is saying we cannot afford this in the  Australian economy, these things must go. 

  By allowing business to take penalty rates off people with little bargaining power  on low pay, like cleaners and shop assistants, the Government seems to believe  that we are on the way to developing a truly productive and internationally  competitive economy.  

  Well, I think that is an insipid defeatist vision for Australia and its people. It's a  vision the Labor movement rejects. Australian people know it is garbage. The laws 

  are bad policy and they are going to hurt people the longer they are in.  

  The Rights at Work campaign 

  Unions are not simply opposed to the IR laws. We have a positive alternative. We  want laws based on strong Australian values. We would seek to have the following  features in any alternative industrial relations system brought in with the labour  movement support. 

  Firstly a decent safety net of pay and employment conditions in awards or  legislation that is able to be adjusted to take account of community standards.  One that ensures that the low paid in particular earn a fair share of the benefits of  prosperity.  

  Over and above the safety net, we support the right for people to collectively  bargain. A system of collective bargaining in which all parties are obliged to  negotiate in good faith.  

  Thirdly, we believe that people must be protected against unfair individual  contracts and we support Kim Beazley's commitment to abolish Australian  workplace agreements. 

  We believe there must be an independent tribunal to maintain and improve the  award safety net, to oversee the bargaining system and to guarantee fair  treatment and protection against unfair dismissal. A practical system. We never  argued that the unfair dismissal laws that we had were the ideal circumstance. But  you must ensure that people have a guarantee to be treated fairly.  

  We also believe that ensuring Australian employees can exercise their right to  Union representation, the membership and representation must be respected in  the law. 

  And we want to see the elimination of discrimination and artificial arrangements  that exclude workers from protection of the IR system -- things such as dodgy  corporate re-structuring, the siphoning off of funds and sham independent  contracting arrangements. People should have the protection of the system  available to them.  

  Those principles are the principles that the Union movement believe should be a  blueprint for a future Labor Party policy. 

  IR Policy Development 

  I believe those principles are more important to Australians than questions about  which constitutional head of power might be used to legislate them or the  jurisdiction in which those rights are delivered. 

  The Judgment of the High Court in the constitutional case against the IR laws that  was brought by the State Governments and Unions New South Wales and the  Australian Workers Union is expected later this year. It's important to bear in mind  that that High Court case is not a test of the fairness of the IR laws. That verdict  we believe is already in. Rather, the case in the High Court and the Judgment will  define the extent to which the Australian Government has the power to legislate  using the corporations head of power of the constitution. Now if the High Court  interprets that power narrowly, the Government's IR laws and its attack on the  rights of Australian workers will be in tatters and that is our desired objective and  that is why in the labour movement we support the challenge to the laws in the  High Court. 

  However, if the High Court interprets that power widely the Commonwealth will  have been granted broad powers to legislate national industrial relations laws and  this will have significant implications for the development of Union and Labor Party 

  policy. In such circumstances, speaking within the Union movement, I will ask the  Unions to support the use by a future Labor Government of all of the constitutional  power available to it to repeal the Governments' laws and legislate a decent IR  system based upon the principles that I articulated.  

  Now that will be a significant decision if it is taken. We will discuss it at our ACTU  Congress in about six weeks' time. But I am keen as an ACTU leader, to use all of  the available powers to establish a fair system for Australian workers and their  employers and if the business community wants to have a say in the development  of such a system, which it should in my opinion, but if it wants to have a say, it  would be well advised to break with the partisan advocacy of the Liberals' attack  on working people and Unions. The ACTU in particular is not interested in talking  to Liberal Party stooges who parade as business representatives. 

  I think, I think the economic circumstances demand greater responsibility and  imagination from the business leadership, at least those who are in public  advocacy. Less partisanship and better long term thinking and in particular,  business and big business has a responsibility to recognise that Australia is a  democracy and that we must as a society adhere to democratic rights and  principles and internationally respected labour rights. 

  Democratic societies do not hold secret interrogations of workers who go on strike  to defend a sacked Union delegate or who hold a stop work meeting. 

  That feature of the laws alone, should alert people to the fact that there is  something seriously wrong at the moment in this country. 

  Genuinely free and democratic societies appeal to what is best in people. They  respect one another. They encourage people to care for each other and to strive  for higher standards of co-operation and a sense of community. Democracies  respect the right of working people to freely associate and organise in trade  unions and they champion the right of working people to collectively bargain. 

  With big business support the Government has repudiated these values and  repudiated these rights and what sort of society would it be if they win? Who is  going to fight for justice? For people who are victims of companies like James  Hardie, if not the labour movement? Who would fight to lift the living standards of  the low paid? Who would fight to improve health and safety at work? Who would  fight to build retirement savings for working people? Who would fight to recover  people's entitlements following a company collapse? Who will guarantee a fair go  for Australian working people? 

  I'm not going to leave it in the hands of big business or the Liberal Party. We are  going to fight for those rights. 

  One of the giants of the twentieth century, in my opinion, Franklin D. Roosevelt,  knew that to avoid a repeat of the economic and political failures that had  contributed to the Great Depression, it was critical that the new deal in the US  delivered rights for working people and many of those rights survive in US law  today that he introduced. He knew that introducing rights for working people would  improve the quality of US democracy and if we want to defend and improve the  quality of Australian democracy, that recognition is needed here and now.  

  Australia is the only advanced economy where an employer can make a collective  agreement with the Union and the very next minute turn around to the employees,  repudiate its contractual commitment and require employees to agree to 

  substantially inferior conditions in individual contracts. It's the only country where  that can occur. It's the only country in the developed world where an employer is  not required to negotiate with a representative Union. Where the law mandates an  employer to say this, I don't care if you represent all of my employees, I am not  going to talk to you and I'll demand that your members sign individual contracts in  terms dictated solely by me.  

  And that's what operates under these laws and there are other people here today,  two representatives from a small operation in Adelaide, Radio Rentals, where  there is a dispute, where the employer targeted the Union activists, sacked three  of them recently and subsequently has locked the employees out for one month.  Their sin has been to seek a collective agreement negotiated with their employer.  Two of them have come up from Adelaide today because this is exactly what is  happening to them. Their employer is saying "Sign this or get out, we will not  negotiate with you or your Union". 

  Collective Bargaining Policy  

  That is why one essential remedy to the injustice at the heart of these IR laws is  the enactment of an enforceable right for people to collectively bargain.  

  The ACTU has been working for some months now on a new model for collective  bargaining in Australian workplaces. A delegation of senior officials, many of  whom are also here today, visited North America, the UK and Europe to  investigate the way in which those countries give effect to their international  collective bargaining obligations. They actually do something about it. 

  Earlier today, we launched the delegation's findings and the policy suggestions  they recommend for Australia and this will be the centrepiece, this report and the  proposed model we are putting forward of the policy to be considered at the ACTU  Congress next month.  

  The model for collective bargaining rights that we are suggesting represents an  entirely new approach for Australia. One which not only respects workers rights,  but which promotes co-operation, not division, and which promotes productivity  and teamwork in workplaces. It is a new approach because it puts workers at the  centre of decision making about the form of agreement that they will have. The  report argues for a policy that removes the right of employers to unilaterally dictate  the form of agreement their workers will have. It argues instead in favour of a  system where an employee, a Union, or the employees themselves will have  equal rights to initiate a collective bargaining process. Collective agreements will  be possible between a Union and an employer or directly between employers and  employees. But Union members as is appropriate should have the right to  representation at all times. 

  Now within that framework there are two key elements of the proposal that we are  advancing. 

  Firstly, that we argue - we argue that the law must oblige all parties to bargain with  each other in good faith. To collectively bargain in good faith and it empowers the  Industrial Relations Commission to help make that happen if help is needed. 

  Secondly, we argue that workers themselves must have a say when there is a  contest about whether there should be a collective agreement. For example, when  an employer refuses to bargain collectively and insists on individual contracts, we  believe that the majority view of the employees themselves should determine the  issue - give people a democratic say. If a majority of workers express their support  for a collective agreement, then it is our proposal that the Industrial Relations  Commission must ensure that good faith bargaining ensues and that the 

  26/09/2006 http://www.actu.asn.au/cgi-bin/printpage/printpage.pl

  employees' decision is respected. And if it is not, then as a last resort we advocate  that the Commission should be able to arbitrate to resolve intractable disputes. 

  Now that proposal, good faith collective bargaining, between an employer, a Union  and employees, and the right for a majority of workers to decide what form of  agreement should be negotiated by them or on their behalf, these things are  fundamental democratic principles in our opinion and they are the foundation of  the proposals that we are advancing. We want to give people a say in their own  workplace, just as it is fair to elect a Government by majority, we believe it is fair  for a majority of employees to democratically decide what form of agreement  should apply to them.  

  Now the Government has already declared its opposition to our ideas, not  surprisingly. They want to maintain an employer monopoly on the form of  bargaining that takes place.  

  Kevin Andrews, the Workplace Minister, says that good faith collective bargaining  means compulsory Unionism. I haven't worked out exactly how that could be. I  just think it's so stupid and ridiculous that it is unworthy of a response.  

  John Howard says that individuals will be denied their right to an individual  contract if that's what they want. This is misleading and it is wrong. Collective  agreements on our proposal would certainly bind all employees. But there would  be nothing to stop an employee and an employer agreeing to an improvement or  some sensible flexibility which does not undercut the collective agreement and  common law arrangements such as that have always been available and we  support their continuing use. 

  Of course in the real industrial world, the Government always opposes flexibility  for individuals when it matters. It supports it for employers but not for working  people. Unions have been seeking for example, the right for some time now, for a  woman to return to part-time work after a period of maternity leave but we have  been opposed every step of the way by the Government for that sort of flexibility  on an individual basis. 

  Kim Beazley's policy statement in recent days in support of collective bargaining  and in support of the views of the majority of workers, means that there is now a  very clear policy difference developing between Labor and the Coalition on  industrial relations and we are very pleased to see it. This argument will get down  to John Howard's individual contracts and Kim Beazley's collective bargaining.  And individual contracts have never been a path to economy wide productivity and  growth. New Zealand in the 1990s was proof enough of that for those of you that  are familiar with it or not familiar with it, people were pushed onto individual  contracts in exactly the same way and productivity fell relative to Australia and  what was going on here at the time, we had engaged upon the path to  decentralised enterprise bargaining on a collective basis and productivity grew  significantly and it has been the basis in a significant way of the sustained  economic growth we have had. 

  As a nation I think it's imperative that we ultimately resolve these industrial  relations issues in an appropriate way and with a decent outcome for working  people in this country because we need to get onto the real economic issues that  are not being addressed. The path to improved productivity and prosperity is not  going to be through John Howard's IR obsession. It will involve dealing with the  real economic challenges facing this country.  

  Australia's Economic Future 

  After more than a decade of Coalition Government we are experiencing an 

  unprecedented skills shortage; significant infrastructure blockages; a collapsing  manufacturing base -- and there's no one at the national level driving the debate  about innovation and productivity.  

  These issues should be at the forefront of national political debate and yet they  are in John Howard's blind spot and are now Labor's opportunity.  

  The sustained boom we've experienced for fourteen years has provided a unique  opportunity to tackle long term economic capacity constraints that we now face,  but it's been completely squandered, the opportunity is being lost. The  Government has been content to rely heavily upon household debt and  consumption as the key driver of economic growth and that has been the main  driver for the large part of the current business cycle that we've been experiencing  and it is the source of interest rate sensitivity in the electorate and it cannot  continue. Growth is already slowing.  

  The challenge now is to identify the new drivers of economic growth and to tackle  the serious capacity constraints on growth and productivity and the first constraint  on growth that has to be tackled is the skills shortage. It requires a substantial  investment in education and training. The Government has overseen a decline in  the proportion of GDP which is dedicated to education and skill development. Its  priority, unbelievably in post secondary education is to compel institutions to offer  individual contracts, otherwise they'll lose their funding. That's the Government's  priority and it will not fix the skills shortage and neither will the Government's  unpopular and abused guest worker visa programme. A major boost in genuine  trades apprenticeships is needed. We need to continue to improve on Year 12  completion rates and at a tertiary level places - more places are needed in  engineering and acquired science disciplines.  

  I think we've got to consider a major scholarship programme in particular to  ensure that young people, who've got the ambition, the capacity, the intellect and  the drive to contribute to the country, who want to get ahead that they have the  opportunity to get tertiary places in the areas where they are needed and they  achieve some financial support for doing so. They cannot - we cannot as a  society, afford to have a disincentive such as is now there through the HECS  scheme for people to get into University and contribute. I would never have got to  University had it not been for the Whitlam Government. But we are now prohibiting  people getting access to tertiary education and it's not good enough. 

  A second constraint to growth is the lack of national leadership I think in  infrastructure investment. There is no nation building plan. And no strategy for  funding one either. The resources boom is fueling huge fiscal surpluses but they  are not contributing to public or private investment in our economic and social  infrastructure. Our transport systems, our communications systems.  Communication strategy is all about privatising Telstra and I agree with Ken  Davidson who wrote in The Age a couple of weeks ago and who's here today, it is  economic lunacy. They're looking to sell the thing at any price that they can get.  We've got a massive need for investment in childcare capacity in hospitals and  schools. Now with increasing globalization and WTO regulation of what  Governments can and cannot do to assist private business, infrastructure  becomes even more important as a major determinant of competitiveness.  

  All Australian Governments should be identifying priorities for infrastructure  investment in a co-operative Federal framework. Now many of the States have  been investing heavily and we recognise that but national leadership is lacking on  this and this is an important opportunity that Kim Beazley and Labor is taking up. 

  A third constraint on growth is the failure of Government to drive innovation and a  strategy is needed to restore double digit growth in particular to business  investment in research and development for the next decade and this is going to 

  be vital for manufacturing. It is not good enough to have one workplace after  another close down and there to be no effective strategy to try and ensure the  improving competitiveness of Australian manufacturing. In the decade to the mid  1990s business investment in manufacturing R&D grew in real terms by ten and a  half percent a year. Since then, under the Howard Government growth has  slumped to only two percent a year. Reversing that trend is crucial. It's the key to  improving manufacturing competitiveness. It's how we get the higher skill, higher  wage jobs and how we reposition Australian manufacturing higher up the value  added chain. But rather than meet this imperative, the Government is preoccupied  with a Free Trade Agreement with China. An agreement with potentially  devastating implications for manufacturing employment in Australia.  

  Now the State and Territory Labor Governments along with industry and Unions  are currently developing a manufacturing industry policy and plan. That is  something that needs to be engaged or with which the Federal Government also  needs to be engaged. We need a co-operative bipartisan approach to tackle these  issues and to provide some optimistic hope, some hope for people in the  manufacturing industry. But what ultimately is the Government doing to prepare  Australia to effectively compete and to prosper potentially from an FTA with  China? The answer, the only one I can come up with is the new IR laws. That is to  allow business to compete by driving down labour costs. And cutting the wages  and conditions of Australian workers will not protect people from competition with  China, India or Asia or anywhere else. We could never go low enough. We must  chart an alternative economic path by investing in skills in education, in  infrastructure and innovation and that returns me to my essential argument. 

  Conclusion 

  There is a better way forward for this country to go.  

  A way which can get the balance right between workers' rights and the economic  imperatives that the country faces. A way which addresses the real economic  issues and at the same time respects the basic Australian value of a fair go. A way  which will treat people with respect and dignity and which will nourish the  democracy rather than undermine it.  

  These values define the labour movement. They're what we believe in. We will  campaign for them for as long as it takes and we always have. In a practical sense  we are going to keep our TV ads on air, we will defend people in their work places.  We will mobilise hundreds of thousands of people in the streets. We're going to fill  the MCG on the 30th of November so get yourselves there. 

  We're going to broadcast across the country, into clubs and pubs and community  halls to take our message everywhere. We will campaign in marginal seats and  we are going to stand up for people's rights and we will articulate a more positive  vision for this country and I am confident that when we do all of those things we  are going to win the support of the Australian people and bring about positive  change. 

  Thank you. 

  [Applause] 

  CHAIR: Thank you very much Greg Combet. As usual we have our period of  questions which start today with David Humphries. 

  QUESTION: David Humphries from the Sydney Morning Herald Mr Combet. You 

  applauded Kim Beazley's pledge to do away with AWAs but your own  announcement seems to imply that AWAs would remain an option of your own  version of work choices in the future. Does that suggest that Unions don't think  that Kim Beazley's going to get a chance to make good his pledge? 

  GREG COMBET: No well if that's been any impression I'm glad to dispell it  because it's completely wrong. We completely support the abolition of AWAs and  that's our policy position. We support Kim Beazley's announcement that that's  what he will do. What I was trying to point to was that there has always been the  flexibility and capacity in the workplace and in the industrial relations system in  this country for employees, individually, and employers to agree on certain things  and to have particular flexibility but it's always subject to the statutory rights that  they have, to representation that women for example are not discriminated against  by paying money to men who perform the same work for the same value. There's  got to be protections against such things and we obviously support the  continuation of same. But there's always been the capacity subject to the safety  net, the standards that apply in the workplace for people to do something a bit  better. We've negotiated - I've negotiated myself many arrangements where in a  collective framework there is a transparent, an accountable and reviewable  mechanism for individuals to be rewarded for their performance. And it's the  system that operates at the ACTU I can assure you, but it is collectively  negotiated. 

  CHAIR: Laura Tingle. 

  QUESTION: Laura Tingle from The Financial Review Mr Combet. You've given a  very detailed outline of the plans for collective bargaining today in the documents  you've released in contrast to Mr Beazley who gave a fairly sketchy impression on  the Channel 9 News on Friday night down the Bulletin from Brocky. There's also a  bit of a difference it appears to me between the policy outlined by Mr Beazley and  what you've outlined here today on collective bargaining. He's talked about a  simple majority vote in a workplace. And you've talked about a system where an  employer, a Union, or the employees themselves will have equal rights to initiate a  collective bargaining process. Given that you're saying that the right to be  represented means that you only need to have member in a workplace, could you  just explain what rights a Union would have to initiate a collective bargaining  process and how that is slightly different to a simple majority as being portrayed  by Mr Beazley? 

  GREG COMBET: Yes. Well I think that might be based upon a slight  misinterpretation of what Mr Beazley has put, but you know he will represent his  view about that. We are not putting and I don't understand Mr Beazley to be  putting a position such as it obtains in North America where before a collective  bargaining process can take place, there's a necessity to establish that a majority  of workers in that workplace want the collective agreement. What we are putting is  that, a much, I suppose more flexible approach to it, that the law provide that  employers and employees and Unions can voluntarily enter into collective  bargaining at any time. The responsibility that they have to each other is to  collectively negotiate in good faith. And if they strike a problem in that regard, then  the Industrial Relations Commission can help. That is not a system where the right  to collectively bargain is predicated upon a majority decision of the employees. It's  a system where any party can enter into collective bargaining negotiation at any  time. Where we are getting the problem though and where we anticipate the  culture has changed over the last fifteen years in the workplace is that some  employers take the stance that they refuse to collectively bargain, they refuse to  respect what their employees would like to do, they refuse to respect the  representation of the Union and they insist on individual contracts being signed  and it's only in those circumstances where you need a circuit breaker and it is  precisely in those circumstances that our proposals says the circuit breaker should  be the majority view of the employees and that is as I understand also Mr 

  26/09/2006 http://www.actu.asn.au/cgi-bin/printpage/printpage.pl

  Beazley's announcement last week. 

  CHAIR: Question from Adrian Rollins. 

  QUESTION: Mr Combet, Adrian Rollins from The Australian Financial Review. I  was wondering if on the issue of labour mobility, a number of Pacific Island  nations have indicated their desire to be able to have their citizens work in  Australia, not necessarily in skilled occupations, but a range of occupations. Given  the importance of some of those repatriated funds to those economies. Just  wondering what, what is the ACTU's view of that, of that possibility? 

  GREG COMBET: We are not opposed as a matter of principle of course to any  migration scheme or guest worker scheme to use that sort of vernacular and I  mean to be, I think the ACTU and the Union movement and the labour movement  more broadly - you know if you know your history, we were one of the most vocal  advocates in the post-War period of the migration programme and we welcome it.  We support it and we support the continuation of it. We support people coming in  where we have skills shortages in a contemporary context, under the temporary  visa programme, the Section 457 visa programme that the Immigration  Department administers. The problem has broadly been this. It is not administered  very well and there is insufficient obligation on employers who are wishing to bring  in people who are applying for visas, there is insufficient obligation on them to see  if there are Australian residents available to perform the work and beyond that  there is insufficient regulation to ensure that people receive, when they do come in  on a visa, equal pay. And those principles permeate our approach to the entire  issue and I don't think they should be controversial ones. We're basically saying if  there are positions available, Australians should have the opportunity to apply for  them. If there are no positions available in particular where we have skills  shortages, then there is certainly a case subject to the payment of appropriate pay  and employment conditions for people. And I see the issue of South Pacific labour  mobility in that context as well. 

  CHAIR: Samantha Maiden. 

  QUESTION: Samantha Maiden from The Australian Mr Combet. You said in your  speech that, that the principles of, of an improved safety net are more important  than the constitutional head of power used to legislate and implement them or the  jurisdiction in which they're delivered. Now I assume that's code for the debate  over whether at the ACTU Congress you should go for a return to the State and  Federal system or purely the Federal system. Can you just explore that issue a  little bit more for us and when you look at the issue of the five minimum standards,  what sort of things would you like to expand that too? Would it for example include  the issue that you raised of allowing women the right to return to a part-time job  after, after having a child? 

  GREG COMBET: Well I think it's a fair bit that we'll continue that policy position.  But I won't speculate about the additional employment standards that we might  seek to be legislated because that'll be an issue for our Congress to further  discuss. But I think it's uncontroversial to say we're obviously going to look to  expand the list of legislated minima to the extent that that continues. On the  jurisdictional question, I see a continuing role for State IR systems as well as a  Federal system, but if the High Court does interpret the corporations power widely  there are clearly wide powers for a future Labor Government not only to repeal the  Federal - the Howard Government's IR laws, but to put in place something  different. And we don't want to go back to the past. You know in a broad sense.  We want to ensure there's a system that's a decent system based upon the  principles I described that looks to the future and affords people the rights that  they need in a modern economic environment. And I don't say that likely. These  things, we have been discussing rather thoroughly in the Union movement about  our approach. I want to ensure that there's a good debate at the ACTU Congress 

  Page 13 of 17 ACTU - printable page

  26/09/2006 http://www.actu.asn.au/cgi-bin/printpage/printpage.pl

  that leads to the development of a good policy but the proposition that I personally  and the other ACTU officers will support will be that we do use, we do support the  use by a future Labor Government of any power that it is available to it to put  those principles into place and that will obviously have implications for the  respective role and coverage of national IR laws and State IR laws. But I in fact  support the State IR systems. They've provided a very good level of protection for  people over many years. Many in the business community support the State  industrial relations systems too and we've got to get the balance right I think  between the various jurisdictions. That's a debate that is you know, that will be  had and I think will be had in a responsible way, which will lead to, I think, a  positive outcome. 

  CHAIR: Michael Brissenden. 

  QUESTION: Michael Brissenden from The 7.30 Report. Mr Combet, clearly IR's  going to be a big campaign issue perhaps the defining campaign issue of this next  campaign and I just wonder if you see this as some others do, as a test for the  traditional relationship between the labour movement and the Labor Party and  should the Labor Party lose this election, what sort of impact will that have on the  relationship? Will there have to be changes? 

  GREG COMBET: Well I don't see it as being a test in some form. The values that I  was describing are values that are held, I think, widely through the Labor Party  and through the Union movement and many, many others in the community. It's  the fact that we hold those values that leads to the unity that I think has been on  display during the course of this campaign. There is a tremendous degree of  commonality of view about not only what we need to achieve, about what is wrong  with the current laws but where we want to go and I only see there being a very  strong unifying outcome as a consequence of the campaign that we're running  and I'm perhaps not the best judge, but I think the fact that we have been  campaigning over these issues over the last eighteen months has been one of the  contributing factors to Labor being in a better position on a two party preferred  basis and I watched with interest Bob McMullen on the TV the other night making  the observation that I thought was quite an accurate one that for the better part of  the last six months, Labor has been ahead on two party preferred terms. It doesn't  get much credit for it. I mean Kim Beazley has made many announcements  consistent with the types of values, principles and policies that was outlining,  particularly on economic issues and I think those things are resonating. I see a  strong position emerging and for that reason I don't countenance Labor losing the  next Federal election. 

  CHAIR: Ken Davidson. 

  QUESTION: Ken Davidon, The Age. I'd like to ask you a question about  employers. Is there... 

  GREG COMBET:I'm not qualified to answer that Ken. 

  QUESTION CONT'D:Well, perhaps think of it as an easy question. Is there any  sign that employers understand that with this legislation that labour productivity  will decline and that necessary structural change in this country will probably be  slowed down, and secondly, particularly small employers, do they realise that this  will increase the uncertainty in terms of their business operations because  hitherto, at least they didn't have to worry about what their competitors were  paying their staff so that they could focus on the other side of the business? 

  GREG COMBET: Well I'm certainly not the best qualified to answer but I'll have a  go at it because I meet a lot of business people. On the latter point, it's an  important one. In areas of the economy that are, are largely labour cost  businesses like contract cleaning and contract security, contract catering, child 

  Page 14 of 17 ACTU - printable page

  care, a number of others, where labour cost is the essential unit of cost that those  businesses deal with, for many years I think there was a great degree of  commonality of view between Unions and business in those sectors that there  needed to be an effective and comprehensive safety net that people were entitled  to have a modest and reasonable increase come through the national wage case  from time to time but that all moved up at the same time and in particular that the  business community in those sectors where they're competing with each other on  labour costs, that they had the same cost structure to deal with and the abolition of  that system and the invoking of AWAs that need satisfy only five minimum  standards, has started the competitive pressure in those sectors of the economy  that lead exactly to the circumstances I described with Sodexho Serco a moment  ago, that is tenders come in, they are labour - fundamentally labour cost  businesses, it only takes one rat bag contractor to put the tender in on the basis of  John Howard's five minimum standards and abolish overtime pay, public holidays,  annual leave loading, penalty rates for shift work etc. etc., and you put a tender in  on that sort of price, you're likely to win it. And as a consequence for other people  to keep their jobs, contractors to keep their business, there's a drive to the bottom  and that's the feature of how the economy operates in many sectors and that's the  inherent unfairness of the laws. It does not drive productivity, it drives labour costs  down, living standards down and in some cases improves the margins of those  businesses. That's well understood and I speak to many business people in that  sector who recognise that and they don't necessarily like what they are being  forced to do by John Howard's new laws. At a wider macro-economic level, I don't  think that there's any credible position that's yet emerged about the likely effects of  the IR laws in the short to medium term. I mean John Howard is asserting that it's  already led to employment growth. That's a ridiculous claim in my opinion, four  months in or so to the laws. You know other things are driving the economy as I  think everyone appreciates. There's nothing really to say at this point in time, that  there's any substantive influence on, on productivity. We're only four months into  the laws and I don't think there will be. I think individual contract arrangements are  labour cost cutting arrangements fundamentally. The mining industry would have  a different view. It would say that ten or fifteen years ago when it brought in  individual contracts, it did so for some specific reasons, but they were confined to  the industrial circumstances in the north west of the country in particular where  there were some restrictive arrangements, I'll acknowledge it - which we needed  to address and perhaps we should have addressed earlier in the Union  movement. But that's a long time ago. A long time ago. We now negotiate where  we do negotiate collective agreements that address productivity issues. So I think  as time goes on people will recognise these dynamics further. I think they will  recognise that having a collective bargaining structure will be more economically  beneficial. That is does generate better co-operation in a workplace which does  contribute to productivity and having a system where, where you know, people are  on lower wages, where there is a decent safety net and where all employees and  employers periodically move up together is a far better one for the community. 

  CHAIR: Misha Shubert. 

  QUESTION: Mr Combet, Misha Shubert from The Age. You've had your fair share  of metaphoric punch ups with the Office of Workplace Services since its role was  beefed up with the introduction of the Work Choices [indistinct]... 

  GREG COMBET: I don't reckon they won any. 

  QUESTION CONT'D: So my question is two part. Were you comfortable when  Kim Beazley referred to the public servants who work for that agency, some of  whom I presume are Union members as snivelling little liars in the Parliament in  the last session? And secondly, under your re-drawing of the architecture for a  new industrial relations system, do you see any role for some form of Government  watchdog that would back the work of the Unions in a return to, a stronger  arbitration regime? 

  GREG COMBET: Yep. Well on the first point I'm not going to criticise Kim  Beazley. He has been supportive of us and he's been supportive of people. He's  been down to that Radio Rentals' site in Adelaide. He's been to all of the industrial  disputes where he's seen people being treated unfairly under the new laws and I  support him and I would under no circumstances criticise him for whatever  language he's used in the hurley burley of Parliament. As to the particular people  working the office of Workplace Services. Many of them have been there for a  long period of time. Union officials have interfaced with them over the years in  their role as industrial inspectors and we respect the work that they have done.  However, what's happened in that Office of Workplace Services is that it has been  politicized, an operative associated with the Government has been put in at the  top of it and it is performing a political role and the standard of the work that was  performed and that was leaked by the Government we assume to the Daily  Telegraph to try and attack the integrity of the people appearing in our TV ads and  attack the ACTU, I think was a disgrace, frankly. And you've only got to take the  Cowra Abattoir example, you know, the Prime Minister himself declared that there  was nothing shonky going on up there after the Office of Workplace Services went  and declared everything [indistinct], you can sack people and offer them their jobs  back with a pay cut and there's nothing untoward. Well, I tell you, have a look at  the Administrator's report now that the company's gone into collapse and just see  what contributing factors there might have been to that business going down. It  makes interesting reading. And John Howard keeps lining himself up with these  employers all the time. He opposes workers in every single situation. I mean we  can't be wrong every time can we? You know but there he is every time  advocating for business. On the side of the employer against the Unions and  against the employees on every single occasion. You know, so, we have respect  for the work that's historically been done by many of those people and I've met  with some of their representatives recently to talk the issues through but we are  very concerned about the politicization of the organisation and the way in which  it's being used by the Government. As to the future position, yes we support the  role of an independent and properly operating, transparently operating  organisation to investigate potential and alleged breaches of the industrial  relations laws and we would like to see such a thing reconstituted. 

  CHAIR: We have a group of secondary students here today from Naden Catholic  College at Geraldton in Western Australia and we decided to give them the last  question today and they've determined that it will be asked by Kate Thompson. 

  GREG COMBET: These are the hardest questions. 

  QUESTION: Kate Thompson and I'm from Naden Catholic College in [indistinct] in  WA. My question is many of your predecessors have gone on to political careers.  

  GREG COMBET: Oh! Yeah. 

  QUESTION CONT'D: Do you have similar plans for the future and if you do what  do you think you can bring to that field? 

  GREG COMBET: No - no I don't. And but if you saw - I was on tele recently and  asked this question many times and I don't rule that out you know in the medium  to longer term and I don't see why I should rule it out or rule it in but in the  immediate future I'm very committed to what I'm doing. I believe in what I'm doing.  I'm proud to have the opportunity that I do in my position. A lot of people I feel are  depending upon me and my colleagues at the ACTU and I'm not going to let any  of them down... 

  [Applause] 

  Not that going into Parliament is necessarily letting them down. 

  

  

  

  [Laughter] 

  I don't mean to do that, however, I'm going to stay where I am for the foreseeable  future because that's where I think you know I would like to make my contribution. 

  END * * 

  More Information 

  Download Mr Combet's speech here  

  ACTU Launches New Vision For Workplaces Based On Collective  Bargaining:  

  z Media Release  

  z A Fair Go at Work - Media Brief  

  z A Fair Go at Work - 9 page summary  

  z A Fair Go at Work - Full Report  

  

  This page can be found at: http://www.actu.asn.au/work_rights/news/1158118720_12780.html  

