---
title: "Group at sea rescued by Navy"
date: "2008-11-20"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211320654
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2484772%22
---

 

 

 Group at sea rescued by Navy 

 Thursday 20 November 2008 

 A group of 12 people has been rescued from their sinking boat by a Royal Australian  Navy vessel in waters off northern Western Australia, the Minister for Immigration  and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, said today. 

 A Coastwatch aircraft located the vessel stationary in waters 80 nautical miles south  east of Ashmore Island while conducting routine aerial patrols late yesterday  (November 19). 

 The Navy patrol boat HMAS Ararat was sent to the area to respond and provide  assistance as required.  

 “Upon reaching the vessel, the 12 people including two crew were discovered on  board. The boat’s engine was unserviceable, an irreparable hole was located in the  hull and the vessel was flooding fast and sinking,” Senator Evans said. 

 “The group was taken on board the Navy patrol boat as a safety of life at sea  situation, and given food and water. As always, the health and well-being of the  people is our primary concern.” 

 The group will be transferred to Christmas Island on a Navy vessel. 

 Senator Evans said the situation highlighted the Australian Government’s ongoing  commitment to patrols of its northern waters and the need for a continual presence  by Border Protection Command in the region.  

 “Although this group is yet to make its intentions clear, there is constant pressure  from people smugglers in the region,” Senator Evans said. 

 “Those pressures have not abated in the last five or six years as conflicts in places  like Afghanistan and Sri Lanka have seen thousands of displaced people seeking  refuge elsewhere around the world. 

 “Prior to this boat, there have been two boat arrivals carrying 26 passengers in  Australian waters this year. Last year we had five boats with 148 passengers and the  year before we had six boats with 60 passengers.”  

 

