---
title: "Charter of rights or a charter of wrongs? Speech to the Sydney Institute."
date: "2008-04-10"
creators:
  - "Hatzistergos, John"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Human Rights Act 2004 (ACT)"
  - "Victoria"
  - "Bill of Rights"
  - "Australian Capital Territory"
  - "Human rights"
  - "Interstate comparisons"
  - "Legislation"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211314876
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/K47Q6%22
---

  1

 A CHARTER OF RIGHTS OR A CHARTER OF WRONGS?   

 SPEECH TO THE SYDNEY INSTITUTE   

 6PM-7PM, THURSDAY 10 APRIL   

 30 MINUTES FOR SPEECH, 30 MINUTES FOR QUESTIONS                                                                                  

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE THEATRETTE 

 

 

 

 Thank you Gerard. 

 

 Ladies and gentlemen, 

 

 Deprived of the protection of a human rights charter, Australia descends into tyranny.  

 

 The M5 and Federal highways become clogged with refugees from the other states 

 fleeing to Victoria and the ACT 

 

 … the last oases of protection against the cruel abuses of the governments 

 without a charter.  

 

 The only things standing between totalitarianism and the Australian people  

 

 …are the paper-thin texts of the Victorian Charter of Rights and the ACT’s 

 Human Rights Act. 

 

 This is - of course - a fantasy.  

 

 But it is not far from the vision of the future contained in the new orthodoxy 

 propounded by those who tell us that Australia must have a Charter of Rights. 

 

 The election of the Rudd government last November has brought renewed focus to 

 the issue of rights protection in this country.   

 

 That focus - and the interpretation given to it - have in many cases ignored a 

 significant change in Labor’s position as reflected in the 2007 national platform.   

  2

 

 Whereas in previous times Labor had specifically committed itself and campaigned 

 on the concept of a Charter of Rights 

 

 …in 2007 it resolved instead to initiate a public inquiry about how to best 

 protect human rights and freedoms.  

 

 Specifically the new platform stated: 

 

 “Labor will establish a process of consultation which will ensure that all 

 Australians will be given the chance to have their say on this important 

 question for our democracy.”   

 

 The change in Labor’s position did not come about by accident.   

 

 It came about because of a recognition that the party’s previous position had failed to 

 resonate with the electors and therefore the issue needed to be looked at afresh.  

 

 The consultation process to be initiated by the Commonwealth Attorney General is 

 an opportunity to do just this.  

 

 For my own part I support this process.  What reasonable person wouldn’t? 

 

 In fact the question of how to ensure that the rights of Australian citizens are 

 adequately protected has been at the centre of public debate even preceding 

 Federation. 

 

 The framers of the Australian Constitution had the US model of a constitutionally 

 entrenched Bill of Rights before them during the Convention Debates of the 1890s.  

 

 During the constitutional conferences of 1890 and 1891 Tasmania’s Attorney General 

 Inglis Clark promoted the idea of constitutional protection of broad based rights and 

 freedoms.   

 

 Richard O’Connor (later a High Court Judge) argued at the Melbourne convention of 

 1898 for a constitutional protection of equality rights borrowed almost word for word 

  3

 from the fourteenth amendment to the United States constitution. Needless to say 

 these efforts were defeated.  

 

 It is worth noting the subsequent efforts to constitutionalise further rights fared no 

 better.   

 

 A referendum proposal by Attorney General HV Evatt in 1944 to guarantee freedom 

 of speech, expression and freedom of religion was defeated.  

 

 The 1988 referendum sponsored by the Hawke Government to constitutionally 

 extend to the States freedom of religion, the right to trial by jury and compensation on 

 just terms as well as to provide fair and democratic elections across Australia were 

 also defeated.   

 

 Even an attempt by the Howard Government to have a non justiciable preamble 

 failed to arouse popular support. 

 

 These decisions of the Australian people reflect in my view a desire to retain the 

 essential balances and separation of powers that have served our community well.  

 

 Instead of a Bill of Rights, our founding fathers preferred the safeguards of 

 responsible parliamentary government and the common law, typical of British 

 Commonwealth nations. 

 

 The Australian Constitution is therefore informed by this older model of rights 

 protection - where rights are secured through the constitutional order of a political 

 regime of civil liberty.  

 

 Our constitutional system combines a range of federal institutions with parliamentary 

 responsible government.  

 

 The effect of combining features of federalism and parliamentary responsible 

 government with largely bicameral legislatures is to ensure a decentralised system of 

 government with institutional features consistent with rights protection - diffusing 

 political will and multiplying opportunities for democratic input. 

 

  4

 Sir Harry Gibbs, ex-Chief Justice of the High Court of Australia encapsulates this 

 when he said in 1991: 

 

 “the most effective way to curb political power is to divide it. A Federal 

 Constitution, which brings about a division of power in actual practice, is a 

 more secure protection for basic political freedoms than a bill of rights, which 

 means those who have power to interpret it say what it means”. 

 

 Our institutions have exhibited remarkable stability and constituted a powerful force 

 for ensuring the peaceful development of our nation within the context of maximum 

 personal freedom. 

 

 It is unsurprising therefore that in all my time in public life not one ordinary constituent 

 whose door I have knocked has pleaded for a Bill or Charter of Rights. 

 

 The referendum results and previous election results have shown the public have 

 been unenthusiastic about such proposals.   

 

 Instead the constituency for such change has come not from ordinary citizens but 

 rather professional lobbyists and law school elites. 

 

 Recognising that constitutional amendment is hopeless, the protagonists have turned 

 their attention to a statutory charter model which it is argued gives the Courts an 

 interpretive and/or declaratory role but nevertheless preserves parliamentary 

 sovereignty. 

 

 A bill or charter of rights would move rights claims out of the political arena, turning 

 them into legal claims 

 

 In essence whether one talks of Bills or Charters of Rights essentially one is 

 discussing the degree to which the primary power for making decisions about rights 

 will shift from legislatures to the courts.  

 

 And this to me is the crux of the problem. 

 

  5

 Basic to our system of representative democracy is the identification and 

 accommodation of conflicting social interests in the process of making laws and 

 governing the state.  

 

 The sophisticated electoral system of preferential and proportional representation, of 

 our bicameral parliament, standing committees and inquiries together with institutions 

 of a free press and ministerial accountability 

 

 …all work together to ensure that complex political conflicts are resolved 

 smoothly and competing rights values and interests are weighted up and 

 decided in a democratic way.  

 

 To put it simply: parliaments are institutions specially designed for consultation on, 

 discussion and resolution of difficult political questions. 

 

 On the other hand, the judicial branch of government is set up in a different manner 

 to achieve different ends: the adjudication of private conflicts and the application of 

 law. 

 

 By transforming social and political questions into legal ones, a Charter of Rights 

 threatens to harm the integrity of both institutions. 

 

 It blurs the Parliament’s authority to decide important political questions which the 

 public has entrusted to it and for which it has evolved a sophisticated democratic 

 infrastructure.  

 

 And it forces the Courts to start making decisions on these same issues, responding 

 to questions which they are ill-equipped to answer and for which they do not have the 

 democratic legitimacy. 

 

 The NSW Solicitor General, Michael Sexton, has argued that bills or charters of 

 rights are “fundamentally anti-democratic” because they transfer decision on issues 

 like freedom of speech from parliaments to courts. He said in 2003: 

 

 “The fundamental point [is] that law cannot be a substitute for politics. To 

 hand these questions over to courts does not make them legal rather than 

 social or economic questions.” 

  6

 

 Furthermore, rights continue to expand and evolve over time.  

 

 The rights we recognise today are wider than those recognised in the past and will 

 continue to change into the future. Sydney University Academic Helen Irving said last 

 year: 

 

 “[rights] should be able to evolve, and the best way to do this is through the 

 political process. The political process is accountable, and it is flexible. It 

 allows for compromise, where litigation is usually a matter of winning or 

 losing.”  

 

 While some would argue that statutory Charters of Rights are not entrenched in the 

 way like a constitutional Bill of Rights, the reality is that they become semi-rigid, a 

 process akin to constitutionalisation. 

 

 A corollary of the shift of responsibility to the courts consequent on the adoption of a 

 Charter of Rights is that different types of political resources and societal interests 

 are privileged.  

 

 Rights become legal battlefields with only those with the knowledge and resources to 

 work the court system being able to participate. 

 

 Helen Irving has argued that the outcomes of litigation based on a Bill or Charter of 

 Rights are not necessarily straightforward advances in social justice that many 

 proponents may assume. She has provided the following examples from the 

 Canadian experience:  

 

 - A law prohibiting the advertising of tobacco products without health 

 warning was found to be in violation of the guarantee of freedom of 

 expression; 

 - Legislation limiting cross-examination of a sexual assault complainant’s 

 sexual history was struck down; and  

 - Freedom of association was held not to support the right to strike. 

 

 Even in Australia, Professor Irving’s analysis of the implied freedom of political 

 communication decisions discloses that those who have successfully invoked the 

  7

 freedom have been, in almost all cases, the big, well-resourced and powerful 

 organisations, not individual rights campaigners. 

 

 It is interesting that a previous advocate for the enactment of human rights 

 isntruments , Chief Justice James Spigelman AC, has recently moderated his opinion 

 on the desirability of a statutory Bill of Rights.  

 

 Earlier this year, the Chief Justice observed that in the context of statutory bills of 

 rights: 

 

 “[r]eal issues about the proper role of the judiciary in a parliamentary 

 democracy arise”   

 

 Further, 

 

 “[t]he range of legitimate opinion on this matter is wide and remains the 

 subject of vigorous debate. I do not wish to be understood to take any 

 particular position on the desirability, or otherwise, of a statutory human rights 

 act”. 

 

 In expressing these views I do not mean to imply that the courts have no role to play. 

 

 I have already remarked on our constitutional framework.  Chief Justice Spigelman 

 argued that the common law rules of statutory interpretation provide systematic 

 protection of human rights at the judicial level.  

 

 According to His Honour this “common law bill of rights” comprises rebuttable 

 presumptions that the Parliament does not intend to: 

 - retrospectively change rights and obligations; 

 - infringe personal liberty; 

 - interfere with freedom of movement; 

 - interfere with freedom of speech; 

 - alter criminal law practices based on the principle of a fair trial; 

 - restrict access to the courts; 

 - permit an appeal from an acquittal; 

 - interfere with the course of justice; 

 - abrogate legal professional privilege; 

  8

 - exclude the right to claim self-incrimination; 

 - extend the scope of a penal statute; 

 - deny procedural fairness to persons affected by the exercise of public 

 power; 

 - give executive immunities a wide application; 

 - interfere with vested property rights; 

 - authorise the commission of a tort; 

 - alienate property without compensation; 

 - disregard common law protection of personal reputation; and 

 - interfere with equality of religion. 

 

 The key to all this however is that these presumptions operate at the judicial level 

 and leave to the people’s representatives decisions on their scope and their balance 

 with competing values.  

 

 When this democratic role in diluted or removed then there is also an inevitable 

 impact on judicial independence. 

 

 In the United States this ideological and political conflict has affected the Supreme 

 Court with attitudes to social policy issues such as gun control, affirmative action, 

 race relations and capital punishment being influential in the selection and 

 confirmation process. 

 

 Professor Yves-Marie Morisette in an article published in the Australian Law Journal 

 said this in relation to the Charter of Rights in Canada: 

 

 “We see a pronounced devolution of power from legislatures to the courts - at 

 the request of almost anyone, really, every provision of every enactment may 

 be subjected to review by the lawyers and by the judges, themselves all 

 former lawyers, on grounds which are broader and vaguer than ever before…  

 

 With this devolution comes the inevitable politicisation of the judiciary. 

 Concerns are now expressed about judicial appointments which previously 

 were only heard in the electoral process.” 

 

 The ’dialogue’ between the Courts and the Parliament 

 

  9

 I appreciate that many Australian proponents would distinguish these experiences 

 arguing that a Charter would operate in a different way; to assist in interpretation and 

 to promote a dialogue between the legislature and judiciary. 

 

 The benefits of such a dialogue are not clear.  

 

 The primary dialogue that a Parliament must have is with the public.  

 

 Prioritising a conversation with the judiciary over one with the people who elected it is 

 a strange and undemocratic path for a Parliament to take. 

 

 This would transform the relations between the institutions of governance, creating a 

 special role for the judiciary to comment on and determine important matters of public 

 policy. 

 

 Courts would become a social laboratory where the balancing of rights and interests 

 would be undertaken according to the political leanings of the bench. 

 

 Bret Walker SC, the then Senior Vice President on behalf of the NSW Bar 

 Association, addressed the absurdity of this situation in his submission to the 2001 

 Legislative Council Inquiry: 

 

 “The notion that you remove difficulties by giving to the courts a power to say 

 to the legislature “Do it again, and do it better” is, to my mind, politically, a 

 very frightening one… 

 

 It seems to me that we must never move away from the tradition of positive 

 law-making, which is that a text in the vernacular which people can 

 understand emerges from the law-making organ which can then be read. You 

 do not cross Macquarie Street, then, to ask the Court of Appeal “Does it 

 work?” 

 

 The creation of a dialogue deprives legislation of its authority and finality, creates 

 uncertainty around its meaning, and removes the ability of Parliament to finalise 

 political questions by enacting laws.  

 

  10

 The dialogue envisaged by the Charter advocates could take years to resolve and 

 will lead to political conflicts that should have been worked out in the parliamentary 

 process being drawn out in ongoing litigation.  

 

 Australia is the only English-speaking democracy without a judicially enforceable bill 

 or charter of rights - is this “exceptionalism” problematic? 

 

 Many proponents of constitutional or statutory Bills or Charters of Rights argue that 

 Australian exceptionalism in not enacting a Bill or Charter evidences grave deficiency 

 in rights protection in Australia with the consequence that the international 

 jurisprudential developments are unintelligible to Australian practitioners. 

 

 Former NSW Supreme Court Justice the Hon Malcolm McLelland QC responded to 

 this argument before the 2001 NSW Legislative Council Inquiry by drawing attention 

 to the fact that rights instruments around the world are all different and nearly always 

 the product of significant historical events, causing difficulties in making 

 straightforward applications of international decisions to local contexts. Mr McLelland 

 stated: 

 

 “Those different historical circumstances produced different kinds of Bills of 

 Rights, that is one of the reasons why they are all different but the fact is that they 

 are all different. I would take the view that the public interest in Australia would be 

 better served by avoiding the confusion, the difficulty, the time and expense 

 involved in Australian courts and lawyers trying to understand these various 

 different provisions and instead trying to be consistent with their own national 

 culture and traditions.” 

 

 The NSW Chief Justice has not repeated his emphasis on Australia’s “intellectual 

 isolation” as the only common law country without a Bill or Charter of Rights; rather 

 His Honour’s emphasis has shifted in part to the role of Australian institutions and 

 jurisprudence in Asia. 

 

 In many countries, constitutionally entrenched rights protection followed long periods 

 of civil war, and were intended to heal rifts and restore trust and the rule of law: 

 

 - The Bill of Rights was enacted in 1791, 8 years after the War of 

 Independence, and the fourteenth amendment to the US Constitution 

  11

 (that includes the due process and equal protection clauses) became law 

 in 1868, three years after the Civil War ended. These rights protections 

 were introduced in order to ensure that African-Americans were not 

 subject to continual marginalisation after the abolition of slavery. 

 

 - The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen provided the basis 

 of the French constitution following the French Revolution. The 

 Declaration is still referenced in the preamble to the current French 

 Constitution. 

 

 - The Constitution of South Africa, enacted in 1996, was intended to 

 contribute to nation building, reconciliation, and the cultivation of an 

 inclusive non-racial citizenship in post-Apartheid South Africa. Section 7 in 

 Chapter 2 provides: “This Bill of Rights is a cornerstone of democracy in 

 South Africa. It enshrines the rights of all people in our country and affirms 

 the democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom.” 

 

 - Canada’s adoption of a Charter of Rights arises against a background of 

 disputes between Anglophones and Francophones 

 

 The UK Human Rights Act 1998 gives legal effect to the European Convention on 

 Human Rights. The Government White Paper Rights Brought Home: The Human 

 Rights Bill unambiguously states that the impetus behind the Act was to retain power 

 to interpret British laws in UK courts, stating:  

 

 “the time has come to enable people to enforce their Convention rights 

 against the State in the British courts, rather than having to incur the delays 

 and expense which are involved in taking a case to the European Human 

 Rights Commission and Court in Strasbourg.” 

 

 There is no comparable international court to which Australian laws are tied and 

 therefore no need for a similar human rights instrument to keep Australian courts in 

 control of our laws. 

 

 I know some point to New Zealand as an example where a country adopted a 

 Charter of Rights without a background similar to that which I have described above.  

 

  12

 However it is worth remembering that the Charter in that country arose against a 

 background of an unwritten constitution with a unicameral legislature with concerns 

 about an over concentration of power in the elected government.   

 

 The introduction of multimember constituencies and the Charter were in part 

 attempts to diffuse power and create checks and balances in that country’s 

 structures. 

 

 Put simply: a Charter or Bill of Rights is not a prerequisite for effective rights 

 protection.  

 

 Separation of powers and strong institutional governance are. 

 

 - Nazi Germany had what purported to be an excellent Bill of Rights that 

 provided for a “dignified existence for all people”. As did the Soviet Union 

 under Joseph Stalin.  

 

 - Some of the worst abuses of rights today occur in Rwanda, China and 

 Sudan, all countries with Bills of Rights. 

 

 - Since 1973 Pakistan has had constitutionally entrenched fundamental 

 rights. The Pakistani Constitution empowers the President to suspend 

 fundamental rights during a declared emergency - which is what occurred 

 in Pakistan last November. The newly-elected government is yet to 

 restore the Constitution and thereby restore constitutional rights of the 

 people of Pakistan. 

 

 Other jurisdictions 

 

 The Australian Capital Territory and Victoria have implemented rights charters. 

 

 The ACT conducted a 12 month review of its Human Rights Act in June 2006. 

 

 In her twelve-month survey, Dr Helen Watchirs, the Human Rights Commissioner, 

 noted that the Act had: 

 

  13

 “only a small impact in a handful of cases where parties have specifically 

 argued human rights issues”. 

 

 Mr Richard Refshauge SC, the former Director of Public Prosecutions and now a 

 Supreme Court Justice, observed that: 

 

 “The decisions [in the criminal sphere] were all … made on the basis of 

 principles of law or the exercise of a discretion that were unexceptional 

 applications of the common law and which were unaffected by or independent 

 of the [Act]… The same seems true of those decisions in the civil area also.” 

 

 Based on this observation, he found the present record to be “a little disappointing”. 

 

 Although the ACT foreshadowed amendment to introduce a direct action for breach 

 and expanded rights it has not done so.  

 

 While the Victorian experience was significantly shorter it is noteworthy that one of 

 the earliest users of the new Charter is Tony Mokbel, whose lawyer has argued that 

 he can use the Charter’s fair trial provisions to avoid facing charges if he is extradited 

 back to Australia. 

 

 

 

 The sorts of Rights protected in these Charters appear unobjectionable and phrased 

 to the point of not making clear their real impact.  

 

 The right to freedom of thought, for instance, or to freedom of movement within the 

 Australian Capital Territory are no doubt good things, but it is hard to imagine a 

 situation where they would be a pivotal element of a legal claim. 

 

 But these apparently benign instruments are not going to be the end of the process.  

 The Mokbel case suggests there is still potential for aberrant results. 

 

 The ACT has foreshadowed the introduction of more substantive social and 

 economic rights into its Human Rights Act in the future.  

 

  14

 Victoria will also be reviewing its charter after one year and there is the potential for 

 its rights to be similarly expanded. 

 

 Western Australia and Tasmania have both also recently undertaken inquiries into 

 having a Charter of Rights.  

 

 The Western Australian Study involved a somewhat predetermined agenda which 

 sought comment on a draft Human Rights Act. 

 

 The Government identified several “essential issues” that it wanted to form the basis 

 of the inquiry, including which human rights should go into the Act, the form it should 

 take, and how a Human rights Act could “create greater respect for human rights”. 

 

 

 In all the Committee attracted 377 written submissions.  

 

 Despite these low numbers the Committee did not recommend putting this major 

 political change to the people of the state through a referendum.  

 

 It appears to have preferred the suggestion of Sven Sorenson, in respect of whom 

 the report said:  

 

 “He considered that a WA Human Rights Act was overdue, and would need to 

 be done in discussion with [the] community but not by a popular vote. WA 

 people are very conservative and ultimately intolerant of change that can 

 affect them (eg daylight savings, shopping hours, a republic).” 

 

 So, because we don’t like their view we are going to ignore them. 

 

 The Tasmania Law Reform Institute also asked a number of pointed questions in its 

 inquiry: 

 

 If change is needed to better protect human rights in Tasmania, how should 

 the law be changed to achieve this? 

 

 Would a Charter of Human Rights enhance human rights protection in 

 Tasmania? 

  15

 

 Should some rights be included at first with other rights being considered for 

 inclusion subsequently after review of the Charter? 

 

 The Institute received a total of 407 submissons 

 

 When confronted by leading questions of this kind, it is hard for members of the 

 public to express an opinion looks at alternatives to a new Charter. 

 

 It is noteworthy that notwithstanding favourable recommendation both Western 

 Australia and Tasmania have decided not to go ahead with the implementation of a 

 Charter of Rights at this time. 

 

  A bill or charter of rights will not serve as a simple educative tool that will clarify the 

 law and help Australian’s to understand their legal rights; it will impose an additional 

 layer of interpretation over all legislation  

 

 Many proponents of a bill of rights cite the educative value of having rights gathered 

 together in a bill or charter.  

 

 The second reading speeches for both the ACT Human Rights Act and the Victorian 

 Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities invoke the educative value of the 

 legislation. 

 

 Depending on its form, a Charter of Rights may in fact operate to distance 

 Australians from the legal system by imposing an additional layer of interpretation 

 over all legislation, so it can no longer be understood at face value. 

 

 The ACT Act specifically provides that the rights in the legislation are not absolute 

 but they are limited to the extent that is demonstrably justified in a free and 

 democratic society. 

 

 The Victorian Act is also subject to such limits as are demonstrably justified in a free 

 and democratic society. 

 

 Section 3(1) of the British Human Rights Act provides that: 

 

  16

 “so far as it is possible to do so”, all legislation “must be read and given effect 

 in a manner which is compatible with the Convention rights”. 

 

 The leading British case on the interpretation of their Human Rights Act, Ghaidan v 

 Godin-Mendoza established that:  

 

 “Section 3 may require the court to depart from this legislative intention, that 

 is, depart from the intention of the Parliament which enacted the legislation. 

 …  

 

 “[Section 3] is also apt to require a court to read in words which change the 

 meaning of the enacted legislation, so as to make it Convention-compliant. In 

 other words, the intention of Parliament in enacting section 3 was that, to an 

 extent bounded only by what is 'possible', a court can modify the meaning, 

 and hence the effect, of primary and secondary legislation.” 

 

 Perhaps it is here that the “real issues about the proper role of the judiciary in a 

 parliamentary democracy” alluded to by the Chief Justice arise. 

 

 In 2001, I sat on the NSW Parliamentary Standing Committee on Law and Justice 

 when it determined that it was not in the public interest to introduce a Bill or Charter 

 of Rights, even in a statutory form.  

 

 The primary concern that guided this conclusion was that a bill would undermine the 

 roles of both Parliament and the Courts. The Committee concluded that a such 

 instruments would: 

 - undermine parliamentary supremacy; 

 - require judicial policymaking, and therefore inevitably legalise political 

 decisions; and 

 - lead to the politicisation of the judiciary. 

 

 Nothing I have seen or heard since has led to me changing my opinion. 

 

 One person who has seen the a Charter of Rights in action is Justice Strayer of the 

 federal Court of Canada, who gave this warning about his own country’s experience: 

 

  17

 There is a belief shared by some academics, lawyers, journalists and an 

 increasing number of citizens, that every ill must have a Charter cure. In other 

 words it is assumed in some quarters that the Charter is a total guarantee of 

 good government and that the courts and that the courts must act wherever 

 legislators are negligent, indolent, or downright wrong-headed in the 

 legislation they pass or refrain from passing. This creates a certain temptation 

 for many of us on the bench to try to set aright all the injustices brought to our 

 attention. But it was never understood by those who gave the Charter the 

 necessary approval that it was to be a substitute for the primary responsibility 

 of elected representatives to provide good government for Canadians. 

 

 

 

 

 

 Conclusion 

 

 In summary let me say this. There are several reasons why adopting a Charter of 

 Rights is a wrong decision for Australia to make. 

 

 A Charter is wrong because it moves debate about rights out of the political arena 

 and places it into the judicial sphere.  

 

 It is wrong because it removes it from democratic Parliamentary processes and 

 distancing ordinary citizens from an important part of political life. 

 

 It is wrong because it threatens judicial independence and blurs our institutional 

 governance  

 

 It is wrong because it generates uncertainty about the meaning of laws and deprives 

 legislation of its finality. 

 

 It is wrong because, rather than being a simple educative tool, it creates a new level 

 of interpretation over and above the vernacular meaning of the legal text.  

 

  18

 This distances non-lawyers from the legal and political process, depriving them of the 

 ability to read and understand a law without applying the complex apparatus of the 

 court’s interpretation. 

 

 I have stated at the outset that I have no objection to a consultative process subject 

 of it being a fair and honest consultation with the public in general. 

 

 The consultation process must look at alternative models to the Charter, including 

 ones that recognise the principle of parliamentary sovereignty and seek to better 

 inform it of potential human rights violations. 

 

 Lawyers bear the scars of litigation.   

 

 To suggest that that advancement can come about through adversarial litigation 

 where community values are converted to legal battlefields is - with respect - both 

 ludicrous and dangerous.   

 

 We do not live in a perfect society and never will.  

 

 There may well be laws perceived by some to be unjust in our community.  It is 

 however wrong to suggest that they can be remedied by enacting Charters with wide 

 ranging values and all will be well.   

 

 The remedies and accountability should rest with the democratically elected 

 Parliament preserving and respecting the traditional role of the Courts and the 

 balance between our institutions of governance. 

 

 Thank you. 

