---
title: "New Citizenship test to focus on responsibilities and privileges"
date: "2008-11-22"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211320723
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2484773%22
---

 

 

 New Citizenship test to focus on responsibilities and privileges 

 Saturday 22 November 2008 

 The Rudd Government will overhaul the Australian Citizenship Test after a review by  a committee of seven eminent Australians found the current test can be improved. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, said the focus of  the new test will be on the Pledge of Commitment that new Australians make when  becoming citizens. 

 “The pledge is about our democratic beliefs, our laws and the rights, responsibilities  and privileges of Australian citizenship,” Senator Evans said. 

 “It is crucial that prospective citizens understand those concepts so the questions in  the new test will focus on the commitments in the pledge rather than being a general  knowledge quiz about Australia. 

 “The Australian Citizenship Test Review Committee made the valid point that an  understanding of our civic responsibilities and what it means to be a citizen is of  fundamental importance to all citizens, whether we are Australian by birth or by  choice.” 

 The Government will engage educational and civics experts to rewrite the citizenship  resource book in plain English, divided into testable and non-testable sections. 

 The testable section, from which the new test questions will be drawn, will cover the  concepts associated with the pledge. The non-testable section will contain general  information about Australia, including its history, its culture and notable people like  Sir Donald Bradman. 

 The pass mark for the citizenship test will rise from 60 per cent to 75 per cent and  there will be no mandatory questions as in the current test. 

 “Raising the pass mark will ensure we have A-grade citizens who understand our  democratic beliefs and the responsibilities and privileges of citizenship,” the Minister  said. 

 To help disadvantaged migrants and refugees who understand English but whose  level of literacy may prevent them from undertaking a computer-based test, the  Government will develop a citizenship course based on the material in the revamped  resource book. 

 “We want to encourage all permanent residents to become citizens,” Senator Evans  said. 

 “The review clearly identified a need to remove unintended barriers to citizenship for  vulnerable groups of people and the changes will ensure the test does not  disadvantage these people who most need our support.”  

 Participants will still be assessed on the responsibilities and privileges of Australian  citizenship as well as the legislative requirement of possessing a basic knowledge of  the English language. 

 Senator Evans said the Government will not adopt the committee’s  recommendations to publish the test questions or conduct the test in languages  other than English. The Government also rejects the concept of earned citizenship  because this would effectively introduce classes of citizenship. 

 “The Rudd Government is committed to the citizenship test,” Senator Evans said. 

 “It encourages potential citizens to find out more about Australia and understand the  responsibilities and privileges of citizenship.  

 “Citizenship is of fundamental importance to us all and is a critical factor in nation-building in our culturally diverse society.  

 “The government thanks committee chair Richard Woolcott and the committee  members for their hard work in reviewing the Australian Citizenship Test, which  included intensive public consultation across Australia.” 

 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship will engage professional experts as  soon as possible to commence work on redrafting the resource book with a view to  completing the book and new test by August 2009. 

 

