---
title: "Unauthorised boat arrivals in Western Australia"
date: "2008-11-28"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211320934
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2484776%22
---

 

 

 Unauthorised boat arrivals in Western Australia  

 Friday 28 November 2008 

 An unauthorised vessel with 12 people on board has been located and secured by  Customs on the Western Australian coast at Shark Bay. Customs officers made  contact with the vessel yesterday afternoon and escorted it through sheltered waters  to anchor it through the night.  

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, said today that  although the nationality of the people on the boat is yet to be confirmed, early  indications are that the group may be from Sri Lanka. Authorities are investigating  how the boat arrived to the mainland undetected. 

 ‘The intentions of the people on board have not yet been determined but they do not  appear to be fishers,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘The health and well-being of the passengers is a primary concern. Early advice  indicates that those on board do not appear to have health issues. 

 ‘Immigration officials still need to obtain further information about the circumstances  of the group but arrangements are being made to transfer the people to Christmas  Island where they will be processed. 

 ‘The mandatory detention of unauthorised boat arrivals on Christmas Island is a key  component of the government’s border protection arrangements.’ 

 The Christmas Island facilities provide appropriate and effective facilities for the  management, detention and processing of unauthorised boat arrivals.  

 Should any of the group raise asylum claims, they will have access to the onshore  protection processes and review procedures while on Christmas Island.  

 People found to be owed protection will receive permanent protection. Those found  not to be owed protection will be removed from Australia. 

 ‘Increasing conflict in countries such as Iraq, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka has seen  thousands of displaced people seeking refuge around the world,’ Senator Evans  said. 

 ‘The Rudd Government maintains extensive air and sea patrols of our maritime  borders. 

 ‘We have intensified our efforts to work closely with regional neighbours to prevent  people from attempting dangerous sea journeys to Australia in the first place.’ 

 Senator Evans said Border Protection Command is undertaking extra surveillance to  ensure there are no other boats in the area. 

