---
title: "Rudd's immigration policy panic."
date: "2009-09-03"
creators:
  - "Stone, Dr Sharman"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211329199
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/U2LU6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 Thu, 3rd September 2009    

 RUDD’S IMMIGRATION POLICY PANIC 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 The Rudd Government has admitted that 10 Afghani unauthorised boat people have been flown from Christmas 

 Island to Melbourne before their identity, security and refugee status checks have been completed, Dr Sharman 

 Stone, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, said today.  

 “The Rudd Government is panicked by the increasing numbers of people being smuggled into Australia.  

 “Last week their response was to bring in portables to Christmas Island. This week the strategy is to move people 

 from the island before the security checks and asylum claims have been processed.  

 “The people smugglers, who make more than $1 million US in profit per boat even when the boats go down and 

 lives are lost, will have another good news marketing message for potential clients following this extraordinary 

 backflip,” Dr Stone said.  

 Australia must not compromise what should be stringent processing protocols for all unauthorised arrivals, Dr 

 Stone said.  

 “The Government claims these young people are being shifted from their communal housing on Christmas Island 

 to enjoy better recreation and education facilities. In fact, the 67 young asylum seekers now on the island have 

 six specialist teachers and recreational facilities that would be the envy of most Australians.  

 “They also have continuing access to the adults who have supported them on the journey so far.  

 “Since the Rudd Government abolished Temporary Protection Visas (TPVs) and watered down the strong 

 immigration policies of the Coalition, there has been a steady stream of smuggler boats carrying nearly 1300 

 asylum seekers with an unknown number drowned at sea or intercepted and held in detention in Indonesia.  

 “The Government must address the pull factors which are luring asylum seekers to Australia, despite the 

 dangers. Simply moving asylum seekers around the country does nothing to address this highly dangerous and 

 criminal activity which also has serious security implications for the Australian community.  

 “Again, I call for an urgent inquiry into the relationship between the Rudd Government’s softened stance on 

 border protection and the surge in people smuggling in Australia.”    

