---
title: "No end in sight of people smuggler boats."
date: "2009-10-01"
creators:
  - "Stone, Dr Sharman"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211329750
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZOTU6%22
---

 

 

 Thu, 1st October 2009    

 NO END IN SIGHT OF PEOPLE SMUGGLER BOATS 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Prime Minister Rudd must immediately take action to stop the out-of-control surge of unauthorised boat arrivals.  

 In less than three months we have had 16 boats carrying 785 unauthorised arrivals.  

 At this rate the people smugglers will have more control over our refugee/humanitarian intake than the Rudd 

 Government.  

 By softening our once strong immigration policies, Mr Rudd has outsourced the selection of new settlers to 

 Australia to the people smuggling criminal syndicates.  

 The most recent boat was intercepted by Australian authorities early this morning, approximately 23 nautical 

 miles north-west of Browse Island off the Western Australian coast.  

 Since the Rudd Government started softening immigration policy in August 2008 39 boats have arrived carrying 

 1873 people. Ten boats were intercepted in September alone.  

 The residents of Christmas Island are becoming increasingly frustrated and angry about the drain on resources 

 caused by the overcrowded detention centre and the hundreds of Immigration staff on the island. The residents 

 concerns include inflated food prices, Immigration staff monopolising tourist accommodation, a shortage of rental 

 cars and crumbling roads.  

 This dramatic surge began when the Rudd Government abolished Temporary Protection Visas, softened 

 mandatory detention rules, abolished detention debt and created a new upfront option for permanent residency 

 for those who do not meet refugee criteria.  

 Mr Rudd and Immigration Minister Chris Evans must immediately launch an inquiry into the impact of their 

 softened policies on the surge of people smuggling we have seen since August 2008.    

