---
title: "Immigration policy chaos has tragic consequences: we need an inquiry now."
date: "2009-07-13"
creators:
  - "Stone, Dr Sharman"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211327356
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YV4U6%22
---

 

 

 Mon, 13th July 2009    

 

 IMMIGRATION POLICY CHAOS HAS TRAGIC CONSEQUENCES: WE NEED  AN INQUIRY NOW 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 “With the strong probability that another smugglers’ boat has gone down with 30 or  more lives unaccounted for, we now have another cone of silence descending over  Labor’s people smuggling strategy. Instead, denial and confusion reigns about the  intervention or activity of the Australian authorities.  

 “Mr Rintoul, the Australian refugee advocate in mobile phone contact with the sinking  boat says he immediately passed the coordinates of the distressed boat’s location to  the Federal Police. This Indonesian authority contact was confirmed by Foreign  Affairs Minister Smith, who leapt into the media to talk up the role of the Rudd  Government in helping to avert the tragedy. In a repeat of the stranded boat episode  on 1 April 2009 the Australian Authorities are now keeping deathly silent about any  role they may or may not have played.  

 “It seems no lessons have been learned, and the smugglers simply rule the seas.  

 “The Rudd Labor Government must immediately instigate a cross border inquiry with  Indonesia about what went wrong with this potential latest loss of life. Who knew the  condition of the boat, which got the SOS messages, who failed to respond in time  and why, what must be done immediately to avert the next attempt to sail in  unseaworthy vessels to Australia, chartered by criminals driven only by profit and  greed?  

 “On 1 April 2009 a boat of some 50 asylum seekers was stranded for four days on  Warrior Reef in the Torres Straits as Australian authorities apparently hovered near  by. The boat was finally towed off to Christmas Island.  

 “On 16 April 2009 the so-called SIEV 36 exploded at sea with lives lost and many  burned. We still do not know if this was a tragic accident or sabotage.  

 “With detainee accommodation at Christmas Island now near full, we have no word  from the Labor Government about how or where it intends to house people next, as  the surge of smuggling continues, spurred on by their continuing migration policy  pull-backs.  

 “Meanwhile boats continue to sink at sea. The Rudd Government must urgently  review this and the other recent episodes of tragic loss of life, and it must urgently  review and address the impacts of its policy paralysis in relation to handling 

 migration and border protection strategy, “ Dr Stone, Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship said.    

