---
title: "Labor-Greens aliance a threat to North East Victoria"
date: "2010-09-01"
creators:
  - "Mirabella, Sophie"
source: "Office of MIRABELLA, SOPHIE, MP"
subjects:
  - "Australian Greens"
  - "ALP"
  - "Victoria"
  - "Murray Darling Basin"
  - "Water rights"
  - "Carbon tax"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211343531
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/335828%22
---

 Sophie Mirabella, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Innovation, Industry and Science  Member for Indi 

   LABOR/GREENS ALIANCE A THREAT TO NORTH EAST VICTORIA  

 01-September-2010   

 Sophie Mirabella - Federal Member for Indi has warned that the formal Coalition between the Labor Party and  the Greens is a potential disaster for North East Victoria and regional Australia.  “The people of Indi have every right to be concerned about this deal between Labor and the Greens,” said Mrs  Mirabella.  “We are now looking at a choice between a Liberal/National Coalition who are committed to regional Australia  and a Labor/Greens coalition who are committed to a carbon tax, an increased mining tax and the destruction of  the irrigation and agricultural industry as we know it.  “What we have seen today is the Greens taking control of Labor policy. They have already scrapped Labor’s  environmental policy and we know that they want to impose a huge carbon tax which will directly damage our  local agricultural industry. The Greens want to end fishing in many marine areas, they want to impose death  duties, they want an open door policy on boat arrivals and they want to stop irrigation in the Murray Darling Basin.  Mrs Mirabella also pointed to the lack of regional representation in the Labor Party.  “As it currently stands, the Liberal/National Coalition is the only party that truly represents regional areas. The  Coalition’s shadow cabinet has strong representation from regional electorates including myself, Labor’s cabinet  has none.   “To make matters worse, Labor cut $1 billion from regional programs in its first budget.  “The Labor/Greens Coalition may make some inner city dwellers feel warm and fuzzy, but their investments are  at risk, as is the long term viability of rural and regional Australia,” Mrs Mirabella concluded. 

