---
title: "Labor - Greens alliance a disaster for regional Australia"
date: "2010-09-01"
creators:
  - "Truss, Warren"
source: "Office of TRUSS, WARREN, MP"
subjects:
  - "ALP"
  - "Election, Federal, 2010"
  - "TRUSS, Warren, MP"
  - "Nationals"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211343522
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/165024%22
---

 

 Media Contact Paul Chamberlin  mob 0419 233 989          ph 02 6277 4482  paul.chamberlin@aph.gov.au          www.nationals.org.au 

 

 1 September 2010 

 

 Labor - Greens alliance a disaster for regional Australia 

 The signing today of a formal alliance between Gillard Labor and the Brown  Greens will send a shiver down the spine of regional Australia. 

 If such a Labor - Green beast forms government, the regions will be  threatened by Greens policies such as an even bigger mining tax, a giant new  emissions trading scheme also imposed on agriculture, an end to fishing in  many marine areas, death duties, an open door policy on boat arrivals, and an  end to coal extraction and other mining. There will be food and fibre shortages  in Australia as The Greens pursue their policies to end intensive agriculture  and stop irrigation in the Murray Darling Basin. The list goes on. 

 “Already, this Labor Government has been one of the worst ever for people  living outside the capital cities,” said the Leader of The Nationals, Warren  Truss. 

 “In Labor’s first Budget, $1 billion was slashed from regional programs. In the  second, even more was cut and Labor gave us an emissions trading scheme.  In the third Budget, Labor gave us a mining tax. 

 “Everything Labor has done has been bad for the regions, smashing  confidence, jobs and investment. As a result, regional people responded in  kind for Labor at the election, delivering record low results for the ALP in  many electorates. 

 “Meanwhile, The Nationals increased its two party preferred vote in almost  every seat, winning three new seats and an extra senator. Proportionally, it  was our best result since 1949. 

 “The people of regional people saw what was happening under Labor, and  acted accordingly.   

 “They will react with dread at a formal ALP - Greens alliance in government  that will drag them even further down the path of ruin,” Mr Truss said. 

 

