---
title: "Processing of asylum seeker claims a shambles"
date: "2010-11-17"
creators:
  - "Cash, Michaelia"
source: "SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211346186
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/369293%22
---

 

 Senator Michaelia Cash  Senator for Western Australia Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for the Status of Women   Media Release 

 44 Outram Street    Parliament House Canberra 

 WEST PERTH WA 6005   CANBERRA ACT 2600  

 Phone: (08) 9221 8955  Ph: (02) 6277 3387 

 

 

 Processing of Asylum Seeker Claims a Shambles   

 18 November 2010  

 "Reports tabled in the Senate on Tuesday confirm that under Gillard Labor the processing of  asylum seeker claims is a shambles", Senator Michaelia Cash the Shadow Parliamentary  Secretary for Immigration said today. 

 The reports, including the "Protection Visa Processing Taking More Than 90 Days" report, confirm  that processing claim times under Labor have declined dramatically and are now well outside the  90 day timeframe. 

 The documents reveal that of the 2614 protection visa applications reviewed between 1 March  and 30 June 2010, only 65% were decided within the 90 day ideal timeframe.  

 "This is a dramatic decrease from the figure of 76% in the previous four months" Senator Cash  said.   "The Department’s failure to process claims in a timely manner is a direct result of the  increased pressure being placed on it by the record number of boat arrivals under Gillard Labor". 

 “To date in 2010, 6,096 people have arrived on 121 boats. This means that a new annual record  is being set on an almost daily basis” Senator Cash said. 

 “Labor's approach to policy making when it comes to border protection is confirmation that it is not  serious about addressing the ongoing problems arising from its softening of the stringent border  protection measures introduced by the former Coalition Government” Senator Cash said. 

 “The statistics revealed in the reports have exposed that Gillard Labor, just like Rudd Labor, have  no answers to the rolling crisis in our detention network that is getting worse by the day”. 

 “Boats are going to keep coming because Labor have not changed any policies that would stop  their continued arrival and detention networks will continue to fill. This will continue to result in  unreasonable pressure being put on the processing of asylum seeker claims. This is an  indictment on the Gillard Labor Government” Senator Cash said. 

 Ends. 

 

 

 Media contact:   Senator Michaelia Cash   0431 990 752   

