---
title: "First group of asylum seekers arrive at Inverbrackie"
date: "2010-12-18"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211347622
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/481494%22
---

 

 

 

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 First group of asylum seekers arrive at Inverbrackie 

 Saturday, 18 December 2010 

 The first group of 81 asylum seekers to be accommodated at the Inverbrackie facility  near Woodside will arrive today. 

 The 22 family groups, including 34 children, have more recently been  accommodated in an alternative place of immigration detention in a Darwin motel.  Most have been there for several months following initial processing on Christmas  Island. 

 The group, which comprises Sri Lankans, Iranians, Iraqis and Kurds is enroute from  Darwin to Adelaide and will transfer from Adelaide Airport to Inverbrackie later today. 

 The families will occupy houses at Inverbrackie, for which the Department of  Defence no longer has any need. Almost 80 houses will eventually be occupied once  minor repairs are completed. 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Chris Bowen said eventually up to 400  asylum seekers in family groups would be housed at Inverbrackie. All the asylum  seekers have been assessed as low risk. 

 In recent weeks, Department of Immigration and Citizenship staff and officers from  the detention service provider, Serco, have been working to ready the facility for  occupancy. 

 'Importantly health, relevant service requirements and fire response plan are now in  place with relevant state authorities,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'Work to erect necessary fencing has been completed and Serco is operational at  Inverbrackie with a full staff complement on duty.' 

 Families will not be permitted to leave the Inverbrackie facility, except under escort  for excursions, medical appointments or for other genuine reasons. Processing of  asylum applications will continue while families are accommodated at Inverbrackie. 

 

