---
title: "Two more boats a reminder of Labor's home grown policy failures"
date: "2010-11-02"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211345521
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/333370%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook   

 Two more boats a reminder of Labor's home grown policy failures  

 02/11/10  

 The illegal arrival of two more boats carrying more than 140 people is a reminder of the Gillard  Government’s own home grown border protection and immigration policy failures, Shadow Minister  for Productivity and Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison  and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan. 

 “While the Prime Minister continues her charade over her never never solution East Timor, the  boats continue to arrive in Australia at record levels,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “The unprecedented arrival of more than 5,700 people illegally by boat in 2010 is the product of  home grown policy failure by the Rudd and Gillard Governments. This is where Julia Gillard should  be focussing her attention, on our side of the fence, rather than maintaining the pretence of her East  Timor regional processing centre,” he said. 

 “It has been almost four months since Julia Gillard first floated her idea for a regional processing  centre, and still there is no proposal.  How she could pretend to hold discussions this week with  regional leaders on a proposal that still does not exist and she clearly does not understand defies  credibility. 

 “Had the Coalition formed Government, Nauru would now be open. 

 “Regional leaders have politely poured cold water on Julia Gillard’s suggestion for the regional  processing centre in East Timor all week.  

 “Australia’s failed border protection polices are the reason why our region now has a problem and  this is where Australia’s attention should be focussed,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: ““As the rest of the nation stopped to watch the Melbourne Cup, the hard working  men and women of Border Protection Command have again been flat out cleaning up Labor's border  mess. 

 “Rather than waste her time and taxpayers money trying to pretend that a regional processing  centre will ever be established on East Timor, Julia Gillard should use the final sitting fortnight to do  something to actually tackle the cause of the problem which is her domestic policies. 

 “The Coalition has a plan to stop the boats.  Labor only has a plan to continue to fail,” he said. 

 

