---
title: "Oakeshott working with new PM for a better mid north coast"
date: "2010-06-24"
creators:
  - "Oakeshott, Rob"
source: "Office of OAKESHOTT, ROBERT, MP"
subjects:
  - "RUDD, Kevin"
  - "GILLARD, Julia"
  - "Lyne (Electorate)"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211340627
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/162509%22
---

 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 24 June 2010 

 OAKESHOTT WORKING WITH NEW PM FOR A BETTER MID-NORTH COAST 

 INDEPENDENT MP for Lyne Robert Oakeshott today said he would continue working with  government to achieve the best outcomes for the Mid-North Coast after Julia Gillard was  elevated to the role of Prime Minister by her party colleagues.   

 “Despite the human cost, despite the faceless men and factions of all major parties and  despite the disloyalties of politics on full display today, it is my job to be a kelpie dog for the  Mid-North Coast, and I have therefore begun the process of talking to the new Prime  Minister’s office about our local agenda, and will work hard to further develop a strong  relationship with her,” Mr Oakeshott said. 

 “We have already begun the process of seeking a meeting with Australia’s new Prime  Minister, and with a focus on outcomes for the region, I will continue to work with whoever  is in the job. 

 “Prime Minister Gillard has been to the Mid-North Coast in the past 12 months and has been  working with our area specifically in the education and employment space.  

 “I will be doing what I can to get the broader issues from our area to the new Prime  Minister, and look forward to her partnering on these issues so we continue building a better  region and country. 

 “For all Kevin Rudd’s drop in community support, he was the first Prime Minister to ever  walk into a hospital in the Lyne electorate and he returned to our electorate twice in the  past 12 months. 

 “Credit where credit is due, and I thank him for those visits, the Community Cabinet in  2009, and the work he did in his time for the people of the Mid-North Coast.” 

 Mr Oakeshott added that from his personal perspective, accusations that Mr Rudd failed to  consult his Parliamentary colleagues were incorrect. 

 “I spent an hour with Mr Rudd on Tuesday evening, and he talked in an engaged way on  Afghanistan, local government issues, asylum seekers, climate change, the mining tax, the  Chinese delegation visit, and a hung parliament,” Mr Oakeshott said. 

 “He was engaged and across his brief.  In whatever he chooses to do from here, I  personally wish him well.” 

 Media contact:  Zita McGregor: 62774054, 0415454533 

