---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Parliament House, Canberra: 15 September 2010: visit to Pakistan and the United States; UN Secretary-General's High Level Panel on Global Sustainability; UN General Assembly; Regional Processing Centre; Afghanistan; climate change; whaling; Asia Pacific community; UN Security Council bid; aid to Pakistan; domestic politics"
date: "2010-09-15"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "RUDD, Kevin"
  - "visit to Pakistan and the United States"
  - "UN Secretary-General's High Level Panel on Global Sustainability"
  - "UN General Assembly"
  - "Regional Processing Centre"
  - "Afghanistan"
  - "climate change"
  - "whaling"
  - "Asia Pacific community"
  - "UN Security Council bid"
  - "aid to Pakistan"
  - "domestic politics"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211343720
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/216326%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP 

 PRESS CONFERENCE   

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE  CANBERRA   

 15 SEPTEMBER 2010   

 

 

 Subjects: Visit to Pakistan and United States; UN Secretary-General's High  Level Panel on Global Sustainability;  UN General Assembly;  Regional Processing Centre; Afghanistan;   Climate Change,  Whaling;  Asia Pacific community;  UN Security Council bid; Aid to  Pakistan; Domestic Politics 

 

 

 E & O E   

 

 KEVIN RUDD: Later today I'll be flying to the flood-affected areas of Pakistan and then to  Washington and then to New York for meetings at the United Nations.   

 So I thought it was useful today to speak to you in my first press conference as Foreign  Minister of Australia. I'd like to begin by honouring my predecessor in this position, Stephen  Smith. Stephen has been an excellent foreign minister of Australia and, having spoken  recently with colleagues in the Department of Foreign Affairs, they have all affirmed that  fact. Also for me it is a great honour to now act as Australia's Foreign Minister. This is an  important agency of state. Our external relations are important to Australia's national  interests and that's what I'll be engaged in. Also I look forward to looking very closely with  Minister Emerson, the Minister for Trade. Craig and I go back about 20 years so this is going  to be a good opportunity to work together. Also with parliamentary secretaries Justine Elliot 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 2 

 

 and Richard Marles. Richard will have responsibility for Pacific Island Affairs and the Pacific  Islands, of course, are critical to Australia's national interests.   

 In the last day or so I've been engaged in roundtable meetings with departmental staff,  yesterday with the senior executive of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and also  with AusAID, and those discussions have gone well, as well as providing me with an  opportunity to get to know quite a number of staff.   

 It was quite, in fact, a shock to realise that some of those folk I'd actually worked with 20 or  30 years ago and - and it was good to renew old acquaintanceships - acquaintances and  friendships.   

 On the question of Pakistan, the reason  I'm going to Pakistan is that when I was briefed by  AusAID officials earlier in the week it's quite plain that we're on a - quite plain that we're in  the process of seeing a slow burn humanitarian disaster in that country, a humanitarian  disaster potentially of horrendous proportions. You know the figures. Twenty million people  affected by the floods in Pakistan, six million people are now entirely dependent on  emergency food supplies and the great danger that AusAID officials see is that we will now  see the real prospect of a massive outbreak of waterborne diseases, with huge cost in lives.   

 At the United Nations on Sunday in New York, there is a meeting, high level meeting for  countries who are supporting the government of Pakistan at this time of great crisis. I will  seek to attend that meeting as well and I believe it's important that on my way to New York  that I see something of our efforts on the ground in Pakistan which are already significant  but also to then speak to the international community about the need for everyone to lift  their efforts.   

 Australia is currently the fifth largest donor to the humanitarian disaster in Pakistan, some  $35 million. The international community needs to do more. We do not want to turn around  in three and six months’ time and ask ourselves this question: what more could we have  done or should we have done to avert a humanitarian disaster? The time for action is now  and I base these remarks to you on the advice I've received from AusAID officials.    

 In Washington I'll be seeing Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, the National Security Advisor,  General Jones, and other US officials. High on our agenda, of course, is our continued  combined military effort in Afghanistan and the future of our operations there together. In  New York I'll be attending the Secretary-General's High Level Panel on Global Sustainability  which has a core reference to climate change. I'll also be representing the Prime Minister at  the Millennium Development Goals Summit, millennium development goals to which the  Australian Government has signed up to.   

 This summit comes five years before the conclusion of the timetable for the MDGs which is  2015. I think it's fair to say it's going to be tough for the international community to realise  the goals which were set at the millennium back in 2000. Australia remains committed to  those goals, both globally and in terms of our key development assistance relationships in  our own region, most particularly in the Pacific. Finally, in New York I'll also be, of course,  providing the annual address to the United Nations General Assembly, again representing  the Prime Minister and the Australian Government.   

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 3 

 

 Okay, folks, happy to take your questions.   

 QUESTION: Mr Rudd, can you elaborate on this panel job? How much time will it take of  yours? Is there any money involved apart from expenses? Will it intrude?   

 KEVIN RUDD: The first point I'd say is that the UN Secretary-General's High Level Panel on  Global Sustainability involves three meetings over the next 18 months. That's, I think,  important to emphasise. Secondly, in terms of payment, Malcolm, not a buck. It's an  appointment which, of course, UNSG made to me in my own right, some time ago. Thirdly,  in terms of its relevance to what I do as Foreign Minister, obviously the successful landing of  global agreements both on the development front and on the climate change front, which  are both directly linked, are critical and I'll be engaged in those debates through that forum.  The forum, or the panel, is co-chaired by the President of Finland, the President of South  Africa, Jacob Zuma, and I'll be seeking to work with them constructively. It will simply be one  of many, many, many things that I'll be doing as Foreign Minister of Australia.  Someone over here.   

 QUESTION: What will be the theme of your speech to the General Assembly this year?   

 KEVIN RUDD: Because it's the Millennium Development Goals review conference it's very  important that we emphasise the importance globally of bringing billions of people around  the world out of poverty. This does not make the daily news but the reason we are  committed to the Millennium Development Goals is there are people around the world right  now beyond Pakistan starving to death, young children who have no chance at life, and  young girls who have no opportunity for an education. Therefore the Millennium  Development Goals is not just a slogan, it's not just an MDG. It is core to changing people's  lives and that is therefore going to be a core part of what I seek to say in the UNGA.  Secondly, the continued global challenge of climate change is a challenge for all countries,  developed and developing. You're all familiar here with what came out of the Copenhagen  conference at the end of last year and there is further work to be done globally on that  front.   

 Finally, of course, our continued work as a society of nations on counter-terrorism and  security of all peoples. The fact that counter-terrorism and terrorist activity again does not  rank a daily front page mention in our papers or papers around the world doesn't mean that  the challenge and threat no longer exists, it does, and therefore maintaining vigilance  globally on those questions and related security questions, on nuclear non-proliferation and  disarmament, means that we must make sure that we are part of the common voice of the  UN.   

 QUESTION: Mr Rudd, one of the jobs you'll have as Foreign Minister is talking to East  Timor about setting up the regional processing centre. Do you believe that centre is the  lurch to the right in asylum-seeker policy that you warned of at your last press conference  as Prime Minister?   

 KEVIN RUDD: No, I don't and the reason I have that view is because the Government's  policy on a regional processing centre states very clearly that such a centre and a regional  cooperation framework on asylum-seekers would; one, be compatible with the United 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 4 

 

 Nations Refugees Convention; two, have the support of the UNHCR and the International  Office of Migration, the IOM, and three, the support of relevant regional countries.   

 To use your term, and mine originally, a lurch to the right means acting in defiance of the  provisions and principles of the Refugees Convention. The Government does not support  that course of action.   

 Yes?   

 QUESTION: Do you think you'll be able to pull off that initiative and get East Timor to  agree?   

 KEVIN RUDD: The first point I'd make, is that, as Minister Bowen said last night, and the  Prime Minister earlier as well, carriage for this policy overall lies, as it has in the past, with  the Immigration Minister. I simply wish to make that as a matter of record.   

 Secondly, I'll be working very closely with Minister Bowen to support his efforts in  diplomatic engagement with relevant regional countries. It is, however, an undertaking  which involves a large number of agencies of state both here and in the region. On the  timetable in question, which you point to, and whether success is possible, as the Prime  Minister indicated some time ago, this is going to take quite a while to work our way  through.   

 QUESTION: Mr Rudd, do you think troops can be pulled out of Afghanistan in two to four  years, the timetable that's been set out?   

 KEVIN RUDD: Again I'd direct you on those questions to the Defence Minister.  Can I restate the Government's policy more broadly, which is that our commitment in  Afghanistan is contingent on the fulfilment of our mission statement. What is our mission  statement? It is to train the Afghan Fourth Army Brigade to the point that it can undertake  the security obligations which are necessary within the province of Oruzgan so that the  Afghan National Army can take responsibility for that province's security, with related  training activities by us for the Afghan National Police and related aid efforts by us in  partnership with the provincial government of Oruzgan, to help them become self-reliant.   

 These are our mission statement - this is our mission statement. Those are the benchmarks  which would then determine when we would withdraw our military effort.  We've been clear about this in the past; that is the benchmark against which we'll measure  our policy end points in the future.   

 QUESTION: Mr Rudd, do you think that the East Timor processing centre can be achieved  in this term of Parliament?   

 KEVIN RUDD: I have been Minister for Foreign Affairs, Patricia, for a little less than 24  hours. As the Prime Minister's already noted, this will involve a long process of negotiation  with regional countries and international organisations. And so, I think it's important that  we do this thoroughly and methodically but I'm being very frank with you, it will take time.   

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 5 

 

 QUESTION: Mr Rudd, on climate change, how optimistic or pessimistic are you about the  world making significant progress in the next year or two and what do you see as the best  way for Australia to advance this and use [indistinct].   

 KEVIN RUDD: I think one of the easiest things to do in international relations is to be  pessimistic about everything. One of the hardest things to do is to be optimistic about what  you can pull off and what you can bring about agreement on.   

 Climate change hasn't disappeared. Climate change continues as a critical challenge for our  age. If you look at the commentaries around the world in terms of the temperatures  experienced in the northern hemisphere during the northern summer, fires in Russia, et  cetera, let me tell you this commentary continues to rage. The problem doesn't disappear.   

 Therefore, one of the things - what are we going to do about it? One of the things the UN  Secretary-General has done, and I go back to the question which Malcolm asked before, is  establish a high-level panel. What does it do? It tries to bring together the two so far  conflicting debates in the global forum about how you bring about a climate change  agreement [break in transmission] does climate change action impede the economic  development of developing countries by putting a carbon constraint on them, and that's the  common concern expressed by China, India and others. And, on the other hand, what  actions are actually necessary to bring about a ceiling in carbon emissions globally in terms  of those emissions. Now, in the past, this has tended to polarise the debate between  developed and developing, haves and have nots, those who've achieved development and  those on the way to it.   

 I think the wisdom of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's decision to establish this panel, is  that it brings both those agendas squarely together. And the composition of the panel is  made of the developed and developing countries, serving presidents, prime ministers,  foreign ministers, in order to fashion an agreement, a way forward on that in the lead-up to  the Rio Summit planned for 2012.   

 Domestically within Australia the questions you just put, Michelle, should properly be  addressed, of course, by the Climate Change Minister.   

 QUESTION: On Pakistan, you said that everyone needs to lift their efforts. Why do you  think the world, including us, has been so slack and secondly was it your idea or the Prime  Minister's idea to go via Pakistan?   

 KEVIN RUDD: I recommended it to the Prime Minister in a long conversation with the PM  on Monday and she readily agreed to it. She, like myself, shares a deep humanitarian  concern for what has happened in flood-affected Pakistan and, of course, as authorised  already, a humanitarian support of $35 million for the aid effort there.   

 As for the rest of the international community, 24 hours into the job, I'm not quite sure  what other countries have done and what more they are proposing to do. I'm sure that will  become apparent on Sunday in New York but I say this again, as someone who's been  somewhat involved in international affairs over a period of time, the last thing you want to  do is scratch your head in three, six or nine months' time and say, what could we have done,  what should we have done, and what were we able to do? 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 6 

 

 

 And therefore, it's very important to have a look at what's happening on the ground and  look at what our officials are already doing, get a sense from Pakistani officials about their  views on AusAID's views, about the real danger of a massive outbreak of waterborne  diseases and an unspeakable humanitarian disaster and then fashion an agreement with  other colleagues in New York on what can be done about it.   

 QUESTION: What would you say to Queenslanders who are still a little bit disappointed  that you're no longer the Prime Minister? Is it time for them to get over it and get behind  Julia Gillard or are they right to still be a little bit upset?   

 KEVIN RUDD: On questions of domestic politics, I'm sure you can throw those at a whole  bunch of ministers and the Prime Minister. I don't intend to engage in any retrospectives  whatsoever on recent political events, including the conduct of the federal election.  I'm the Foreign Minister of Australia. I have a large area of responsibilities to undertake. I  intend to get on with that job.   

 QUESTION: How would you describe your current relationship with the Prime Minister,  and is there more than a crack of light between the two of you?   

 KEVIN RUDD: The Prime Minister and I had a great discussion on Monday covering a whole  range of foreign policy measures. It went for an hour or so, and we covered a lot of turf.  That relationship is a very productive and professional relationship, and I'm sure it will be  continued to be conducted on that basis.   

 QUESTION: During the swearing in ceremony, you looked quite pained and  uncomfortable. Why was that?   

 KEVIN RUDD: I love these psychoanalyses…   

 [Laughter]   

 … of how I look. What's your qualification, by the way? Are you like David Marr, got a PhD in  the discipline, or what?   

 The - I just think this stuff is great. How long did the ceremony go for yesterday, guys?   

 QUESTION: Indistinct   

 KEVIN RUDD: Yeah, can someone give me how long it was?   

 QUESTION: About an hour.   

 KEVIN RUDD: Okay. And did you study everyone's faces for an hour and a half as to  whether they maintained an absolute gaze of unmitigated engagement with every scintilla  of it? Probably not. Probably not.   

 QUESTION: It wasn't feeling resentment towards some of the people who'd been  promoted? 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 7 

 

 

 KEVIN RUDD: It's a great honour to be sworn in as Foreign Minister of the Commonwealth  of Australia and I'm proud to be a minister of this Labor Government.   

 I'm proud also to be a member of the Labor Government which prevented the election of  Mr Abbott, for the views that I put during the election campaign that Mr Abbott would  represent a massive retrograde step to the Australian national interest, our foreign policy,  and in other areas of government policy.   

 QUESTION: Are you committed to serving as Foreign Minister for the full term of this  government or are you, if an opportunity comes up on the world stage, would you take  that?   

 KEVIN RUDD: Yes, and no.   

 By the way, that wasn't a contradictory proposition. For anyone watching that was yes for  the first part and no to the second part.   

 QUESTION: Mr Rudd, Lachlan Harris cut short his holiday in New York to return to be with  you during the election campaign?   

 KEVIN RUDD: And if you know Lachie that would have been a hard thing.   

 QUESTION: [Laughs] Does he intend to return to be a member of your staff as Foreign  Minister?   

 KEVIN RUDD: So far as I know, no, Lachie's pursuing his own interests in Sydney, and these  are questions you should address to Lachlan Harris esquire, gentleman…   

 QUESTION: So you don't want him to return…   

 KEVIN RUDD: … care of Bondi Beach.   

 QUESTION: You don't want him to return on…   

 KEVIN RUDD: Lachie makes his own decisions in life. I'm sure those of you, who have dealt  with Lachie over the years will know that only too well. Sorry.   

 QUESTION: Mr Rudd…   

 KEVIN RUDD: I'll come to you bunch.   

 QUESTION: Mr Rudd, do you support taking Japan to the International Court on whaling,  and what progress is being made on the Asia-Pacific community proposal and, also, the  securing the seat on the Security Council.   

 KEVIN RUDD: That's three questions, not one. The - let me have a go.   

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 8 

 

 The first one, of course, the decision on Japan and the ICJ on whaling is government policy.  The government took that to the election, the 2007 election, the government said,  subsequent to that, it would seek to use diplomacy to resolve the matter. We weren't  successful in that and, therefore, the government took the next decision, which was to take  action in the ICJ, and we've commenced that process. I say that in the context of every  strong and good relationship with Japan, and a relationship which, in recent times, have  seen us develop, for example, a strategic - an action plan to implement the joint declaration  on security cooperation, a whole range of new bilateral initiatives.   

 The second point that you raised was?   

 QUESTION: The Asia-Pacific community, progress on that and…   

 KEVIN RUDD: Asia-Pacific community and regional architecture.   

 We have seen, I think, a very significant breakthrough on this question in recent months.  The core of the proposal for an Asia-Pacific community was for - to have the countries of our  wider region, including the United States, involved in a - an organisation, which was capable  of discussing security and non-security matters. The problem in the past is we didn't have an  organisation which either had that membership or that mandate. Now, what has happened  in recent times is that our colleagues in ASEAN, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,  have invited the United States and Russia now to attend that extended forum. It's called,  and the parlance of it, ASEAN+8. Up until now, we have ASEAN+6. We're one of the six:  Australia, New Zealand, India, China, Japan and the ROK.   

 This actually is a significant breakthrough, and I know governments around the region, with  whom I've had contact on this in recent times, and the United States have been working  very hard on this. It's an important breakthrough, and achieves very much the core of what  lies at the objective of an Asia-Pacific community, whatever name you choose to apply to it.  And the last point was UNSC, is that right?   

 QUESTION: Security Council.   

 KEVIN RUDD: Yeah, okay, let me go on the front foot on this question. Frankly, this  commentary from the Opposition about Australia's candidature for the UN Security Council  is just a lot of rubbish.   

 Here we are as Australia, the number 13, number 14 economy in the world, a middle power,  a country with global interests. And are we seriously having a view that we should not be a  candidate for the United Nations Security Council? Mr Downer wimped out on this when the  last opportunity arose. This Government will not. However, because Mr Downer wimped  out we entered this race late. It is therefore going to be very hard for us to win.  I accept  that but I believe to win it, you've got to be in it. The other thing I'd say is this for those who  doubt what value comes from Australia being a member of the of the United Nations  Security Council, leaving aside that on a continuing basis we're a middle power with  significant global interests.  Our troop presence in Afghanistan hangs off the back of UN  Security Council resolutions. Our current actions against Iran in terms of sanctions regimes  hangs off the back of UN Security Council resolutions. A whole bunch of what we do around  the world hangs off the back of UN Security Council resolutions. So frankly it is just a 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 9 

 

 nonsense for any responsible opposition to be engaged in a debate which demeans or seeks  to undermine Australia's candidature.    

 Can I add this point? I've already been advised by officials that one of the reasons we are  having some problem with our number on the UNSC bid around the world is because those  up against us are drawing upon statements by the Opposition and alternative government  of this country that this bid does not have their support. So let me be very blunt about this,  there's a national interest at stake, Australia should have bid for this when Mr Downer was  foreign minister. He wimped out because he feared he would lose. We entered the race  late, we're putting every effort behind it. I've gone through the reasons why but it does not  help the Australian national interest to have someone playing cute partisan politics on the  home front on a question like this when our national interests are at stake, being a member  of the supreme security decision-making body of the United Nations. Sam.   

 QUESTION: Mr Rudd, Australia will always take a strong interest in such a humanitarian  crisis, such as Pakistan, but what specific nation or incident that convinced you that you  needed to personally go, and are you concerned about some of the reports, for example, on  the ABC recently that terrorism organisations providing aid in the region might use this crisis  to recruit for terrorism?   

 KEVIN RUDD: On the first part of your question, Sam, the - I sat down for coffee with the  head of AusAID just a couple of days ago, and this is one of the first things he said to me.  And it really galvanised my attention that we are sitting on the edge of a very large  humanitarian disaster. He began comparing it to the disasters of the tsunami and of Haiti in  terms of its physical dimensions. You cannot sit down with the head of your aid agency and  hear that and say, oh well, that's someone else's problem. My next question was, well, what  should we do about it. And because I'm off to New York anyway, it's, I think, a wise use of  time to spend a day on the ground in Pakistan talking to the locals, seeing first hand, but  critically then being in a position to report to international colleagues.  The second part of your question was?   

 QUESTION: Well, you know, do you think that terrorism organisations…   

 KEVIN RUDD: Yeah.   

 QUESTION: … providing aid could use that as a recruitment tool?   

 KEVIN RUDD: It's always a danger that when disasters hit that others could exploit those  disasters. I'm always concerned about that.   

 Let's be very clear, Australia has deep national interests in the stability of Pakistan, deep  national interests in the stability of Pakistan. And that goes to the terrorism question, as  well as to international people movements as well.  Therefore, it is of fundamental interest to us that this disaster is handled as well as possible,  with the countries of the world, developed and developing, helping to the greatest physical  extent possible to reduce this disaster of nature.   

 QUESTION: Mr Rudd…   

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 10   

 KEVIN RUDD: Last one, Bonge, then I've got to start heading to the airport.   

 QUESTION: I think we're drawing a line under things here. Some of your colleagues  believe that you were behind the damaging leaks in week two of the election campaign. Is  that belief well-founded?   

 KEVIN RUDD: As I've said before when asked this question, Paul, the answer to that is, no.  Any other questions?   

 QUESTION: Mr Rudd, sorry, the UN summit on the MDGs is actually a summit for world  leaders, and Mr Ban says he expects about 139 world leaders to attend. Why is Julia Gillard  not going, and can we expect to see, perhaps, a blurring of the role of Prime Minister and  Foreign Minister?   

 KEVIN RUDD: I've seen some commentary on this from, I think, the Shadow Foreign  Minister. And if I've got her comments correct, I think it was along the lines that attending  the UN General Assembly, for example, more broadly, should be the role of heads of  government rather than that of foreign ministers. For Julie's homework, could I draw this to  her attention - Mr Howard only attended UNGA leaders week once and that was in 2005. In  eight of the 11 years of the Howard Government, Mr Downer represented Mr Howard at  the UN General Assembly. Now, I think it would be good if Julie did a little bit of homework  first.   

 The second point I'd make is this, the - this government was sworn in yesterday, and the  parliament resumes soon, it is simply a matter of commonsense on the Prime Minister's  part that she has concluded that her energies at this stage are best directed here, and that is  why she has asked me to represent Australia at the UN.  Having said that, folks, it really is time to zip. Thank you.   

 

 END 

