---
title: "Greens plan to get children out of detention"
date: "2010-10-11"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Australian Greens"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344500
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/279754%22
---

 Greens Plan To Get Kids Out Of Detention  Published on Sarah Hanson-Young (http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au) 

 

 Greens Plan To Get Kids Out Of Detention 

 

 

 The Australian Greens have launched their plan to remove children and their families from  Immigration detention, according to Senator Sarah Hanson‐Young. 

 Senator Hanson‐Young, Greens spokesperson on Immigration, was joined by Australian of the Year,  Professor Patrick McGorry, and the director of the Hotham Mission Asylum‐Seeker Project, Caz  Coleman, as she launched the plan in Melbourne. 

 "Today there are more than 700 children held in immigration detention in Australia, and this is  unacceptable,'' Senator Hanson‐Young said. 

 "The definition of immigration detention within the Migration Act makes it clear children should not  be held in secure detention, regardless of what name it is given. 

 "The Federal Government says children are held in detention facilities, not detention centres ‐ but  the bottom line is that 700 children are being held across Australia, and this is a clear breach of the  Government's previous commitment to have detention purely as a last resort. 

 "I will move in the Senate to amend the Migration Act, to exempt children and unaccompanied  minors from the act's mandatory detention clause. This is nothing new ‐ Spain already exempts  minors from immigration detention (unless detained parents request to be housed together), while  Canada and New Zealand make special provision for only detaining minors as a last resort. 

 "It's simple ‐ children seeking asylum should be in appropriate housing, not immigration facilities.'' 

 In 2006 the Howard Government introduced the Community Care Pilot Program, now known as the  Community Assistance Support program. 

 The CAS program provides asylum‐seekers living in the community with services such as health and  welfare support. 

 Eligibility for the CAS is assessed based on criteria of vulnerability. The Greens want to see the  program expanded with appropriate funding and resources to cover all children and minors as well  as their parents and caregivers. 

 "These children deserve access to schooling, health care, and the normal support that any child  requires, including leisure and sporting activities and an open living environment,'' Senator  Hanson‐Young said. 

 "These children are not criminals, they have done nothing wrong, they should be treated with 

 Page 1 of 2 

  [11 October 2010]

  Greens Plan To Get Kids Out Of Detention  Published on Sarah Hanson-Young (http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au) 

  compassion in line with our Australian values of a fair go and protection of the vulnerable.'' 

  The Greens have introduced a bill to establish a Commonwealth Commissioner for Children and  Young People. The bill gives support to all young people who are vulnerable and disadvantaged,  including young non‐citizens without guardians who arrive in Australia without the protections given  to those with visas or other authority to enter Australia. 

  "This package of measures ‐ amending the Migration Act, expanding the Community Assistance  Support program and establishing a Commonwealth Commissioner for Children and Young People ‐  is the Greens' solution to the shameful detention of children. Let's end this practice now.'' 

  

  Human Rights & Justice  Children  Detention Centres  Immigration  Refugees 

   Source URL:  http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au/content/media-release/greens-plan-get-kids-out-deten  tion   

  Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org) 

  Page 2 of 2

