---
title: "A 'glimpse of Australia' to help refugees"
date: "2010-10-18"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344890
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/500173%22
---

 

 Senator Kate Lundy  Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 

 A 'glimpse of Australia' to help refugees  Monday, 18 October 2010 

 The Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Kate Lundy  today launched a new DVD to assist refugee and humanitarian visa holders  preparing to settle in Australia. 

 At the opening of the annual conference for Australian Cultural Orientation (AUSCO)  program trainers in Adelaide, Senator Lundy announced the release of a new  training video produced by the Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC),  featuring former refugees talking about their own experiences of their journey to  Australia and their settlement story. 

 'The stories told represent the reality of resettlement and portray a variety of  experiences, including people who have resettled in rural and regional areas,'  Senator Lundy said. 

 Among the stories featured in the DVD is an Iraqi refugee who describes the best  thing about living in Australia as 'freedom, the right to expression of your feelings'. 

 AUSCO is a five-day cultural orientation program offered to all refugee and special  humanitarian entrants before their departure for Australia. In 2010-11, about 13 750  people are expected to be granted humanitarian program visas. 

 The program provides an overview of life in Australia including geography and  climate, government, cultural adjustment, health care and finding a job. 

 'AUSCO is the first glimpse of Australia,' Senator Lundy said. 

 'It positions people to regain much-needed skills and benefit from the settlement  support they receive when they arrive in Australia.' 

 The AUSCO trainers' conference runs until Friday 22 October. 

 

 See: Index of Media releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/parlsec/media/kl/2010/kl156139.htm  Last update: Thursday, 16 December 2010 at 12:10 AEST  

  

