---
title: "Bowen heads to East Timor as boats keep coming"
date: "2010-10-11"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR PRODUCTIVITY & POPULATION, IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344535
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/286545%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook 

 

 Bowen heads to East Timor as boats keep coming  

 11/10/10  

 The interception of a further two boats today, one towing the other, carrying 77  people, is a further reminder that Labor have no answers on illegal boat arrivals  according to Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population and Shadow Minister for  Immigration & Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs 

 & Border Protection, Michael Keenan. 

 “More than 800 people have arrived since the election in 17 boats, the last two boats  arriving together with one towing the other. This makes 103 boats in 2010 and more  than 170 since Labor abandoned the Coalition's strong border protection regime,” Mr 

 Morrison said. 

 “While the government has announced a further 1000 beds in the detention network,  it's clear this won't last long, as the boats continue to arrive. 

 “The constant arrival of boats should serve as a reality check to Mr Bowen as he  heads to East Timor that Labor's policies simply don't work and the Government  needs to do better than their flawed and failed East Timor proposal. 

 “When Mr Bowen visits East Timor next week he will not be meeting with the Prime  Minister or any other decision makers. It will be just another exercise of going  through the motions. As Labor continue to talk, the boats will continue to arrive. 

 “The Gillard Government just cannot take a hint. East Timor are being extremely  polite, but their message to Julia Gillard on the regional processing centre is clear -  they're just not that into you Julia. 

 Michael Keenan said: “Labor’s spin machine wants us to believe that this latest  arrival was one vessel, and not two. 

 “They also want us to believe that Labor is serious about securing Australia’s borders. 

 “Julia Gillard’s Labor Government continues to pursue spin over substance, instead of  taking real action to stop the boats. 

 “The only thing ‘moving forward’ since Julia Gillard was elected Prime Minister is  the rate of boat arrivals. 

 “The Australian people deserve better.” 

