---
title: "Gillard's toxic East Timor solution"
date: "2010-09-23"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "GILLARD, Julia"
  - "East Timor"
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "RUDD, Kevin"
  - "MORRISON, Scott, MP"
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "ALP"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211343914
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/235019%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook 

 Gillard's toxic East Timor 'solution'  23/09/10  

 Labor’s never never East Timor ‘solution’ has become toxic in the Gillard Government, with  no one wanting to take responsibility for the plan, Shadow Minister for Productivity &  Population and Shadow Minister for Immigration & Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.    

 “During the election Julia Gillard was going to take charge of the East Timor plan, described  by the East Timorese Prime Minister as ‘what plan’,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “After the election it was Kevin Rudd’s job as Foreign Minister. Kevin Rudd has never  thought it was a good idea and flick passed it back to Julia Gillard,” he said.    

 “The Prime Minister is refusing to lead negotiations over her proposal and her foreign  Minister is more worried about being seen at the UN in New York than Dili.    

 “In his recent meeting with Indonesian counterpart Dr Marty Natalegawa, Kevin Rudd did  not even discuss the East Timor proposal, let alone issue a joint statement on it.    

 “Minister Rudd simply doesn’t believe in an East Timor processing centre, is not interested in  discussing it and has now washed his hands of it by standing by as Minister Bowen is handed  the can.    

 “Julia Gillard’s East Timor proposal has become so toxic in her own Government that the job  is now being reluctantly taken on by Minister Bowen as the only person who couldn’t say no.    

 “Julia Gillard used the Timor plan as a fix during the election campaign and is now forcing  one of her own Ministers to wear the deception, lest she be seen as responsible for yet another  policy failure.    

 “The failure of Julia Gillard to have a plan for third country off shore processing and her  back-flip decision to add another 1,000 onshore detention beds, has exposed Labor as having  no answers to the rolling crisis in our detention network, of their own making, that is getting  worse by the day.    

 “Boats are going to keep coming because Labor have changed no policies that would stop  their continued arrival and detention networks will continue to fill.    

 “Incidents of recent days will be repeated because more and more people will end up in  detention. This is a growing crisis Labor has no answer to.    

 “Julia Gillard should get serious and immediately move to re-open processing centres on  either Nauru or Manus Island in Papua New Guinea,” Mr Morrison said.  

  

