---
title: "East Timor plan orphaned by Gillard in Governor-General's speech"
date: "2010-09-28"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "East Timor"
  - "GILLARD, Julia"
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "MORRISON, Scott, MP"
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "BRYCE, Quentin"
  - "RUDD, Kevin"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344060
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/253663%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook   

 East Timor plan orphaned by Gillard in  Governor-General's speech   28/09/10  

 Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population and Shadow Minister for Immigration  & Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today Prime Minister Julia Gillard has officially  disowned her East Timor ‘solution’, leaving it off the government’s agenda as  delivered by Governor-General Quentin Bryce to both houses of Parliament today. 

 “Any reference to East Timor was conspicuous in its absence from the Governor-General’s speech. The East Timor ‘solution’ has been orphaned by the Prime  Minister,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “East Timor was always a ‘never never’ plan. The regional processing framework  referred to in the speech came across as an afterthought, with just three paragraphs  dedicated to the topic. 

 “The Prime Minister has steadfastly refused to say when the centre would be opened  if ever, with no commitment given to opening within the next three years. 

 “Kevin Rudd doesn’t believe in an East Timor processing centre, the East Timorese  don’t want it and even the Prime Minister now wants to ignore it. 

 “With more than 5,000 people in detention, the Government needs solutions that can  be implemented now, like the Coalition’s proposal to reopen the taxpayer funded  facilities in Nauru. 

 “The Labor Government simply can’t be trusted to end the crisis in immigration.  Labor have tried to spin boats away, they have tried cynical election fixes like the  East Timor ‘solution’ and they have broken their promise not to expand detention  centres,” Mr Morrison said. 

  

