---
title: "Hills detention centre: Labors gift"
date: "2010-10-18"
creators:
  - "Briggs, Jamie"
source: "Office of BRIGGS, JAMIE, MP"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Refugees"
  - "GILLARD, Julia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344876
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/350158%22
---

 Jamie Briggs, MP 

 Chairman - Scrutiny of Government Waste Committee  Member for Mayo 

 Media Release 

 Hills detention centre Labor's gift -  

 Monday 18 October 2010 

 Inverbrackie will be forced to house the latest immigration detention centre thanks to the  Gillard Government’s failed border protection policies.  

  The Gillard Government is set to drop over 400 asylum seekers into the Adelaide Hills  because other detention centres can’t cope with the influx of boats that keep coming in  greater numbers every week.   

 The Prime Minister is yet to say whether she has or will consult the community on how her  latest border protection policy will affect the residents around Inverbrackie and what this  will mean for local schools, services and supply arrangements for local businesses.   

 There will also need to be substantial upgrades to the houses at Inverbrackie and  importantly security arrangements. This will have substantial costs associated with this  decision.   

 The Shadow Minister for Immigration Scott Morrison and I will be seeking an urgent briefing  on the plans to turn Inverbrackie into a detention centre.   

 This decision is a direct consequence of Labor’s failed border protection policies.   

 As more beds won’t stop more boats, the Prime Minister should also explain whether she  would expand an Inverbrackie detention centre in the future. 

 

