---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Christmas Island: 16 December 2010: Christmas Island [Sky News]"
date: "2010-12-16"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211347511
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/437217%22
---

 Brendan O’Connor, MP  Minister for Home Affairs  Minister for Justice  Minister for Privacy and Freedom of Information 

 Member for Gorton   

 

 

 SKY NEWS - PRESS CONFERENCE  Thursday, 16 December 2010  Topics: Christmas Island   

 KIERAN GILBERT:  I’m just being told by our studio that we’ve got Brendan O’Connor, the Minister for Home  Affairs. The Minister for Customs and Border Protection. We’ve got a live stream box there  coming from Christmas Island. Let’s cross there now.   

 ASSISTANT: The Minister’s just going to read a statement first and then it’ll be time for  questions.   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:  Just tell me when you’re ready… Ok, well thank you very much for attending today.    

 I’m here with the Administrator Brian Lacey and Superintendent Gavin Ryan from the  Australian Federal Police and I’m on Christmas Island responding to this very tragic situation  where of course, we know now as I’m advised 28 people have perished in what has been a  very tragic incident on the island.    

 As a result of the extraordinary efforts of Customs and Border Protection personnel, the  Australian Federal Police on the island, Customs and Border Protection personnel also on the  island, Parks Australia, other agencies and indeed volunteers including commercial divers  and commercial fishers who all rallied around in order to make sure we rescued those people  in this very tragic situation.   

 I can reveal the more precise numbers of those rescued of the 42 that were rescued, 25 are  men, 8 women, 8 children, 4 boys and 4 girls and 1 unaccompanied minor. Of the 28 people  who’ve perished, who have been recovered, there are 12 men, 9 women, 2 boys, 1 girl, 4  infants 3 of which were girls.    

 This underscores the tragedy that’s occurred here. But I again want to pay tribute to the  efforts of the islanders and of the professional response by Customs and Border Protection  personnel to attend to this very difficult situation.    

 If I can actually paint a picture about the circumstances they found themselves in yesterday  morning the climatic conditions were awful. We had cyclonic weather conditions. There were  very high swells. The largest swells for months. There was low visibility and, as you know,  as you can see behind me, this is a very steep precipice, a very steep cliff, making it very  difficult for local islanders to provide support when people found themselves in the water.    

 As I am advised also that this vessel was foundered on the rocks there had been distress calls  made to the Customs and Border Protection vessels. That is the vessel Triton and HMAS  Pirie they immediately deployed their small and faster rafts into the water around the lee of  the island where it was safer. Those vessels which are faster as I say, went to the immediate  rescue of those people that were in the water. There’s no doubt in my mind as a result of the  efforts of those personnel , we have saved many, many lives and they deserve our  commendation today.   

 I’ve just recently spoken with the Prime Minister. I have conveyed to her the situation on the  island and indeed she wanted me to pass on our appreciation to all of those involved in the  rescue and this magnificent effort by the agencies but also the volunteers involved.    

 I’m also advised that the Prime Minister will seek to establish a group of Parliamentarians  including the Minister for Immigration, myself, the Leader of the Opposition, indeed the  Prime Minister,  the representatives from the independents and the Greens Party to form a  group so that we can, they can be properly briefed on the facts, so that the agencies involved  can apprise that group of all the facts before we draw any conclusions to this very difficult,  very sad tragedy.    

 And as I understand it, the Prime Minister has spoken with the Leader of the Opposition, the  Minister for Immigration has spoken to his counterpart, the Shadow Minister for  Immigration, and I’ve certainly made contact with the Shadow Minister for Border  Protection, made contact with his office and will be discussing this matter with him in due  course.    

 It is important that we focus now on attending to the needs of the rescued and attending to the  needs of the rescuers who of course have experienced quite a traumatic situation. And for that  reason I, as I’m on the island speaking with the medical practitioners that are available,  speaking with the hospital,  indeed, also speaking with, the counsellor support, to ensure that  there is sufficient support for the people rescued and, as I say, those people on the island  who’ve been engaged in this very challenging situation.   

 I’m happy to take any questions.   

 JOURNALIST:           

 How many people are still missing, do you know Minister?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:  As I’ve said at this point we’ve, confirmed that, 42 rescued and 28 people have perished. We  are yet to determine whether in fact there are others that are missing and indeed at first light  today, led by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority, we resumed the search and rescue in  order to see whether or not we would find more people alive, hopefully, if there are more  people. And indeed we’d also be searching for any that may have perished.    

 This rescue led by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority, and they will be of course the ,  appropriate agency, along with others, to determine how long that rescue will continue.   

 JOURNALIST:  The refugees haven’t given you any idea of how many people are still missing?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:  There is as I’m advised, conflicting views as to the exact number and I think it would be  entirely inappropriate to speculate on that number until we have more compelling evidence,  to  ascertain the number of people that were on the vessel before it foundered on the rocks.   

 JOURNALIST:           

 Before those safety calls were made were navy officials aware of this vessel?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:  Look I can confirm that there was no tracking of this vessel. People really do have to  understand the very difficult weather and climatic conditions on the island yesterday. There  were, as it was described to me, cyclonic conditions, there were very high swells, there was  very low visibility and indeed as it was explained to me, those that had fallen into the water  and those that were engaged in the rescue were working in what was described as like  working in a washing machine of water. That’s how rough the seas were, and that’s why the  efforts of all involved have been quite magnificent and remarkable.    

 These were horrendous weather situations, and quite frankly it’s remarkable how many have  been saved given those circumstances.   

 JOURNALIST:           

 I mean this one ended in tragedy but how many times has this happened before that you know  a boat’s got this close and navy officials haven’t known anything about it?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:  Well all I can say of course is, it is tragic and indeed we need to ensure we respond as quickly  as we can.    

 From what I can see and after speaking with the AFP and customs here and indeed speaking  to  the crew on both Customs and Border Protection vessels, everything was done to respond  as quickly as possible to this very difficult situation, and indeed there will of course be a  proper examination of the situation to determine the facts and before we determine all of the  facts we won’t be able to draw conclusions on all matters.   

 JOURNALIST:  But Minister has this happened before?   

 JOURNALIST:  [talks over] how long did it take, how long did it take between the time the emergency call  went out and the arrival of the navy and customs vessels?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:  The advice we’ve received is as soon as the vessels were in receipt of calls in relation to the  vessel they were immediately in operation. So in other words as soon as they could deploy  the smaller and faster rafts, that was done. They made the right decision it, it would appear to  me, on the advice I’ve received to make sure they deployed those faster and smaller vessels  in the lee of the island so, because they’re faster vessels, ah-   

 JOURNALIST:           

 [talks over] Was there any, sorry Minister, was there any other possible option? Could they  have deployed it from the windward side?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:  As I understand it, as I’m advised by the commander of one of the vessels and the  enforcement officer of Triton, they would not have been able to deploy those rafts in these  conditions. And for that reason it would appear from what I’ve been advised that they’ve  made the absolutely appropriate decision to have those smaller crafts deployed in the lee of  the island and… for two reasons, one is that it was safer to do so but also because those  vessels are faster they got to the scene quicker.   

 JOURNALIST:  Witnesses have described the boat going up and down for about an hour, to an hour and a  half. Since between the first sighting and the arrival of the boats, do you think that’s an  accurate description of the time it took the boat to get there?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:      Well, I can only say that on the advice I’ve received from the crew and the officers of the  vessel, they responded as soon as they possibly could.    

 Can I say in relation to the times, these are matters that are very much subject to the  investigation that will ensue, and it’s for that reason the Government has called, and indeed  the Prime Minister has sought, the convening of a group, of people representing all parties,  and indeed the independents of Parliament, to be properly briefed by our agencies, so we can  establish and determine the facts before any further conclusions other than to say this has  been a very tragic situation and it’s been also an extraordinary effort by not only the crews on  those vessels, but the locals who have rallied to this challenge in an extraordinary way.   

 JOURNALIST:  Could you tell us the extent of the injuries of the people that survived it?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:  There have been six people now admitted, and are indeed admitted to the local hospital.    

 There have been two women who have been evacuated from the Island with the assistance of  the Royal Flying Doctors Service and they’re now in hospital in Perth. There are other minor  injuries that are being attended to so we have those who need to be admitted into hospital...  are admitted into hospital, of which there are six. There are also people being cared for at the  centre with medical practitioners there.    

 So everything that needs to be done is being done in relation to responding medically to the  injuries of those that have, of course, been rescued.   

 JOURNALIST:           

 And could you tell us the timeframes from the time that the boat started breaking up on the  cliffs…to the time the rescue effort had concluded, where everyone that could be seen to be  alive was safe? Was it half an hour…forty-five minutes?   

 BRENDAN O’CONONOR:  

 Well, as I’ve said the Customs and Border Protections personnel responded as soon as they  possibly could, as I’m advised by them directly to this tragic situation. The rescue and the  recovery continued throughout the course of yesterday and resumed at first light today.   

 There are no assumptions, there are no assumptions that the full toll of people have been  rescued or recovered. And indeed the assumption was we have to continue to look and  search, and that’s exactly what they did, until we lost light and first thing this morning, at first  light, the agencies continued their effort, which includes a number of aircrafts being deployed  from Darwin, to help in the aerial surveillance of this area.   

 JOURNALIST:  Just a quick question about those who have survived and those who’ve died. It sounded like a  number of children had passed away, are any of the survivors parents who have lost their  children?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:  At this point we can’t establish the relationships between all of the survivors, or for that  matter, those people who have perished and who have been recovered, and those that have  survived.    

 There are translators that are assisting with the counsellors and the medical practitioners in  order to ensure we have as much information we can. But you can understand at this point,  our focus is attending to the care of people who have been traumatised because of this tragic 

 situation, and so our interest is their well being.    

 But of course as this matter continues, we’ll look to establish more of the facts as they come  to hand. And as soon as they do come to hand the Government will be disclosing those facts  publicly.   

 JOURNALIST:  How hard will it be to identify these, ah, those deceased   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:  I’m happy to say we managed to have the Disaster Victim Identification Unit from the  Australian Federal Police get here quite quickly, and indeed flew overnight to get here.    

 They are now undergoing the very difficult task of identifying those people who perished but  have been recovered. And until they’ve finished their job we can’t determine all of the  matters, except to say, as I said earlier, we do know now the breakdown of men, women and  children, that have lost their lives.    

 JOURNALIST:  Do you know where and when the boats sailed from?   

 BRENDAN O CONNOR:  At this point we don’t have a previous embarkation point, and we may not actually determine  that matter, but as I said earlier, this vessel was not being tracked. The conditions were so,  were very horrendous, and these vessels are very difficult to detect or track by radar,  particularly in very difficult weather conditions because of the construction, they’re made of  wood, there is no easy detection.  

 

 So if you can understand, we had very difficult climatic conditions, very very high swells,  low visibility, as a result this was very difficult. But I can say to you, that as soon as the  Customs and Border Protection personnel were in a position to be deployed to respond to the  distress calls, they did so and as a result as I’m advised, forty-one of those rescued were  actually plucked out of the water by those crew that were on the four smaller craft.   

 They endangered their lives to rescue men, women, and children, and they should be  commended for their extraordinary efforts in what were very trying circumstances.   

 JOURNALIST:  How many of the forty-one that survived were crew of the boat, as opposed to asylum  seekers?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:  There were forty-two, can I say, just to correct you there. At this point, and things can  change, but, I’ve been advised there are forty-two people that have been rescued, of which  three, were, as I’m advised, crew.   

 JOURNALIST:  Do you believe any crew perished?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:  I haven’t been advised as to whether in fact there were crew members, and of course, we at  this point are not aware of the total number that were on the vessel before it foundered on the  rocks. And we couldn’t speculate therefore whether there are people who are yet to be  rescued, or indeed yet to be recovered, because we’re not clear on the actual number.   

 JOURNALIST:          Do you know if you have any captains in your line?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:    I’ve been advised there are three Indonesian crew members that  have been rescued at this point, we’re not sure of the particular rank or office held by crew.    

 JOURNALIST:          [Indistinguishable]…people smuggling operation that resulted in  dozens of people dying, what kind of ah, judicial process can we expect now?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:      Well, we will firstly establish the facts. The Australian Federal Police are here in large  number. In fact they’ve been added to as a result of people flying over tonight, last night. And  so there are, there are about forty-five Australian Federal Police officers who are now  undergoing the painstaking and deliberate investigation of this matter that then will be subject  to their decision, their referral to the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions.   

 I think it’s important now that the relevant agencies do their work without me prejudicing this  issue with any further comment. But of course this Government takes this issue very  seriously, we have been vigilant in making sure that where there has been prosecution of  people smuggling, they have faced the courts and indeed have been gaoled in this country,  but as for…   

 SUSANNE LATIMORE: 

 And that was the Home Affairs Minister, Brendan O’Connor, live from Christmas Island  giving us an update on the details that are now coming out of this tragedy with the boat  crashing on Christmas Island.   

