---
title: "Christmas Island boat tragedy needs facts found not politics played"
date: "2010-12-16"
creators:
  - "Windsor, Tony"
source: "Office of WINDSOR, TONY, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211347537
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/437251%22
---

 

  TONY WINDSOR MP 

  INDEPENDENT   

  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND   

  Shop  5  

  259 Peel Street   TAMWORTH  NSW  2340   

 All Mail: PO Box 963   TAMWORTH  NSW  2340   

 Ph: (02) 6761 3080 

 Toll Free: 1300 301 839  Fax: (02) 6761 3380 

 e-mail: Tony.Windsor.MP@aph.gov.au  Web Page:  www.tonywindsor.com.au 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 For further information contact Tony Windsor,  Ph (02) 6761 3080 or 0427 66 8868 

 

 

 PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

 

 

 

 Media Release   

 16 December 2010   

 

 Christmas Island boat tragedy needs facts  found not politics played  The Independent member for New England, Tony Windsor is calling for the facts of the  Christmas Island boat tragedy to be found and not for politics to be played with it. 

 Mr  Windsor  is  deeply  saddened  by  the  news  that  at  least  28  people  have  died  with  that   number to possibly increase. 

 He said speculation about why it happened should not become a finger pointing exercise  about policy. 

 “The Christmas Island boat tragedy with the loss of at least 28 lives is a terrible event that  will be the subject of very close investigation and inquiry. 

 “Already  there  is  speculation  and  questioning  as  to  how  such  an  event  could  happen  on   our doorstep. 

 “For  people  within  the  political  sphere  and  some groups  with  an  agenda  to  push  to  start   playing  politics  over  policy  on  boat  people  is  opportunistic  and  until  all  the  facts  are   known  everyone  should  keep  a  respectful  demeanour  towards  each  other  and  focus  on   those in need of our help. 

 “Refugees  take  great  risks  in  leaving  their  homeland  where  they  face  dangerous   circumstances about which most Australians have little or no experience. 

 “I  ask  Australians  to  be  mindful  of  this  as  we  as  a  community  try  to  strike  a  balance  in   dealing with this event and issue,” Mr Windsor said. 

