---
title: "Unions welcome release of Aung San Suu Kyi but call for action on labour and human rights in Burma"
date: "2010-11-14"
creators:
  - "ACTU"
source: "ACTU"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211346033
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/364535%22
---

 Sunday, 14 November 2010

 Unions welcome release of Aung San Suu Kyi but

 call for action on labour and human rights in Burma

 There must be real action to improve workers’ rights in Burma following the release from

 house detention of pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi, say Australian unions

 The Australian Council of Trade Unions welcomes the release of Ms Suu Kyi from house

 arrest after seven years, but is deeply concerned that forced labour and repression of basic

 human rights continue under the military regime in Burma.

 “Aung San Suu Kyi is a beacon for democracy fighters worldwide and her overdue release is

 wonderful news,” said ACTU President Ged Kearney.

 “It will give hope to activists for a democratic Burma, including the large Burmese refugee

 community in Australia.

 “But it is only one small step towards true democracy, and as the recent sham elections

 showed, Burma remains an oppressive regime.

 “The release of Ms Suu Kyi should be the touchstone for a renewed effort for democratic and

 human rights reform in Burma.

 “The immediate next step should be the release of more than 2200 other political prisoners in

 Burma.

 “Beyond that, violations of labour rights, including complete denial of the right to join a union,

 remain a major ongoing concern in Burma.

 “Forced labour and child labour are also commonplace, and used as a tool of repression by

 the military regime.”

 Ms Kearney said Australian unions supported international calls for targeted investment and

 trade sanctions against Burma, and condemned any Australian companies that do business

 with the regime.

 It has been estimated that Australian companies doing business in Burma are effectively

 funding the junta to the tune of about $US2.8 billion.

 The ACTU’s overseas humanitarian aid agency, Union Aid Abroad-APHEDA, has had a

 long-standing commitment to Burma, and operates six projects for refugees on the Thai-

 Burma border.

 One of those projects is the Mae Tao Clinic, which urgently needs financial assistance to

 cope with the influx of refugees following this month’s election. For more information, go to

 www.apheda.org.au

 Media contact: 

 Mark Phillips ph (03) 8676 7266 or 0422 009 011; mphillips@actu.org.au

