---
title: "More leadership, less politics on asylum-seekers"
date: "2010-10-22"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211345071
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/312512%22
---

 More Leadership, Less Politics On Asylum-Seekers  Published on Sarah Hanson-Young (http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au) 

 

 More Leadership, Less Politics On Asylum-Seekers 

 

 

 The Australian Greens have called for community and political leaders to step up and lead a more  civil debate over the treatment of vulnerable asylum-seekers, according to Senator Sarah  Hanson-Young. 

 Senator Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson on Immigration, says the anger by some on display at  last night's public meeting in the Adelaide Hills is upsetting. 

 "It's time for elected members of Parliament and community leaders to take some of the hysteria  out of this debate, by putting the facts out there, and moving to stop the fearmongering,'' Senator  Hanson-Young said. 

 "We need a bit more leadership and a little less cheap politics. These vulnerable people are not  illegal, they are not criminals, they are simply asking for protection from torture and war. 

 "It is in everybody's interests for these asylum-seekers to be treated humanely, to have their claims  processed quickly and fairly, and for our immigration system to move through the backlog so that  we can minimise the cost to people's mental health that inevitably occurs when asylum-seekers are  detained for prolonged or indefinite periods. 

 The Greens believe that children, unaccompanied minors and families should be housed in the  community rather than in detention. 

 "There are obviously concerns in the community about the lack of consultation, but there is nothing  to fear from asylum-seekers and people should not be making personal attacks on families and  children who in many cases have suffered torture and trauma in their own countries,'' Senator  Hanson-Young said. 

 "Overwhelmingly, the people who seek our protection are found to be refugees with a genuine fear  of persecution. 

 "We need a measure of calm, so that expressions of frustration are not allowed to escalate into  something worse.'' 

 

 Detention Centres  Immigration  Refugees 

  Source URL:  http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au/content/media-release/more-leadership-less-politics-a  sylum-seekers 

 Page 1 of 2

 More Leadership, Less Politics On Asylum-Seekers  Published on Sarah Hanson-Young (http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au) 

 

 Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org) 

 Page 2 of 2

