---
title: "Launch of Australia's Human Rights Framework: address to the National Press Club, Canberra."
date: "2010-04-21"
creators:
  - "Mcclelland, Robert"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
  - "Australia's Human Rights Framework"
  - "Human rights"
  - "Discrimination"
  - "Consolidation of law"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337338
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8JSW6%22
---

 ATTORNEY-GENERAL ROBERT McCLELLAND MP

 LAUNCH OF AUSTRALIA’S HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK National Press Club of Australia, Canberra

 Wednesday, 21 April 2010

 Subject: Australia’s Human Rights Framework

 QUESTION: Nicola Berkovic from The Australian.

 Mr McClelland, you flagged today a review of the framework that you've announced in 2014. Does that mean that Labor might revisit the issue of a Human Rights Act at that point or further down the track, or are you categorically ruling out today any revisiting of the issue of a human rights charter if Labor is re-elected?

 McCLELLAND: All politicians hope for longevity. I hope I'm still around in 2014, but no one can guarantee these things. Look the review is in place because we believe it is a significant reform. It doesn't indicate that any particular view will be taken at that time. It is built into the process simply because it's a prudent thing to do when we introduce significant reform.

 QUESTION: Susanna Dunkerly from Australian Associated Press.

 Attorney-General, I was just wondering if the Government had any concerns that a charter of rights may have had implications for legislation such as the Northern Territory Intervention, the suspension of some asylum seekers applications and the internet filter and if not, will the Government make a commitment to look at these more controversial pieces of legislation first?

 And my second question is relating to another test case currently before the High Court relating to the South Australian Government's attempts to put control orders on people associated with some bikie gangs, and the bikies are arguing that that impedes on their civil liberties, do you agree with that argument or do you support the South Australian Government?

 McCLELLAND: The Commonwealth is intervening in that case. We will be supporting some of the arguments of the South Australian Government, but not addressing all issues. We'll be speaking from the point of view of our own Framework at a federal level in respect to these matters.

 In terms of the Northern Territory Intervention, Jenny Macklin has stated that we have reviewed and will be implementing changes to ensure that it complies with Australia's obligations under the Racial Discrimination Act.

 In terms of issues migration policy and legislation, again we believe all actions that we've taken are consistent with our obligations under the Refugees Convention. I think it's fair to say that any legislation from now on, or from the enactment of these changes, will have at the outset a focus on

 human rights considerations. So it will be up front and centre as part of the debate that Parliament engages on but the outcome may not necessarily be different in respect to that legislation or any legislation.

 In respect to this broader issue of coercive powers and rights perhaps because of my office but I have a specific view there. I notice a number of submissions to the Human Rights Enquiry started off on the premise or presumed that our counter-terrorism laws were an infringement of human rights. I think that argument and that submission ignores the fact that under the international instruments to which I've referred, there are specific rights and obligations.

 All citizens have a right to live with freedom from fear and indeed there are specific obligations in treaties such as the Racial Discrimination Act and importantly in the Convention on the Rights of the Child which casts an obligation on Governments at all levels to take all reasonable and necessary steps to protect children from violence, from aggression, from abuse and that is an obligation all children wherever they live have that right to live free from abuse.

 So, that is why in the speech I said that the Statements of Compatibility will enable the weighting of human rights considerations, and where those rights may be restricted or placed in the context of other obligations to individuals or societies.

 I should say at a federal level we haven't adopted the approach of the South Australian Government. We believe the model we have is sound but equally the South Australian Government has aimed at achieving a sound purpose.

 The fact that Governments take action and are required to take action to protect the safety and security of individuals is not inconsistent with human rights. Obviously it can be done so that there is appropriate review and the rights of all are recognised but it is a cutting edge of the debate.

 QUESTION: Hi, Peta Donald from Australia Network on the ABC.

 Can I ask you about the Four Corners program on Monday night? The program outlined concerns about some major Australian mining companies coming under cyber attack and there were concerns that those attacks had come from China. So how extensive do you think these sorts of attacks have been and is there any evidence that these attacks have come from China and how confident are you that the Government's Cyber Security Strategy that came into effect late last year will stop these kinds of attacks?

 McCLELLAND: It is an important issue, not simply this week, but in November 2008 the Prime Minister indicated in his National Security Statement that cyber security was very much a priority national security issue and since then we've put a lot of resources into the Cyber Security Operations Centre that is a joint operations centre but housed within defence. John Faulkner opened that this year, and in November we issued our Cyber Security Strategy.

 As part of that, the Attorney-General's Department has established CERT, the Computer Emergency Response Team which will be a pivot between business and Government and again the resources that are in other agencies and specifically drawn together through the Cyber Security Operation Centre.

 It's been publicly stated for example that Defence last year detected in the order of 200 attempted intrusions on their own infrastructure and received complaints of another 240 in the broader

 community so it is a significant issue. It is a difficult issue. I am convinced that the resources we have and the expertise we have developed are as good as any nation.

 I think we are equally on top of the game as any nation but that's not to say there are not going to be more complex, more frequent, and greater challenges particularly as we increase the technology which is going to have its own complications in the national security area.

 We're doing a lot of work - a lot of work in the area. I can't give you guarantees that we've got it entirely solved but I can give you a guarantee that we are very determined to ensure that we do maintain best practice, that we build those relationships, and put appropriate resources which are significant into this area.

 QUESTION: James Eyers from the Australian Financial Review.

 Mr McClelland in the absence of a charter of rights, rights will continue to be protected through the administrative law and in that regard, in your materials today you have suggested that the president of the Australian Human Rights Commission will become a permanent member of the Administrative Review Council.

 My question is what effect will this have given that the Administrative Review Council remains under-resourced and as I understand it has been without a President for the last six months? When does the Government intend to appoint a president to the Administrative Review Council and what do you see as its future role in the administrative law system?

 McCLELLAND: The Administrative Review Council does an excellent job. It consists of academics, representatives of private industry and the heads of departments who are particularly involved in this area, Immigration to name but one.

 This is an important area and we regard its work and the Council itself as being of importance and hence specifically why we thought appointing as an ex-officio member, the head of the Human Rights Commission, to that body was a significant thing.

 I have been in discussions with my Department as to who is an appropriate replacement for the Council and we have a few names available that we're giving consideration to.

 QUESTION: Attorney Chris Uhlmann from the 7.30 Report.

 You said at the outset that you've responded in the way that you have because you wanted to unite the community and not divide it, can you detail for us what would have been divisive about an act or a charter of rights?

 McCLELLAND: Where people proposing a charter or bill of rights, indeed where the Committee itself proposed to go a step further was in respect to the role of the courts in issuing declarations of inconsistency.

 That is, the courts would attempt to construe legislation consistently with Australian's human rights obligations. If they could not do so and apply the law to reach an outcome that they thought was inconsistent with human rights obligations then it was proposed that they would have the ability to issue a declaration to that effect.

 That declaration would then be considered by the Parliament. Parliament would have the ability to either re-affirm its legislation with regard to the court's determination, it may amend it or it may repeal it in light of that declaration.

 I think it is fair to say that that was the step many in this room would have liked the Government to have taken, and that was the controversial issue, the controversy being is the authority or sovereignty of Parliament usurped by the courts, having the power to issue this declaration? That is the controversy.

 We have, assessing the arguments, considered that our focus is on the outset, getting the focus on human rights at the outset of the parliamentary process, and indeed the administrative process, and that has been the focus and hence no need to take that additional step. There will be those who will argue passionately in this area for the alternative points of view.

 QUESTION: Laurie Wilson from A-PAC.

 Chris Uhlmann just asked the question I was going to ask, but I might just therefore ask it too. I'll just pick up on that last point. Do you think there's a danger, given your comments, that the community might say, well, isn't this just a case of the politicians protecting their patch, their powers if you like, in terms of ensuring that the courts don't have a greater say, on the basis that many people, obviously -and you made the point - in this room, have a genuine belief that that was the path to go down.

 And if I could pick up on another comment you made towards the end of your speech, you said we can be entirely proud of our human rights protections we have in place, our record. But what would you say to, you know, Amnesty International, the various UN agencies like UNHCR, Indigenous groups, other disadvantaged marginalised groups in Australian society who say, hey, we don't see that, that's not our experience? What do you say to them?

 McCLELLAND: Without being presumptuous, I think looking around the room, most people in this room are not of a background which has been deprived. There is always a danger in generalisations. And indeed a lot of commentators in this area are not from a background that has suffered disadvantage. So I would like to think that if they reflect, that they will acknowledge there is a need for enhancement in this area. How far that enhancement goes is obviously the cause of legitimate debate.

 The report makes the very point that you make, that while we are doing well and the vast bulk of Australians don't even contemplate that their rights are going to be infringed by government or that they will be without an adequate voice, there are a range of groups, those without housing, victims of domestic violence, our Indigenous community, the rights of disabled where we have a long, long way to go.

 I think it's fair to say that the whole purpose of the framework is to re-adjust a focus on all that we do in legislation and administrative action and have regard to the interests of all Australians, including those who are from less than privileged backgrounds or have a particular disadvantage or a disability.

 In terms of the argument that rights are meaningless unless they're enforceable, in terms of that, I would say that, look, our focus again is looking at the systemic consideration of rights at this parliamentary level of the creation of legislation at an administrative level, but also giving people the opportunity through their representatives but also in a form, I suppose, of participatory democracy, through the Joint Committee on Human Rights and its ability to conduct public hearings, the opportunity to have a voice.

 So, that has been the focus. I appreciate there are those who will argue that additional steps are necessary but again, by focusing on these systemic considerations, we think we have got the balance right.

 COMPERE: Minister, could I just take this line of thinking a bit further from those two questions. Laurie was sort of suggesting that one of the arguments against a charter or a human rights act might be the fear of having something like an independent umpire, a judge, to say whether something was in order of not. How robust do you intend your Statements of Compatibility to be? Will you codify it to an extent that makes it clear what is required to be included in such a statement and a very clear definition of the reasons that you're departing from the conventions or the international instruments that are apparently being breached?

 McCLELLAND: The requirements will be contained in legislation, so that will be there. The details looking at where these exist in other jurisdictions domestically and internationally, they do range from a brief statement of the amendments, whereas the Northern Territory intervention and counter-terrorism laws, for instance, may well raise very significant issues where there are more extensive requirements. In drafting our legislation, will have regard to precedents that exist overseas and in Australia. We don't want to be too prescriptive.

 Again, in terms of how they operate, in Victoria for instance, Rob Hulls recently issued such a statement in respect to tougher criminal laws to address the issue of violence against Indian students, where he went through human rights considerations and emphasised also the obligations on Government to do something about that issue of violence. So that's probably not a bad example to look at, in terms of balancing these considerations.

 QUESTION: Minister, Steve Lewis from News Limited.

 You have spoken about the issue of disability. Can I just ask you to perhaps expand on that issue. There are forecasts that the number of people with a disability is going to increase and that will become, like health I guess, an increasing drain on the budget. Can I ask you to address the question of do you believe that in years to come, is this Government going to have to look to put in place some more permanent funding structures to try and address the myriad of issues and challenges facing people with a disability?

 And could I also ask you from, I guess, a Ministerial point of view, your colleague Bill Shorten has been doing some terrific work over the last couple of years addressing these many challenges, but he is a Parliamentary Secretary. Is it not time that that portfolio is elevated up the pecking order into a full ministerial, perhaps even a Cabinet position, so that these very important challenges can be tackled at a higher level?

 McCLELLAND: I agree with you that Bill has done an excellent job. And I think as a Government, we have put a fair bit of effort into this area. We were one of the first governments, for instance, to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Disabled. And as a result of that, we were able to have Professor Ron McCallum elected to the international committee of that body and since then he's been promoted within that body. So he is really having a very significant influence in the development of international policy.

 The Government recently released the Disability Access to Premises Standards. All the research in that indicated that, as you say, this is going to be a very significant issue, and it is associated not only with those who suffer a disability but it is also associated with the ageing of the population and the ability

 of people obviously is restricted, in terms of mobility. That was one of the motivators, I think, and the private sector did a tremendous job coming on board in a very complex, very detailed, very minute analysis of Access to Premises Standards because they recognised that it was in their commercial interests to ensure that they had ongoing access in light of this trend in the community.

 While you indicated that those with a disability may be a financial burden on the budget, and depending on the nature of the disability, that may well be right. But we believe if we get our systems right and if we get a respect and recognition of the rights of the disabled happening at an early place in time, opportunity to education, opportunity of employment, a voice in politics and the whole range of social interaction, you actually maximise the productive capability of your society as a whole, by maximising the capability of those who have a disability.

 Bill, with Jenny Macklin, is also embarking on not only consideration of a form of a national compensation package, for want of a better description, for those who suffer illness or disability which is very embryonic, Bill would say at this stage, but certainly an issue worth examining, but they are also looking at this whole issue of opportunity for those with a disability in terms of education and employment opportunity and a lot of very solid work is occurring there.

 The suggestion about elevating a specific Ministry, that is not for me to call, but it's a valid point.

 QUESTION: Tony Melville, director of the National Press Club.

 I was reading the Sunday papers and read a few of them at the weekend, and one paper in one state had a story about a serious criminal who was given bail while he was waiting trial. And another story in another state had a story about a serious criminal who was denied bail and both stories took different angles to it, but it made me think about the right of bail being fairly generic, but in one state can get out fairly easily, in another you don't.

 And I guess the Federal Government's looking at the hospitals at the moment, taking over the hospitals. We've had workplace relations laws. You talked about the human rights laws and discussions you're having with the states. Is there greater scope for forays into these sorts of areas, into State laws?

 McCLELLAND: I think there are more extreme examples in some states. For instance, in Queensland it's possible to be jailed for non-payment of a fine. So, while the penalty specified in the particular section of the Crimes Act or Code specifies a fine rather than imprisonment, ultimately you may be liable to imprisonment if you don't pay or can't pay the fine.

 So, the disparity across states and territories on these issues is significant. We try and address through the Standing Committee of the Attorneys General various issues in respect of criminal law enforcement. I'm not aware in recent years that there's been a specific reference on bail conditions, but something to look at and certainly, I think, associated with bail conditions, this issue as to when people can or can't be jailed for non-payment of fines is also a live issue and a similar context.

 QUESTION: Mr McClelland, do you think that this Brennan Consultation process has actually caused a political problem for Labor by perhaps raising expectations of a charter unrealistically among some within the community?

 And also, can I just get you to clarify the reasons for actually rejecting a charter. You've talked about it being a divisive issue. Are you saying that the Government has simply rejected this because it's too

 contentious in an election year? Or does the Government actually believe that it would transfer too much power to judges?

 McCLELLAND: No, I don't think the report has created a political problem at all and if I can answer it another way, it most certainly shouldn't because I think all Australians of decent and fair mind would say that these issues should be discussed, should be considered even though they may have intensely different views on these matters.

 I am proud of the Framework that we are announcing. It will make a real difference. Over time the cultural impact it will have on education, from the impact it will have on putting the focus on rights up front and centre in the legislative process, and in the public service administration process are all significant things. Engaging the public in a dialogue with the Parliament, through the joint Parliamentary Committee on human rights, again we believe is significant.

 The Government, as I say, thinks that these are practical measures, they are common sense measures. I think by-and-large they will have, or at least should have the support of the broader community and I think they generally will. And again, I think we can do that in the context where we avoid the more intense and out there submissions by going into the area of a Charter or Bill of Rights.

 I think it's fair to say that in all areas of public policy my observations are those who advocate the benefits of a particular measure, tend to overstate things, but equally those who oppose a particular measure, or highlight the detriments of the particular measure tend to, for the purpose of their arguments, overstate things as well.

 We believe these measures will make a real and practical difference and they will do it in a way that brings the community, or the best part of the community along with the process.

 QUESTION: Attorney General, Labor was reportedly quite divided on this issue of adopting a charter. I was just wondering what your position was? Did you support it in the party room? And if I could just clarify the impact statements, they will apply retrospectively to existing legislation? And who will undertake those impact statements?

 McCLELLAND: I will state as the custom that I won't go beyond the veil of the Cabinet process to indicate my view or the outcome of those discussions. But I can say, and I won't go through the previous answer I gave, why we are proud and believe this package will make a difference.

 But I should clarify that the Statements of Compatibility will only apply to legislation that is introduced. It will apply prospectively, not retrospectively.

 There will be a separate process where we will identify and the question which I didn't answer before, appropriately suggested that we prioritise legislation where there is an intense focus on rights. And we certainly intend to do that. The counter-terrorism area is another area where we are already conducting a review.

 So, the review or any amendments arising from those reviews which will brought into Parliament will have a Statement of Compatibility accompanying those new amendments as they're brought in, but that will apply prospectively, not retrospectively. So, I think that is an important thing to emphasise.

 [Ends]



