---
title: "Gillard's East Timor plan will only ever be a temporary fix confirms Horta as yet another boat arrives"
date: "2010-10-11"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344533
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/286531%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook 

 

 Gillard's East Timor plan will only ever be a  temporary fix confirms Horta as yet another  boat arrives   11/10/10  

 The statement by the President of East Timor, Jose Ramos Horta that any plan for a  regional processing centre in East Timor would only be temporary, has poured even  more cold water on Labor’s ‘never never’ plans to establish the centre, as the fifth  boat in four days arrived, Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population & Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “On the same day that the 105th boat this year arrived off our coast, Jose Ramos  Horta told reporters, on the eve of Minister Bowen’s visit, that any centre could only  be temporary and would cost $30 million to develop and a further $30 million each  year to run,”[1] Mr Morrison said. 

 “Given the state of supporting infrastructure in East Timor and, unlike the Nauru  option, the need to make the centre a secure facility, costs are likely to be far higher.  As a signatory to the Refugee Convention the facility will also require special  legislation to quarantine the impact of East Timor’s convention obligations, to avoid  being held responsible for the long term residency of people taken to the centre. 

 “The Gillard Government can’t take a hint when it comes to the problems associated  with their flawed proposal for a regional processing centre in East Timor. 

 “The region has profound reservations about the idea as it runs the real risk of  creating an asylum magnet within our region, making an already difficult situation  worse. 

 “Apart from the fact that the people of East Timor, the majority of East Timorese MPs  and senior Government members are opposed to the idea, it is clear that at best it  would now only ever be a temporary option. 

 “Surely it’s time for the Prime Minister to take the hint and stop this charade over her  never never plan for East Timor. 

 “Labor must turn their attention to their own policy failures that have led more than  8,200 people and 173 boats illegally arriving in Australia since they chose to  dismantle the strong border protection regime inherited from the Coalition. 

 “On the weekend, Minister Bowen displayed an acute lack of understanding of the  issue by equating the position of the secondary movement of Afghans through our  region with the legitimate regional crisis of Indochinese fleeing Vietnam, in the  decade after the Vietnam War. 

 “The regional crisis today is being caused by Labor’s failed policies, not an internal  regional conflict. It requires an Australian solution, dealing with Australia’s problem  caused by Australia’s failed polices under the Rudd Gillard Governments,” he said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “What we are now seeing is a whole new level of unauthorised  arrivals. 

 “This is only the start of this new government’s term and already we are seeing a  climbing rate of arrivals. 

 “A new Immigration Minister and a new look Labor Government only seems to have  strengthened the people smuggling industry. 

 “If this rate of arrivals continues for this Government’s full term, Australia will be in  serious trouble. The Government needs to take action now, before they lose control  altogether,” he said. 

 [1] AFP ‘Timor Solution not permanent: president’ http://news.smh.com.au/breaking-news-world/timor-solution-not-permanent-president-20101011-16fbv.html accessed  11-10-10 

  

