---
title: "Asylum seeker return reintegration package announced"
date: "2010-11-09"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211345843
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/371732%22
---

 Chris Bowen, MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Federal Member for McMahon 

 Asylum seeker return reintegration package announced 

 Tuesday, 9 November 2010 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen, today announced a program of  modest reintegration assistance to support the sustainable return of irregular maritime  arrivals who choose to return to their country of origin. 

 ‘The provision of reintegration assistance is an important tool that has been employed in  the past by previous Australian governments and is currently employed by many European  countries to enable the sustainable return of asylum seekers who are found not to be owed  protection,’ Mr Bowen said. 

 The provision of individual reintegration assistance to support sustained returns recognises  that some asylum seekers will return to a country in which they have not lived for a number  of years and may have limited assets or support networks on return.  In many cases,  employment opportunities for returnees may also be limited. 

 ‘Properly targeted reintegration assistance for returned asylum seekers can minimise the  risk that the return will be unsustainable and that returnees will again become displaced,’  Mr Bowen said. 

 Reintegration assistance will be tailored to individual circumstances and will primarily  consist of in-kind support such as vocational training, small business start-up and job  placement support. 

 The International Organization for Migration (IOM) will deliver the reintegration assistance  program. The program is designed to complement the independent immigration advice and  counselling that IOM is already providing to irregular maritime arrivals. 

 The IOM has substantial international experience in this field and delivers similar programs  for a number of European countries including the United Kingdom.  The IOM will remain in  contact over a fixed period with returnees to determine the effectiveness of the  reintegration assistance program. 

 

 

