---
title: "21 boats and over 1,000 people since election & still no answers from Labor"
date: "2010-10-21"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211345038
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/312497%22
---

 Michael Keenan, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection  Member for Stirling, WA 

 21 boats and over 1,000 people since  election & still no answers from Labor   21/10/10  

 The latest illegal boat arrival, carrying 90 people, means more than 1,000 people have arrived  on illegal boats since the election, adding to Australia’s immigration detention crisis that the  Gillard  government  refuses  to  address  decisively,  Shadow  Minister  for  Productivity  and   Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow  Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.     

 “Since the election 21 boats have illegally  arrived, carrying more than 1000 people. All the  Gillard government can do is open more beds but as every new boat arrival shows, opening  more beds doesn’t stop more boats,” Mr Morrison said.  

 “Julia Gillard’s never never East Timor solution continues to unravel in farce with revelations  in  Senate  estimates  that  after  three  months  there  is  still  no  proposal  for  the  centre.  Senior   Indonesian officials have also described the idea as an asylum magnet and the Prime Minister  cannot even define the regional boundary that determines who will be eligible to be processed  at the regional centre,” he said.  

 “As  soon  as  the  election  was  over  Julia  Gillard  and  Minister  Bowen  opened  over  3,000   detention beds, despite misleading the Australian people during the campaign that there were  no plans for further expansion of our onshore detention network.  

 “If the Coalition were in government Nauru would be open and offshore processing would be  a reality. Instead Labor are still only talking about their never never plans. While Labor keeps  talking, the boats keep coming.    

 “Labor has tapped the mat on border protection and as long as they  persist with their never  never  policies  and  opening  more  beds  the  people  smugglers  boom  will  continue,”  Mr   Morrison said. 

 Mr  Keenan  said:  “The  wider  this  Government  opens  Australia’s  doors,  the  faster  the  boats   will come.  

 “Monday’s announcement of two new detention facilities signalled to the people smugglers  that our doors are wide open. 

 “And now they are coming. 

 “We need to stop the boats from coming, not provide more beds, and more incentive for the  people smugglers to continue their trade,” he said. 

