---
title: "Migration program targeting skills"
date: "2010-10-27"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211345319
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/371725%22
---

 Chris Bowen, MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Federal Member for McMahon 

 Migration program targeting skills 

 Wednesday, 27 October 2010 

 Australia's migration program continues to target the skills Australia needs for a healthy economy,  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, announced today. 

 Launching the Report on Migration Program 2009-10, Mr Bowen said the Government's targeted  approach to overseas workers was helping to fill critical skills gaps in the healthcare, engineering,  financial services and IT sectors. 

 More than 60 per cent of the skill stream outcome comprised applicants under the targeted  categories, including those who were sponsored by either an employer or state/territory  government - a 12 per cent increase on the previous program year. 

 The total outcome for the 2009-10 migration program was 168 623 places (0.05 per cent below the  planning level). The 2009-10 skill stream outcome of 107 868 places accounted for 64 per cent of the  total migration program.  

 The skilled program planning level was reduced in the 2009-10 Budget to 108 100 in response to the  continued economic slowdown through most of 2009.  

 Despite this, the proportion of overseas workers who were sponsored by employers continued to  rise, comprising 38 per cent of the 2009-10 skill stream, compared to 33 per cent in 2008-09 and  22 per cent in the 2007-08 program year.  

 'This outcome is consistent with the government's focus on high-demand, employer-sponsored  professionals in areas where Australia has critical skill shortages,' Mr Bowen said.  

 'The program met the government's objective of sharpening the focus on skilled migration and  targeting the needs of Australian industries and employers.'  

 The migration program showed that across all permanent skilled visa categories, the top three  occupations were accountants (6734), computing professionals (5370) and registered nurses (3960)  while the top three countries of citizenship for these categories were the United Kingdom (18 487),  India (18 042) and China (14 505). 

 The government announced in the 2010-11 Budget that the overall level of skilled migration would  increase by 5750 places to further address Australia's needs as the economic climate improves. This  will increase the proportion of skilled migrants to 67.5 per cent of the migration program. 

 The top three countries of citizenship under the family stream were China (10 218), the United  Kingdom (7229) and India (5103). 

 Overall, the United Kingdom remains Australia's largest source of migrants with a total outcome of  25 738 or 15 per cent of the total migration program in 2009-10, with China (24 768) and India  (23 164) following closely behind. 

 The Report on Migration Program 2009-10 is available on the Department of Immigration and  Citizenship website.  See: www.immi.gov.au/media/statistics/statistical-info/visa-grants/ 

 The minister also revealed that refugees from Burma, Iraq and Bhutan are among the 13 770  vulnerable people starting a new life in Australia through the 2009-10 humanitarian program. The  planning level was 13 750 places.  

 The figures reveal that of these 13 770 people, Burma has 1959 humanitarian visa grants, Iraq 1688  and Bhutan 1144.  

 'These refugees had fled violence and persecution in their home countries,' Mr Bowen said.  

 'Many had been living in volatile and insecure situations, both in camps and urban environments. 

 'As a responsible member of the international community, Australia contributes to the system of  international refugee protection. This is something of which we in Australia can all be proud as we  have provided refuge and hope for 13 770 people.'  

 

 

