---
title: "Govt must review interception protocols after Cocos Island tragedy"
date: "2010-05-10"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211338311
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/312505%22
---

 Govt Must Review Interception Protocols After Cocos Island Tragedy  Published on Sarah Hanson-Young (http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au) 

 

 Govt Must Review Interception Protocols After Cocos  Island Tragedy 

 

 

 The Australian Greens have called on the Federal Government to review its protocols for monitoring  and intercepting boat arrivals after the reported drowning of five asylum-seekers off the Cocos  Islands, according to Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young. 

 Senator Hanson-Young, Greens Spokesperson on Immigration and Human Rights, says the deaths  are a tragedy. 

 "It is desperately sad that these vulnerable people have lost their lives, reportedly after swimming  for help,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "This news again raises the issue of Australia's practices and protocols when a boat is sighted, and  the Greens believe the Government must investigate the handling of this incident to identify  whether anything could have been done to prevent this tragedy. 

 "Customs knew of this boat as early as April 30 and were told the boat had run out of food, fuel and  water. We also know that many of the boats that make this journey are unseaworthy - this boat had  more than 60 people on board. 

 "An investigation into the incident must consider whether it was possible for Customs officials to  pick these people up? 

 "We need a public investigation of the monitoring and interception protocols and a move to a more  pro-active policy rather than a wait-and-see approach.'' 

 Senator Hanson-Young also condemned the Liberal Party's latest ad, which features a call to deal  with "illegal immigration", with red arrows pointing to Australia from nations which are the main  sources of asylum-seeker applications in Australia. 

 "This ad is appalling - it's false, it relies on fearmongering and does nothing to advance the  discussion on how we deal with vulnerable asylum-seekers,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "The Liberals must pull this ad immediately. 

 "The question is, however, Is Tony Abbott now proposing a Coalition policy that Australia abandons  its international obligations and refuses to allow asylum-seekers or refugees into the country? If he  is, then he has to be upfront with the Australian people. 

 "I am calling on the Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) and the Advertising  Standards Board to investigate this ad and the broadcasters who allowed it to go to air.'' 

 

 Detention Centres  Immigration  Refugees 

  Source URL:  http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au/content/media-release/govt-must-review-interception- protocols-after-cocos-island-tragedy   

 Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org) 

 Page 1 of 1

