---
title: "Boat arrivals double in 2010 as latest policy failure arrives"
date: "2010-11-19"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211346298
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/371744%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook 

 

 Boat arrivals double in 2010 as latest  policy failure arrives   19/11/10  

 The arrival of the 122nd boat this year, with 57 people on board, means that twice as  many boats have now arrived this year than arrived in the whole of 2009, Shadow  Minister for Productivity and Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border  Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “Last year 61 boats with 2,856 people on board arrived. This year, as Labor’s  immigration and border protection crisis has worsened under Julia Gillard and  Minister Bowen, a record 122 illegal boats with 6,153 people have arrived,” Mr  Morrison said. 

 “It was Julia Gillard who said, another boat arrival another policy failure. As long as  Labor continues to lose its way with Julia Gillard at the helm, the people smugglers  will continue to find their way to Australia under Labor’s failed policies,” he said. 

 “A total of 190 boats with 9,188 people on board have arrived since Labor tore up the  Coalition’s strong border protection regime in August 2008. This is a record that will  continue to be broken under a government that doesn’t even admit it has a problem. 

 “People smugglers are dispatching leaky boats at will and Australians are being  forced to bear a growing burden for Labor’s failure. 

 “The crisis in immigration detention is worsening. Reports of protests on Christmas  Island, unrest at Villawood Detention Centre and brawls in Broadmeadows - are  symptoms of a Labor mess of their own creation that is getting out of control. 

 “Christmas Island is bursting at the seams with around 3,000 people now crammed  into facilities that were designed to accommodate 800 under ‘surge’ conditions and  new detention centres announced by Minister Bowen will be full as soon as they 

 open,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest boat arrival indicates that the Labor/Greens alliance has  emboldened the people smugglers and given them greater confidence to continue their  insidious trade in human misery. 

 “The people smugglers will no doubt continue to take advantage of the slackened  border conditions provided by the Gillard Labor Government, thereby placing further  strain on our limited Border resources. 

 “With the festive season approaching, it seems that everyone else will have the  opportunity to take a break except the hard working men and women of Border  Protection Command, who are already stretched beyond capacity,” he said. 

  

