---
title: "Labor's contempt for the Adelaide Hills"
date: "2010-10-23"
creators:
  - "Briggs, Jamie"
source: "Office of BRIGGS, JAMIE, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211345125
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/350157%22
---

 Jamie Briggs, MP 

 Chairman - Scrutiny of Government Waste Committee  Member for Mayo 

 Media Release  

 Labor's contempt for the Adelaide hills  

  Saturday 23 October 2010 

 I am calling on the Immigration Minister Chris Bowen to visit the Adelaide Hills to hear first  hand the concerns the community have with the proposed detention centre at  Inverbrackie.  

 Last night on ABC’s PM program, the Minister showed his complete disregard for the local  community, saying “The Cabinet's made a decision and we're implementing it...” 

 

 Worse still the Minister last night refused to consider a Parliamentary enquiry describing it  as a “political organisation”.  If Chris Bowen believes Parliamentary committees are merely  “political organisations”, you would have to wonder what is the purpose of the climate  change committee and the committee looking at the Murray Darling Basin plan?  

 

 It is not good enough to simply duck shove this to the public service; this Labor Minister  must front this community and explain.  

 

 The community deserves better than this.  They deserve to have an opportunity to raise  their concerns directly with the Minister before a final decision is made.  

 

 The suggestions by senior Labor Ministers that the Woodside community is engaging in  hysteria underline the point that they have completely lost control of the issue.  Rather than  taking pot shots from Canberra, Labor Ministers should have the guts to front the  community and ask them what they think.  

 

 It is not good enough for the Prime Minister to simply use the Adelaide hills for photo  opportunities; she must return and listen to their concerns.  At the very least demand her  Minister attend a public forum and answer the questions.  

 

 If they think that Inverbrackie is the best place to house 400 asylum seekers, then they  should front up and tell the local residents the reasons why.  

 

