---
title: "Three years of failure: detention population soars under Labor"
date: "2010-11-23"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR PRODUCTIVITY & POPULATION, IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211346444
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/383561%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook 

 

 Three years of failure: Detention population  soars under Labor   23/11/10  

 The  scale  of  Labor’s  immigration  detention  crisis  is  revealed  by  immigration  detention   figures from exactly three years ago today that show there were just four illegal boat arrivals  in detention when the Howard Government left office, Shadow Minister for Productivity and  Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today. 

 “On this day in 2007 there were 449 people being held in immigration detention, only four of  whom  had  arrived  to  Australia  illegally  by  boat.  Today  there  are  over  5,300  people  being   detained, over 5,100 of whom arrived illegally by boat because of Labor’s failed immigration  and border protection regime,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “This  is  failure  on  a  massive  scale  and  underscores  the  crisis  in  our  immigration  detention   system  which  has  seen  chronic  overcrowding,  court  challenges,  unrest,  violence  and   gruesome protests,” he said. 

 “Three  years  ago,  just  a  day  out  from  the  2007  election,  the  Howard  Government  was   presiding  over  a  strong  border  protection  regime  with  temporary  protection  visas,  third   country  offshore  processing  in  Nauru  and  the  commitment  to  turn  back  boats  where  the   circumstances allowed. 

 “This series of measures meant that just ten illegal boats arrived in Australia over the last six  years of the Howard Government. This month alone there have been ten illegal boat arrivals  with 554 people on board and a boat arrival record is being set every week. 

 “Revelations  today  that  in  2008  the  then  Immigration  Minister  Chris  Evans  was  warned  by   his  department  that  closing  Nauru  would  lead  to  a  surge  in  boat  arrivals  is  a  damning   indictment of the government’s failure. 

 “This  clearly  shows  that  the  Labor  Government  knowingly  and  willingly  dismantled  the   strong border protection regime they inherited from the Coalition and that people smugglers  will continue to find their way to Australia under Labor's failed policies. 

 “Minister Bowen must this week come into the Parliament and give a Ministerial statement   outlining  the  full  extent  of  the  government’s  immigration  and  border  protection  chaos  and   outlining their plan to fix this mess.  

 “We are happy to have that plan contrasted with what the Coalition has to offer - a suite of  proven  policies  that  stopped  the  boats  and  an  immigration  detention  system  that  ran   effectively and efficiently,” Mr Morrison said. 

