---
title: "Greens will work to make detention policy changes a reality"
date: "2010-10-18"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344859
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/305126%22
---

 

 SARAH HANSON-YOUNG 

 GREENS WILL WORK TO MAKE DETENTION POLICY CHANGES A REALITY 

 18th October 2010 9:24 am 

 Today's news from the Federal Government is finally an acknowledgement that it has got it  wrong on the detention of children, and the Australian Greens welcome the commitment by  the Minister to fix the problem, according to Senator Sarah Hanson-Young. 

 Senator Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson on Immigration, says reports of an imminent  release of hundreds of asylum-seekers into the community are welcome, and a victory for the  long-term campaign by the Greens, key NGOs and concerned members of the community  against detention of children. But she says the Government must eliminate all doubt by  enshrining any changes in legislation. 

 "There are few details available, but If media reports are correct, then this is very good  news,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "The Greens have been vocal in calling for a change to the way Australia treats young  asylum-seekers, so if the Federal Government is finally acknowledging that vulnerable  children do not belong in detention, then that is a good start. 

 "But the many Australians who oppose the detention of children remember all too well what  happened under the dark days of the Howard Government - how children were detained for  far too long, then when a new government had the chance, it failed to shut the door forever on  this inhumane policy through legislation. This failure must not be repeated.'' 

 The Greens have announced a plan to deal with children and unaccompanied minors in  detention, through amendments to the Migration Act to exempt them from the mandatory  provisions of the act. 

 The plan also calls for an expansion of the Community Assistance Support program - which  provides asylum-seekers in the community with key services - with appropriate funding and  resources to cover all children and minors as well as their parents and caregivers. 

 "The Greens have a plan to put children and families going through immigration processes in  the community where they belong. If the Government is serious about reforming the system,  then it should take a look at our plan and then work together to make it a reality," Senator  Hanson-Young said. 

