---
title: "Harkins again calls for Tasmania to become an internment camp"
date: "2010-11-12"
creators:
  - "Bushby, David"
source: "Office of BUSHBY, SEN DAVID"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211345984
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/354934%22
---

 

 

         - MEDIA RELEASE -   SENATOR DAVID BUSHBY  Liberal Senator for Tasmania         Chair of the Coalition Economics Policy Committee 

 Advancing Tasmania’s Interests…   

 DB12111001           Friday, 12 November 2010 

 

 Harkins again calls for Tasmania to  become an internment camp   

 Unions Tasmania boss and Tasmanian Labor Party Vice President, Kevin  Harkins, should publicly state where he thinks a Tasmanian centre for  processing asylum seekers should be located, Liberal Senator for Tasmania,  David Bushby said today.    

 “Turning our State into a processing centre for people who arrive in Australia  without a visa, as suggested by Kevin Harkins, would no doubt add a little to  the level of economic activity in Tasmania, but as has been shown by the  sharp opposition to the Adelaide Hills centre, this benefit tends to be  outweighed by community concerns about where they are located," Senator  Bushby said.   

 “As such, Mr Harkins should back his call for a Tasmanian processing centre  by stating where he thinks it should go.”   

 The need for more processing centres comes about as a direct result of  Labor’s policies, which have created the marketing opportunity for people  smugglers to sell the hazardous boat journey to Australia.    

 "Yesterday's High Court ruling blow to the Gillard Government's offshore  processing attempts, just highlights the consequences of yet another Labor  policy failure, as Federal Labor struggles to accommodate and process more  people without visas arriving on more boats than Australia has ever before  seen," Senator Bushby said.   

 “Tasmanians should and will welcome any families who are housed in our  State as part of the new policy by the Government.  But it is inevitable that if  such a centre was to be developed in Tasmania, the local community would  have concerns and these need to be considered as part of any assessment of  the benefits to Tasmania.”   

 Media Enquiries: Heath Michael - 0400 467 232   

 “Please see Labor Vice President Kevin Harkins previous press release below along with a call he made on facebook  today”   

 Kevin Harkins Now that the "Christmas Island" solution is kuput, can we at least  CONSIDER bringing people to Tassie - think of the JOBS it will create if nothing else!  Our elected representatives, your thoughts please (in anticipation)??? 

 Kevin Harkins Why is it that the pollies don't express an opinion? Surely sometimes  the "party line" should be set aside for the sake of an honest and open discussion, or  not? It's not that scarey - who wants to go first? 

 

 Asylum Seekers - A Lost Opportunity for Tasmania?   

 by Kevin Hark ins on Tuesday, October 19, 2010 at 9:02am 

 Changes announced yesterday to the Federal Governments Asylum Seeker Policy  must not become a lost opportunity for Tasmanian workers. 

 The Tasmanian State Government and our Federal Parliamentarians should  immediately request that asylum seeker families that are to be relocated into the  community, be considered for relocation to Tasmania. 

 Construction of new housing units should begin immediately with extra housing units  added for the use of Housing Tasmania and the Tasmanian Community. 

 Serious consideration should also be given to the construction of an “open”  processing centre in Tasmania, possibly in the North or North West of the state which  would provide adequate accommodation for asylum seekers and many badly needed  jobs for the region. 

 There is unlikely to be any other new project in this state that will offer the same job  opportunities for Tasmanian workers while demonstrating our strength of conviction  to help people in need. 

