---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Ramallah: 14 December 2010: peace process; development assistance; State of Palestine; nuclear non-proliferation"
date: "2010-12-14"
creators:
  - "Malki, Riad"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "peace process"
  - "development assistance"
  - "State of Palestine"
  - "nuclear non-proliferation"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211347442
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/433020%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP 

 TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH PALESTINIAN   FOREIGN MINISTER RIAD MALKI    

 RAMALLAH   

 14 DECEMBER  2010   

 

 

 Subjects:  Peace process, development assistance, State of Palestine,  nuclear non-proliferation   

 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 DR MALKI: Introductory remarks in Arabic. 

 In English: I just want to say that we do welcome the Honourable Kevin Rudd and his  delegation in the Palestinian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  We have discussed different  matters.  

 First of all we extended our appreciation and thanks to Australia for the support that has  been given to the Palestinian Authority, not only political, in terms of supporting the two  state solution, but also in terms of developmental support and also the announcement of  the five year development partnership between Australia and Palestine which allows the  Palestinians to plan ahead in terms of their need to continue further building the institutions  towards statehood.  We appreciate very much that kind of support that Australia has  extended to us.  

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 2 

 

 We discussed the impasse in the negotiations and we were looking for ways how to renew  such negotiations.  

 We highlighted our readiness as the Palestinian side to be fully engaged with Israel in order  really to reach an agreement as soon as possible that will put an end to the conflict and  allow a Palestinian state to be established alongside the State of Israel.  

 We discussed our bilateral relations and we explored the ways how to further develop these  bilateral relations in a way that will serve both the interests of Australia and Palestine.  Once  again I do appreciate and thank the Honourable Minister Kevin Rudd for coming and visiting  Palestine, Palestinian Territory and visiting us here in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

 MR RUDD: Thank you very much Minister. Thank you for making me feel so welcome here in  Ramallah today.  

 I said to the Minister as I arrived having been to Ramallah a number of times in the past, it’s  good to see the changes; it’s good to see the signs of economic development; it’s good to  see greater signs of economic activity and I would congratulate the leadership of the  Palestinian Authority for having overseen good economic growth in recent times, which  means more jobs, increased living standards and better prospects for the Palestinian  people.  

 I was privileged last night to have a good and solid conversation with President Mahmoud  Abbas.  This was a conversation which dealt not just with the bilateral engagement that we  have here in the Palestinian Authority and the development assistance that we seek to  provide here, but also on the broader dimensions of the Middle East peace process.  

 Of course this Middle East peace process is at a difficult time. I think everyone recognises  that fact.  

 As I said in my public remarks at the King David Hotel in Jerusalem last night, my own belief  is that time is running out.  My own belief is that we need to land a conclusion to the Middle  East peace process.  I believe that is in the interests of the Israeli people and I believe that to  be in the interests of the Palestinian people; all anchored in the underlying principles of a  two state solution.  

 The Minister and I this morning continued that conversation about the peace process and  the individual elements of it and where the negotiating process proceeds to from here.  

 Of course Senator Mitchell is in town this morning.  I was fortunate to spend some time with  him in Jerusalem this morning as well before coming to Ramallah.  And we in Australia wish  him well, as we do the efforts of Secretary Clinton to assist this process reaching its  conclusion.  

 Can I also say Minister how delighted we in Australia are to provide continued and  expanded assistance to the Palestinian Authority and the broader works in support of the  Palestinian people and Palestinian refugees.  

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 3 

 

 We have been long contributors to UNRWA and today I’ve been delighted to confirm a  further contribution on our part of some 18 million dollars to assist UNRWA’s efforts and  not just here but also in Gaza and its wider operations with Palestinian refugees in Jordan  and in Syria and in Lebanon.  

 This is important work that is done.  If we put it into context through our contributions to  UNRWA over the years, which now totals something in the direction of nearly 100 million  dollars, we are helping to provide opportunities for nearly half a million Palestinian children  to attend school; provide training for 4,200 health workers; on top of that through medical  centres, about 134 in number; water and sanitation facilities in some 105 schools. These are  important practical areas of support and help for Palestinian refugees everywhere.  

 On top of that, what I’ve confirmed both to the President last night and to the Foreign  Minister this morning is that we in Australia will provide also budgetary support for the  Palestinian Authority as well through the UN trust fund and confirmed that we’ll be making  a further contribution of some 20 million dollars to that effect.  

 Also, in working with the Palestinian Authority, we believe that it’s important that we, in  engagement with leadership here in Ramallah, work not just on an annual basis but  increasingly on a triennial and quintennial basis so that proper planning can be put in place  within Ramallah about how development funds are used into the future.  

 If we in Australia for example were trying to plan our future on the basis of one year’s  budget ahead, it would be very difficult to lay out the plan for a nation.  Therefore we are  here to support our Palestinian friends build continually the competencies of the Palestinian  state, its ability to deliver key services to the Palestinian people and therefore provide  predictability of funding over time and that’s why we’ve announced that framework today.  

 Also, as I confirmed to the President last night, Australia will now be providing 50 Australia  Awards to Palestinian students. These are awards which I’m advised can be taken either  short-term or long-term, three months up to two years depending on the field of  scholarship in which Palestinian students wish to study, whether it’s in public  administration, public finance, water management, dry land farming or other areas of  priority here in the Authority. And those scholarships I hope will be available to run as of the  beginning of 2011. And so therefore that’s a practical way of providing support in areas of  expertise which have been identified by our friends in the Authority.  

 On an unrelated matter, but an important matter for me personally, could I also make some  remarks about the passing of Richard Holbrooke who is a great friend and colleague of mine  from the United States State Department.  

 Richard is a man who has had an extraordinary career working in the service of his country  in so many distinguished positions over so many decades. I have known him well. I have  known his family.  He has been an extraordinary force for US diplomacy over so many 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 4 

 

 decades and I extend to his family our deepest condolences over his untimely death in  Washington early today. Thank you. 

 JASON KOUTSOUKIS (FAIRFAX): Mr Rudd, would the Australian government ever consider  recognising the State of Palestine? Just coming out with a statement of recognition as we  saw last week from Brazil and Argentina?  

 MR RUDD: Well our first priority is to support the peace process and that is to bring formally  into being a viable, secure Palestinian state, which is the subject of comprehensive  international diplomatic recognition.  And that is the process in which we are deeply  engaged with the Authority right now in partnership with our friends in Israel, in partnership  with our friends in Ramallah, in partnership with our friends elsewhere in the Arab world.  

 Therefore we believe these things need to be taken step by step.  We’ll be taking them step  by step.  But the key challenge for us all now is to support totally, and not just nominally,  but through effective, direct diplomacy, the conclusion of this peace process.  That puts us  in a position therefore to address the final questions of statehood and global recognition.  

 Can I also emphasise the importance of the provisions contained within the Arab Peace  Initiative on this.  And that is if we do manage to conclude a settlement between Israel and  the Palestinian Authority, then what comes from that under the terms of the Arab Peace  Initiative, is an undertaking for diplomatic recognition from across the Arab League and the  wider membership of the OIC, the Islamic Community of States.  This would be an  extraordinary development of itself, but I believe a very worthwhile addition, and therefore  an important part of our considerations about bringing the peace process to a conclusion. 

 BEN KNIGHT (ABC): Mr Rudd, since your comments on opening up Israel’s nuclear facilities  to international inspectors were published overnight I’m just wondering what sort of a  reaction you had here from your counterparts from the other side in Israel. 

 MR RUDD: Well, what I was simply indicating there is what the Australian government has  said for a long period of time; and that is that our position is that it is good for all states to  become accessories to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and for the associated obligations to be  undertaken.  We have always said also that Israel has somewhat unique security  circumstances and we’ve also indicated over a period of time that these arrangements  concerning the NPT and the IAEA would obviously be embraced over time consistent with  the changes in the region’s wider security environment.  But our position on NPT and the  State of Israel has been constant.  

 Secondly, on the question of the position of the Israeli government on these matters, far be  it from me to speak on behalf of Israel. That’s a matter for you to put to them. But I believe  that our position is a consistent one, and one of principle.  

 The other point I’d make is this; you have also in Iran a government which has acceded to  the NPT and has comprehensively failed to adhere to its obligations under international law.  There are two sets of provisions now which the Iranians are in defiance of. Hence UN 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 5 

 

 sanctions against Iran and hence the actions taken by a number of other states including  Australia of autonomous sanctions against Iran. We take the question of nuclear non-proliferation seriously and we have done so since the beginning when we became one of  the founding partners to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. 

 JOHN LYONS: Mr Rudd, could I ask, a view often expressed in Israel is that the Palestinian  Authority is not a partner for peace. That’s one of the reasons some Israeli politicians give  for not wanting to be part of the peace process. What’s your assessment? Do you believe  the current Palestinian Authority as it is currently constituted, is a legitimate partner for  peace for Israel? 

 MR RUDD: Well the first thing I’d say is that I don’t make comments into Israeli domestic  politics. That’s a matter for them, and the positions one way or the other taken by various  Israeli politicians in terms of their views of the Palestinian Authority.  

 What I would say as Foreign Minister of Australia is that we have a government in Israel led  by Prime Minister Netanyahu which is committed to the peace process. My experience here  is that we have a Palestinian Authority led by President Mahmoud Abbas which is  committed to the peace process.  

 In my discussions with both the Prime Minister of Israel and the President of the Authority,  all yesterday, and confirmed by my subsequent discussions with others within their  administrations, is that both parties are committed to producing a conclusion from this  peace process.  

 I think it is time for all men and women of good will to encourage all those who are the  principle parties to this longstanding peace process to bring this to conclusion. I see no  inherent impediment in terms of the postures and commitment of the two political leaders  who we’ve just referred to. And we as Australia, as friends of Israel, longstanding,  supporters of the Palestinian people, we see no fundamental impediment as to why this  cannot be brought to conclusion.  

 I sense some good will on both sides of this discussion right now and I believe like most  things in life it’s a question of identifying when the opportunity presents itself, seize the  opportunity to bring these things to conclusion and to do so with speed, because if we wind  the clock ahead six or twelve months or beyond, who knows what set of circumstances we  may confront then.  

 So I would encourage President Mahmoud Abbas, who has I believe displayed strong  leadership here within the Palestinian Authority and Prime Minister Netanyahu whom I  have known for more than a decade and with whom I have a good personal relationship; I  believe that both these leaders are committed to the process. I certainly believe they have  the capacity to land the outcome. Thank you very much. 

 

 ENDS  

