---
title: "'Regional processing centre' is nothing more than a three-word slogan"
date: "2010-11-03"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211345553
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/335769%22
---

 The Hon Julie Bishop, MP  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Deputy Leader of the Opposition  Member for Curtin 

 ‘Regional processing centre’ is nothing  more than a three-word slogan   03/11/10  

 The Prime Minister should end this embarrassing farce of raising with Asian leaders  her proposal for a ‘regional processing centre’ for asylum seekers in East Timor until  she has developed some form of basic proposal. 

 After claiming that she had raised her three-word proposal for a ‘regional processing  centre’ with the leaders of the East Asia Summit member countries and in meetings  with leaders in Malaysia and Indonesia, it is obvious that the Prime Minister has  failed to garner any support for her idea. 

 This is hardly surprising given that the Prime Minister has been unable to provide  even the most basic details of her ‘proposal’. 

 The Government of East Timor has been waiting for over four months for details  of Julia Gillard’s announcement of a detention centre in East Timor. 

 There are two critical aspects to the proposal that must be addressed before any  reasonable assessment can be made of the viability of a ‘regional processing centre’. 

 First, the Prime Minister must detail how it will work in a practical sense and, second,  how it will act as a deterrent to the people smuggling trade. 

 In her speech to the Lowy Institute on 6 July, the Prime Minister explained it this  way:  “We move forward to an effective, sustainable, long-term solution: to stop the  boats not at our shoreline but before they even leave the far-away ports from which 

 they come; to ensure people smugglers have nothing to sell and so ending the long  and dangerous voyages.” 

 While ever the Prime Minister is unable to provide any further detail, questions will  continue to be asked about which nations she envisages will participate in her  proposed regional framework, where asylum seekers will be intercepted and by  whom, which asylum seekers will be eligible, and how they will be transferred to East  Timor. 

 The Prime Minister’s decision to raise her proposal in discussions with the leaders of  other nations, before any sort of formal proposal was developed, exposes an alarming  lack of judgement and risks making her appear a rank amateur in our region. 

