---
title: "Speech at the official opening of the Australian Chancery in Amman, Jordan"
date: "2010-12-12"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Jordan"
  - "Diplomatic relations"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211347358
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/427073%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP 

 SPEECH AT THE OFFICIAL OPENING   OF THE AUSTRALIAN CHANCERY IN AMMAN   

 AMMAN   

 12 DECEMBER, 2010 

 

 

 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY   

 Let me say some things about Australia and our engagement with this wonderful country.    

 As you know our diplomatic relations with Jordan go back some 35 years. And in that period  of time we have had a diplomatic mission here on the ground in Amman, and that is why it  is good today to have the opportunity to launch, albeit a little bit late, and officially open the  Australian Chancery here in Amman.   

 This is an important relationship for Australia. It goes back a long, long, long time - well  before the establishment of diplomatic relations.     

 I think we’re familiar here, one and all, with the history of the Australian light horse and  their work with those who participated in the great Arab rising of 1916 - 1918. This was our  very first chapter of our engagement with the independent Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.   

 Of course our political relations with the Kingdom are in first class working order. I spent the  morning with the Foreign Minister and I will leave here to be received for an audience with  His Majesty the King and Her Majesty the Queen.   

 This is a good relationship, we are doing good things together in the world, we are doing  good things together here in Amman.   

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 2 

 

 More broadly across of course the wider fabric of the Middle East, Jordan and Australia have  an active interest in bringing to conclusion the Middle East Peace Process.    

 You cannot be in Jordan but be reminded again of the continued longstanding interest of  the Palestinian people to have a place to call home, a State to call home, an independent  Palestinian state.   

 In Australia our position for decades has been a two state solution. One an independent and  secure state for Israel but in its neighbour, an independent and secure Palestinian state.   And these core objects lie at the very heart of Australian diplomacy and foreign policy and I  will be deeply engaged in these questions in the year which lies ahead.   

 The last this I would say is that more broadly for the good people of Jordan; many, many,  many Jordanians find their way to study in Australia each year. We have thousands of  Jordanian students in Australia and we have tens of thousands from across the Arab world  each year.  And the message I would just send back to Jordan and more widely across the  Arab world is that these students are very welcome guests in our midst. We take them all as  members temporarily of the Australian family, we are pleased that they chose to study in  our parts of the world.    

 They join the ranks of hundreds of thousands of students from China, from Japan, from  Indonesia, from the Middle East from Latin America; all creating human bridges, between  our country, a multicultural country and countries such as this, a long way from our shores.   

 For those of you who have worked here for a long time as members of the locally engaged  staff, I would like to say some particular things.   

 We on the diplomatic side come and go. The Ambassadors come and they go. The Australia-based diplomats come and they go.  What is really important for us is the fact that those of  you who serve here as members of our local staff, you remain.  You provide a continuing  thread of services to the good people of Jordan, in whatever capacity; whether it’s dealing,  as I spoke with the young lady in the corner there, with our commitments to the refugee  communities in Jordan or those who are dealing with the consular needs of Jordanian  Australians or those who are dealing with those who wish to migrate to our shores.    

 Can I say to each and every one of you, it is so important to us that you are dedicated  members of our Australian team here.   

 So thank you for those of you who have served as long as 15 years - and I said I wouldn’t  mention that again. For those who have worked for shorter periods of time because you are  so much part and parcel of the Australian effort in this part of the world.   

 So it is good to be here. It is good to be on my first visit to the Hashemite Kingdom.   

 I will terrify you all by saying it will not be my last.  You’re likely to have me on a more  regular basis here and in other capitals across the region as we tackle the large challenges  that lie before us in the year ahead.   

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 3 

 

 So thank you for your hospitality this morning. Thank you for enjoying the Melbourne  weather outside.  For those of you who have not been to Melbourne, this is a perfect  Melbourne day and slightly toastier than my experience there.   

 Let’s have a cup of tea together and celebrate this important occasion.    

 Thank you Ambassador. 

