---
title: "Minister Bowen must address Parliament on detention crisis"
date: "2010-11-22"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR PRODUCTIVITY & POPULATION, IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211346379
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/381385%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook 

 Minister Bowen must address Parliament on detention crisis  

 22/11/10  

 Minister Bowen must provide a Ministerial Statement to the Parliament before it rises  this week on the Government’s rolling detention crisis and border protection failures,  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today. 

 “The rolling crisis in our immigration detention network is getting worse by the day.  Under Labor, chronic overcrowding, court challenges, unrest, violence and gruesome  protests are unfolding on an almost daily basis,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “In November 2007 there were just four people in our immigration detention network  who  had  arrived  illegally  by  boat.  Since  Labor  introduced  their  policies,  there  are   more than 5,000 in detention.  

 “The government’s only response has been to build more detention centres and their  never  never  solution  in  East  Timor.   Furthermore  Labor  has  ignored  the  Coalition’s   now proven warnings, describing them as hysterical and even racist. 

 “Since  the  election,  more  than  1,800  people  have  arrived  by  boat.  As  arrivals   accelerate again, it will only be a matter of time before Labor’s additional beds will  also be unable to cope. Next year. The Government will likely be forced to open more  centres like those at Inverbrackie and Northam. 

 “Minister  Bowen  must  face  up  to  parliamentary  scrutiny  and  make  a  Ministerial   Statement to the House of Representatives this week about this growing crisis and the  historic  level  of  illegal  boat  arrivals  under  this  government’s  weakened  and  failed  

 policies and outline the Government’s response.  

 “Minister  Bowen  must  outline  a  comprehensive  plan  to  tell  Australians  what  Labor   will  do  to  solve  this  problem  and,  above  all,  stop  the  boats.  The  Coalition  will  be   happy to respond by outlining our comprehensive suite of proven policies that stand  ready to be implemented, if only we had a Government that had the resolve to act.   

 “This is a Government that has lost its way on border protection and immigration. As  long as Labor has lost its way, the people smugglers will continue to find their way to  Australia,” Mr Morrison said. 

  

