---
title: "Cooler heads needed to ensure time-timits on detention: Greens"
date: "2011-03-18"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211350674
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/630990%22
---

 Friday, 18 March 2011   

 Cooler heads needed to ensure time-limits on detention: Greens   

 In light of the escalating tensions on Christmas Island, the increase of self-harm at Curtin  Detention Centre, and the sad death of an asylum seeker in the remote detention facility in  Scherger, it is clear that Australia’s immigration detention system has reached breaking  point, said the Australian Greens.   

 Senator Hanson-Young has called for calm, and urged for the compassionate members of  the two major political parties to add their voice to the chorus of calls for an immediate  overhaul of the way in which the mandatory detention system is operating.    

 “It is clear that something needs to give, to avoid ongoing tensions and issues of indefinite  and prolonged detention. Today, the Greens are calling on all sides of politics to take the  heat out of the debate, and come together to bring about the necessary reform to make the  immigration system more sustainable, practical and humane,” said the Greens’ Immigration  Spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.   

 Reports that the Government has done a deal with ASIO to ensure that the security  assessments of the 900 genuine refugees languishing in detention are conducted within 6  weeks, is welcome, but should not be seen as a one-off quick fix.   

 “Ensuring that these 900 genuine refugees are assessed and moved out of the detention  network by the end of next month is a long overdue development, but must not be used as a  special case by the Government, ” said Senator Hanson-Young.   

 “We know that the immigration detention system is under pressure from overcrowding and  massive delays in processing.  What the Government must now do, is move to implement  effective time limits on detention, and judicial review.    

 “This is not about push or pull factors.  This is about acknowledging that the current practice  that has lead to indefinite and prolonged detention, is damaging vulnerable people, and we  need an fresh approach that ensures detention is the last resort, and for the shortest  practical time.   

 “I have a Private Senators Bill before the Parliament that would among other things, end  indefinite and long-term detention, and introduce a system of judicial review of detention  beyond 30 days. I encourage all sides of politics to consider this as viable option on  improving what is increasingly becoming an untenable situation.   

 Senator Hanson-Young also expressed her deepest sympathy to the family of the young  Afghan asylum seeker who was found deceased in his cell at the remote Scherger Detention  facility last night.   

 “This is a tragic reminder of the vulnerable state of many asylum seekers who seek refugee  protection around the world, and on behalf of the Australian Greens, our sympathy goes out  to the young man’s loved ones.”   

 

 MEDIA CONTACT: ROBERT SIMMS 0427 604 760   

