---
title: "If Julia Gillard was serious about stopping the boats she would support the Coalition's amendments"
date: "2011-09-19"
creators:
  - "Brandis, George"
source: "SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211360514
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1099826%22
---

 1 

 

 

 

 JOINT PRESS RELEASE 

 THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SENATOR THE HON. GEORGE BRANDIS SC, SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL  MR SCOTT MORRISON MHR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  CITIZENSHIP 

 

 

 IF JULIA GILLARD WAS SERIOUS ABOUT STOPPING THE BOATS   SHE WOULD SUPPORT THE COALITION’S AMENDMENTS   

 Tonight the joint Coalition party room endorsed the shadow cabinet’s decision to propose amendments to  the Migration Act that will put beyond legal doubt the ability of the Government to send people offshore for  processing, whilst ensuring that appropriate protections are in place.    

 If Julia Gillard wants to stop the boats she should support the Coalition’s proposed amendments.   

 The Coalition’s position for at least a decade has been that “we will determine who comes to our country  and the circumstances in which they come”.    

 The right way to stop the boats is the combination of Nauru, temporary protection visas and turning boats  around where it is safe to do so. The wrong way is to cobble together in confusion and panic a one-for-five  people swap which has been proven not to work.    

 While we remain confident that we could implement our policies under the current law, we are willing to  strengthen the Migration Act.    

 Our proposal would allow for offshore processing provided boat people are sent to countries which are  signatories to the United Nations Convention relating to the Status of Refugees.   

 Former Solicitor-General David Bennett AC QC has provided written advice today on the two sets of  amendments proposed by Labor as well as the Coalition’s alternative. In Mr Bennett’s opinion the  Coalition’s plan “provides more protection for asylum-seekers than the two Government versions and it is  less likely to be the subject of complex judicial proceedings.”   

 Our proposal is a win-win. It will restore offshore processing while retaining offshore protections.    

 The Malaysian people swap is a proven policy failure. Since the agreement with Malaysia was announced  earlier this year, almost 1,000 boat people have arrived and, since it was signed, 400 people have arrived.    

 When Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard unpicked the Howard Government’s border protection policies, they put  the people smugglers back in business. The people smugglers only have a “business model” because Kevin  Rudd and Julia Gillard gave them one.     

 If Julia Gillard was telling the truth when she said, prior to the last election, that “I would rule out anywhere  that is not a signatory to the Refugee Convention.” (Radio 6PR, 8/7/2010) then she should not have a  problem in supporting the Coalition’s amendments.   

 19 September 2011 

