---
title: "Mayo lecture: speech, James Cook University, Townsville"
date: "2011-10-06"
creators:
  - "Mcclelland, Robert"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
  - "Natural disasters"
  - "Climate change adaptation and mitigation"
  - "National security"
  - "Climate change (Anthropogenic)"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211361430
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1136057%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 ATTORNEY-GENERAL 

 HON ROBERT McCLELLAND MP 

 

 MAYO LECTURE 

 

 JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY, TOWNSVILLE 

 

 THURSDAY, 6 OCTOBER 2011 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 2 

 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

 First, may I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land we meet on - and pay my respects to 

 their elders, both past and present. 

 

 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

 Ladies and gentlemen. 

 

 I would like to thank the James Cook University School of Law and the Law Students’ Society for 

 inviting me to speak here tonight. 

 

 Tonight, I would like to speak with you about three matters within my areas of responsibility as 

 Attorney General. 

 

 First, I would like to talk about Natural Disasters and the need to do more to mitigate their 

 impacts.  

 

 Of course the people of this state sadly know through recent experience the devastating impact of 

 natural disasters. 

 

 My view is that we can reduce loss of life and we can reduce cost by investing more up front in 

 mitigation. 

 

 I would then like to speak to a trend we are witnessing in the courts in Australia which are 

 increasingly taking into account the affects of climate change as a basis upon which to make 

 decisions. 

 

 And finally to the need to consider climate change in the context of national security. 

 

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 3 

 Allow me to take each in turn.   

 

 Natural disasters and mitigation 

 Many of you would have been here when Tropical Cyclone Yasi made landfall in the early hours of 

 3 February this year. 

 

 Although Townsville escaped the worst of Yasi, this town and many communities around it 

 suffered considerable damage. 

 

 I travelled to Townsville with the Prime Minister the day after Yasi hit and although I experienced 

 only a small fraction of the aftermath, I was taken aback by the howling wind....the sight of trees 

 simply uprooted and tossed on to the ground... and the volume of debris strewn across the 

 streets. 

 

 I cannot imagine what it must have been like to sit in your homes and wait for this massive force 

 of nature to pass. 

 

 Even as we recover from the physical damage caused by Yasi, its impact is still being felt across Far 

 North Queensland both economically and socially.   

 

 And Yasi follows fairly hot on the heels of Cyclone Larry which hit Far North Queensland in March 

 2006 with devastating effect on the agricultural industry around Tully and Innisfail. 

 

 The good news following Cyclone Yasi was that some disaster mitigation measures put in place 

 after Cyclone Larry - particularly changes to building codes to harden homes and businesses 

 against the effects of cyclones - were instrumental in saving lives and minimising injuries. 

 

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 4 

 The bad news coming out of both Cyclone Yasi and the Queensland floods was that we still saw 

 destruction and damage to residential properties and public infrastructure on an unprecedented 

 scale. 

 

 It is expected that the total recovery and reconstruction cost to the Commonwealth alone will be 

 more than $6 billion. 

 

 While the scale of these events was extraordinary, I strongly believe the enormous cost of 

 reconstruction cannot just be attributed to forces of nature outside of our control.   

 

 There is a strong argument that the damage bill both here in Queensland and in other parts of the 

 country affected by disaster last summer was exacerbated by a lack of investment in disaster 

 mitigation initiatives and poor planning decisions which have left communities exposed to very 

 significant disaster risk. 

 

 I find it hard to accept that some households have received Government disaster relief assistance 

 three times over the past 10 years simply because of bad luck. 

 

 The emergency management community generally accepts that one dollar spent on mitigation can 

 save at least two dollars in recovery costs. 

 

 Some even argue that this is a conservative estimate. 

 

 Flood mitigation works in Lismore illustrate the return on investment in mitigation and prevention. 

 

 In 2005, after completing a $19 million levee, Lismore experienced a one-in-ten year flood.   

 

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 5 

 The levee saved about $15 million in recovery costs on that occasion alone and also played an 

 integral part in minimising flooding in Lismore in subsequent years.  

 

 There are a many other examples both here and internationally. 

 

 In fact by rethinking our policies and approaches, we can be more resilient when disasters strike. 

 And this is entirely consistent with international law which I will shortly turn to. 

 

 I am pleased that following last year’s events all levels of Government - Federal, State and Local - 

 are examining these issues with a renewed sense of purpose. 

 

 In February this year the Council of Australian Governments agreed to the National Strategy for 

 Disaster Resilience. 

 

 The Strategy sets out the priorities of all Australian governments for building disaster resilient 

 communities across the nation. 

 

 There are three aspects of the Strategy that I would like to emphasise. 

 

 First, governments cannot improve resilience alone. The Strategy emphasises that disaster 

 resilience is a shared responsibility for individuals, local communities, businesses, the not-for-profit sector and governments. 

 

 Second, the Strategy is about providing all Australians with a better understanding of what we 

 need to do about the disaster risks we face. 

 

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 6 

 To create a resilient nation, we all need the relevant knowledge, skills and abilities to take 

 appropriate action. We all need to work in partnership with emergency services, local authorities 

 and other bodies to manage risk and to minimise the impacts of disasters. 

 

 To that end, the Strategy calls for greater individual and community empowerment, rather than 

 relying on post disaster recovery efforts and financial assistance. 

 

 Third, and perhaps most important, the high level objective of the Strategy is to bring about 

 sustained behavioural change.  It recognises that disaster resilience is a long-term outcome which 

 will require collaboration and long-term commitment. 

 

 The clear message is - we all have a role to play and we all have to be in it for the long haul. 

 

 The Standing Council on Police and Emergency Management is leading the implementation of the 

 COAG agreed priorities. 

 

 This includes working with Planning Ministers to ensure that land use zoning and planning 

 decisions integrate consideration of priority hazards. 

 

 There are some encouraging signs that we are starting to take the need for disaster mitigation into 

 account in the reconstruction and rebuilding phase following the past disaster season. 

 

 In particular the decision to relocate the town of Grantham - which was devastated by the inland 

 tsunami that ripped through the Lockyer Valley on the 10th of January - relocate to higher ground, 

 should be applauded.   

 

 In addition, in August I approved the first ever application under the betterment provisions of the 

 NDRRA which will see the relocation of the Adelong public swimming pool to an area above the 

 flood level.   

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 7 

 

 ‘Betterment” is available under Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements to allow States 

 and local governments to restore or replace essential public assets to a more disaster resilient 

 standard.  

 

 In other words, we should avoid rebuilding an asset in a way or in an area where there’s a better 

 than even chance it’ll be damaged again, if there are alternative options. 

 

 I understand the Queensland Government is also looking at a number of betterment proposals 

 following last season’s events.  

 

 Initiatives like these are promising developments. 

 

 But given the enormous natural disaster recovery and reconstruction bill that Australian taxpayers 

 are being repeatedly asked to shoulder, I believe they are entitled to expect that Governments do 

 more to mitigate the impact of natural disasters. 

 

 Without professing to offer commentary on the cause of recent natural disasters there is a 

 unquestionably significant body of scientific research drawing a direct link between climate 

 change and increasingly extreme weather events - including rising sea levels, flooding and mud 

 slides, as well as increasingly prevalent bushfires.  

 

 The scientific basis for this link is widely supported, including by the United Nations Framework 

 Convention on Climate Change (the NFCCC), the World Meteorological Organisation, the 

 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the CSIRO and the United States’ National Oceanic 

 and Atmospheric Administration. 

 

 It is interesting that international law has been a motivator for State governments to implement 

 environmental legislation to mitigate against the effects of climate change.  

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 8 

 

 In particular, under international law Australia is required to maintain programs and policies 

 containing measures to facilitate adaptation to climate change including taking climate change 

 into account in relevant policies and actions. 

 

 We see those principles implemented in a range of State legislation including protection of coastal 

 regions from inundation due to rising sea levels. 

 

 Which brings me to my next topic - the issue of climate change and the courts. 

 

 The courts and climate change 

 Irrespective of action we can take to improve our approach to disaster mitigation, there is a 

 growing body of case law indicating that courts are willing to take the environmental impacts of 

 climate change into account in their decision making around planning and other issues. 

 

 As Jacqueline Peel, Associate Professor at the Melbourne Law School, has explained 

 

 “Environmental groups have long used litigation to address environmental problems.  Climate 

 change is no different.”   

 

 Peel points to an increasing number of cases are coming before Victorian Civil and Administrative 

 Tribunal - or VCAT - raising issues of adaptation to future climate change along the Victorian coast 

 following the Gippsland Coastal Board case.  

 

 The Victorian Government subsequently developed policies on planning for coastal climate change 

 and sea level rise.  

 

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 9 

 Another area of the law where climate change is being considered by the courts is the area of 

 wind farm applications.  

 

 In these cases the effects of climate change are being used as an argument to ensure something 

 happens rather than to prevent something happening.  

 

 This is in contrast to wind farm applications being regularly challenged by local community groups 

 who oppose the development on the grounds of amenity and health concerns.  

 

 One example is the NSW Land and Environment Courts decision in Taralga Landscape Guardians 

 Inc v Minister for Planning (2007). In that case the judge allowed the development to proceed 

 because of the broader public good associated with “reducing the cumulative and long-term 

 effects caused by anthropogenic climate change”.  

 

 Water extraction rights are also being legally challenged on grounds related to the possible effect 

 of climate change. In Paul v Goulburn Murray Water Corporation & Ors, heard by the VCAT, a 

 landowner challenged the right of two licensees who were permitted to extract groundwater on 

 the applicant’s properties.  

 

 The Tribunal heard evidence about the effect that climate change may have on the hydrology of 

 the area, in particular the Ovens River and whether this uncertainly should lead to the application 

 of the precautionary principle.  

 

 In the end Member Potts determined that the allocations were sustainable under the range of 

 climate change scenarios presented by the experts. 

 

 These cases have focussed on what Peel has termed as ‘five common features’ of climate change 

 law in Australia. 

 

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 10 

 

 

 They are:  

 First, establishing a causal link between certain actions (e.g. mining) and the production of 

 substantial greenhouse gas emissions.   

 For example, in the Anzvil Hill Case, Justice Pain of the NSW Land and Environment Court 

 considered that “there is a sufficiently proximate link between the mining of a very 

 substantial reserve of thermal coal in NSW, the only purpose of which is for use as fuel in 

 power stations, and the emission of GHG which contribute to climate change/global 

 warming.” - Anvil Hill (2006) 152 LGERA 258, 288.    

 

 Second, the indirect and cumulative impacts of climate change; 

 

 Third, the role of environmental sustainable development principles;  

 

 Fourth, the scientific proof of climate change, and 

 

 And finally, a continuing role for the courts. 

 

 Clearly there is a case for Governments at all levels to acknowledge these developments with a 

 view to taking a nationally consistent approach to these issues. 

 

 Accordingly, I intend to raise this growing jurisprudence with my Ministerial colleagues at SCPEM  

 

 I would now like to turn to the final topic this evening: climate change as a potential threat to 

 national security 

 

 

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 11 

 Climate change and national security 

 As Attorney-General, my responsibilities include the coordination of Australia’s response to a 

 broad range of national security threats.   

 

 From terrorism to natural disasters through to people smuggling and organised crime - the 

 dangers to Australia and its citizens are clear and undeniable.   

 

 While the environmental and economic threat of climate change to Australia and the world is well 

 traversed, it is only in the past couple of years that we have begun to properly explore and 

 properly articulate climate change as a clear threat to our national security.   

 

 Following the 2007 election, the Government commissioned the Garnaut Climate Change Review - 

 led by Professor Ross Garnaut - to conduct an independent study of the impacts of climate change 

 on the Australian economy.   

 

 Garnaut reported in June 2008 that climate change is metamorphosing from an environmental 

 concern to a core issue for national and international security. 

 

 He noted that should climate change coincide with other transnational challenges to security, such 

 as terrorism or pandemic diseases, or add to pre-existing ethnic and social tensions, the impact 

 will be magnified.   

 

 Garnaut concluded that prudence and sensible risk management suggest that Australia’s strategic 

 planners ought to include worse case climate change scenarios in the contingency planning as they 

 do for terrorism, infectious diseases and conventional military challenges to national security. 

 

 In 2007, the then Australian Federal Police Commissioner, Mick Keelty APM described climate 

 change as ‘the security issue of the 21st century.”  Mr Keelty also referred to the prospect of large 

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 12 

 scale civil unrest resulting from climate change and its implications for law enforcement within 

 Australia 

 

 Given these comments and the findings of the Garnaut Report, this Government clearly identified 

 the security implications of climate change in Australia’s first National Security Statement made by 

 former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd in 2008.  

 

 The Statement recognised that over the long term, climate change represents a fundamental 

 national security challenge for the long term future.   

 

 It also observed that less attention had so far been given to the potential threat of climate change 

 compared with other traditional security threats.  

 

 Finally, it stated this area of emerging consequences will require the formal incorporation of 

 climate change within Australia’s national security policy and analysis process. 

 

 Consistent with that approach, the 2009 Defence White Paper also identified climate change and 

 resource security as new security risks.  

 

 The White Paper referred to the potential for future tensions over the supply of energy, food and 

 water.   

 It noted these issues are likely to exacerbate already significant population, infrastructure and 

 governance problems in developing countries, straining their capacity to adapt.  

 

 Importantly, Australia and this Government are not alone in identifying the national security 

 threat of climate change and the belief that action is necessary to address this threat. 

 

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 13 

 These views are shared by international organisations such as the United Nations and the 

 Governments of our closest allies - both on the left and right of the political divide. 

 

 United National Secretary-General, Mr Ban Ki Moon, has made several statements highlighting the 

 security implications of climate change. 

 

 In his 2009 Report the Secretary-General identified five channels through which climate change 

 could affect security.  These are: 

 

 Vulnerability: climate change threatens food security and human health, and increases human 

 exposure to extreme events 

 

 Development: if climate change results in slowing down or reversing the development 

 process, this will exacerbate vulnerability and could undermine the capacity of States to 

 maintain stability 

 

 Coping and security: migration, competition over natural resources and other coping 

 responses of households and communities faced with climate-related threats could increase 

 the risk of domestic conflict as well as have international repercussions 

 Statelessness: there are implications for rights, security, and sovereignty of the loss of 

 statehood because of the disappearance of territory, and 

 

 International conflict: there may be implications for international cooperation from climate 

 change’s impact on shared or un-demarcated international resources. 

 

 The UN Secretary-General has also reflected on how the environmental effects of climate change 

 in one country, can compound existing political, economic and social fragility which may in turn 

 effect neighbouring countries and ultimately the entire international community. 

 

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 14 

 The potential security threats of climate change for the United States are unequivocally 

 highlighted in President Barrack Obama’s May 2010 National Security Strategy.   

 

 It says: 

 “The danger from climate change is real, urgent, and severe. The change wrought by a 

 warming planet will lead to new conflicts over refugees and resources; new suffering from 

 drought and famine; catastrophic natural disasters; and the degradation of land across the 

 globe.” 

 

 Similarly, the National Security Strategy issued by the Conservative Cameron Government in 

 October 2010 notes that the security of the United Kingdom is: 

  “vulnerable to the effects of climate change and its impact on food and water supply”. 

 

 Finally, I note that the Pentagon in its January 2010 Quadrennial Defense Review addressed 

 climate change for the first time. 

 

 In the review, Pentagon officials concluded that climate change will act as an “accelerant of 

 instability and conflict,” ultimately placing a burden on civilian institutions and militaries around 

 the world. 

 

 There are some people who remain to be convinced by the science on climate change. 

 

 But I think it is very instructive that an institution as traditionally conservative as the Pentagon is 

 recognising that the risk of climate change is a sufficient basis for the United States to act. 

 

 The concept of climate change as a national security risk is now well and truly accepted 

 internationally, across the political spectrum. 

 

 

 Mayo Lecture  6 October 2010 

 Page 15 

 Which makes it all the more an imperative for countries to work in concert consistently with 

 international law to mitigate against the effects of climate change. 

 

 Conclusion 

 In many respects, the implications of climate change for Australia and our region are clear. 

 

 But it is sometimes difficult to grapple with the long term nature of the challenge and the less 

 obvious potential impacts.  

 

 Many of the decisions necessary to prevent or reduce these effects must be made now.   

 

 Australia stands ready to play its full and fair part in global efforts to tackle climate change. 

 

 We have begun to incorporate the security implications of climate change into our national 

 security contingency plans. 

 

 We are working hard to ensure that we have coordinated and integrated capabilities, at both the 

 domestic and international levels, to address this risk. 

 

 And we are starting to seriously rethink the way we approach natural disaster prevention, 

 preparation and mitigation. 

 

 Failure to act now on the potential implications of climate change will exacerbate risks in the 

 future. That is why the Government is so determined to take action.  

 Thank you. 

 

 ENDS 

