---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Cairns: 17 February 2011: [Scott Morrison; immigration]"
date: "2011-02-17"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Scott Morrison"
  - "immigration"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211349577
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/570400%22
---

 

 

 

 Transcript of doorstop interview, Cairns  THU 17 FEBRUARY 2011 

 Prime Minister 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Sydney Morning Herald has reported this morning that  the Opposition’s Immigration spokesman, Scott Morrison, has urged the Shadow Cabinet in  December to capitalise on the community’s growing concerns about Muslims in Australia  with a discriminatory policy. Can you comment on what this leak may mean? 

 PM: Well, first and foremost we need the Leader of the Opposition, Tony Abbott, to confirm  whether or not these reports are true, that his Shadow Cabinet sat around talking about  making Australia’s immigration policy one that discriminates on the basis of religion or race.  And Mr Abbott has to confirm today, does he agree with Scott Morrison that we should have  discriminatory immigration; that we should knock someone back because we don’t like their  religion. Is that Tony Abbott’s position? 

 And if that’s not Tony Abbott’s position, then really he has to say to Mr Morrison, his  Shadow Minister, he’s not prepared to follow him down this grubby path and Mr Morrison  should go to the backbench rather than being on Mr Abbott’s frontbench. 

 JOURNALIST: What does this mean on the back of the debate of the last few days about the  appropriateness or otherwise of bringing the asylum seekers to Sydney for the funerals of  (inaudible) Christmas Island? 

 PM: This is an incredibly important question for the future of the nation - how we construct  our migration policy. For many, many long years now it’s been bipartisan politics in this  country that we do not discriminate on the basis of race or religion. 

 I’m a migrant. I’ve got a very clear view about what it means to be a good migrant to this  country. I can talk about that from lived experience. You’re a good migrant to this country if  you come here; you’re here because you want to abide by the rules of this country; you love 

 this country and you’re prepared to work hard to make its future. That’s the basis on which  we run our migration program. 

 We don’t say to people ‘you can’t worship this way if you want to come to Australia.’ That’s  not the Australian tradition, it’s not the Australian way. So, this is a big question for Mr  Abbott to answer today. 

 In an act of leadership, is he saying the modern Liberal Party now stands for discrimination  on the basis of religion? 

 Mr Abbott clearly made comments he regretted about enabling asylum seekers to attend  funerals of their loved ones. Mr Abbott said that when Mr Morrison backed away from those  comments he was pleased to see that Mr Morrison had. 

 Today there is another big issue, a very big issue, involving Mr Morrison. Mr Morrison, from  today’s reports, appears to want to go down a very grubby path in the migration debate in this  country. Is Mr Abbott going to follow him down that path or stop it now and get Mr Morrison  to go to the backbench? 

 

 JOURNALIST: Do you think the Party is extremely divided on this issue? 

 

 PM: Liberals, over a long period of time, Liberals like Malcolm Fraser, have championed a  non-discriminatory immigration policy. Prime Minister Howard championed a non-discriminatory immigration policy. He at one stage questioned that policy and then, in his  latter years as Prime Minister of this country, said he very much regretted ever questioning it  and he very much believed in non-discriminatory immigration. 

 

 So, if Mr Abbott is making this move, he is repudiating Prime Minister Howard, Prime  Minister Fraser, and many people in his political party today. 

 

 JOURNALIST: And what are the implications for Australia’s social fabric if this is the way  policy, or at least behind closed doors discussions, are going? 

 

 PM: Well, I simply can’t imagine it. I can’t imagine that an Australian Government would  ever do what Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison may well be urging. I can’t imagine that an  Australian Government would ever say ‘if you’re Greek Orthodox, you can’t come to this  country; if you’re a Muslim, you can’t come to this country.’ 

 

 I can’t believe that Mr Abbott or Mr Morrison really want to see the nation go down that  path. That’s why it’s so important today that Mr Abbott comes out and says ‘these reports are  incorrect, and I believe in a non-discriminatory policy’, or ‘these reports are correct, Scott  Morrison is wrong, he’s going to the backbench, and I, Tony Abbott, reaffirm the Liberal  Party’s belief in a non-discriminatory immigration policy’. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Thank you for your time, Prime Minister. 

 

 PM: Thank you.  

 

