---
title: "Gillard spends up big on asylum seekers as regional students left out-of-pocket"
date: "2011-02-15"
creators:
  - "Hartsuyker, Luke"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH AND SPORT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211349333
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/560451%22
---

 February 15, 2011 

 Gillard spends up big on asylum seekers as regional  students left out-of-pocket  The Gillard Government is refusing to support university students from regional areas whilst  doling out millions of dollars to keep asylum seekers in hotels and motels, Federal MP Luke  Hartsuyker said today. 

 Mr Hartsuyker was commenting on media reports the Government is forking out $2.5 million a  month to house 500 asylum seekers and that an extra $290 million will be required this year  to fund Labor’s failed border protection policy. 

 “The Gillard Labor Government simply has the wrong priorities,” Mr Hartsuyker said. 

 “At the same time they have axed Youth Allowance support for thousands of regional  students, they are now spending millions of dollars to keep asylum seekers in motels, hotels  and other accommodation. 

 “Australians are a generous people but they don’t like waste and mismanagement and they  resent governments which place the interests of foreigners ahead of a fair go for our young  people. 

 “Last week the Senate passed a Private Member’s Bill, introduced by Nationals Senator  Fiona Nash, which restores the same eligibility criteria for Independent Youth Allowance  apply to all regional students. 

 “Students who are deemed to live in ‘inner regional’ areas have been unfairly discriminated by  Federal Labor’s Youth Allowance changes. You literally have students who have attended the  same secondary school being treated differently, purely because they live in a different street  to their friends. 

 “The Labor Government has literally drawn lines on a map to decide who’s a winner and who  loses out. They have fundamentally ignored the fact that most tertiary students from regional  areas incur significant higher study costs because they have to move away from home.” 

 Mr Hartsuyker said it was beyond belief the Prime Minister was using all her power to stop  Senator’s Nash’s Bill being debated in the House of Representatives, whilst spending  hundreds of millions of dollars on illegal boat arrivals. 

 “The cost of providing equity to regional students is significantly less than what Julia Gillard  wants to spend on asylum seekers. Under the Coalition’s plan, the additional $90 million cost  to support all regional students could be paid out of the Education Investment Fund. 

 “After wasting billions on the pink batts, school halls and the failed Green Loans scheme  there is no reason for Labor refusing to give all regional students the same access to  Independent Youth Allowance.   

 “Senator Nash’s Private Member’s Bill has been democratically passed by the Senate and  now it should be debated in the House of Representatives. It’s simply undemocratic and  morally wrong for Julia Gillard and Labor to prevent debate on this important issue. 

 “This just highlights how out-of-touch Labor is with regional Australia and their hypocrisy on  providing educational equity and value for money for the taxpayer.” 

 

 Media Contact: Greg Pierce      Coffs Harbour: 02 6652 6233      Canberra: 02 6277 4447      Mobile: 0408 532 785       

 Email:  greg.pierce@aph.gov.au   

 

 ends 

