---
title: "Greens demand clarification from Govt on Timor Solution"
date: "2011-02-02"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211348920
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/526752%22
---

 Wednesday, 2 February 2011    

 ** MEDIA RELEASE **   

 Greens demand clarification from Govt on Timor  Solution.   

 Leaked documents outlining that East Timor would be responsible for the legal  processing and resettlement of up to 4000 asylum-seekers simply proves that the  Government is seeking to dump Australia's obligations offshore, according to  Senator Sarah Hanson-Young. 

 Senator Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson on Immigration, says any genuine  regional solution to the issue of refugees and asylum-seekers has to involve more  than just buck-passing on Australia's part. 

 "What is clear from this document is that the Government seems more than happy to  dump both our international obligations and our moral responsibilities onto another  country.  It is irresponsible to simply push this problem offshore, into the hands of  other people,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 “The fact that there is no evidence that the UNHCR has even agreed to be engaged  in the process of running the proposed centre in East Timor is just one of the many  areas where central issues are completely unconfirmed.   

 "If the Government is serious about tackling the numbers of asylum seekers that  arrive in Australia, then a genuine regional framework must mean talking to all  countries in the region about how we deal with the flows of asylum-seekers, not  simply dumping them out-of-sight-out-of-mind with no further responsibility.     

 “It’s time for Prime Minister to be upfront with what her plan for detaining refugees  offshore is, and her understanding of Australia’s obligations and responsibilities.  

 The Greens are also concerned about reports surrounding our Memorandum of  Understanding (MoU) with Afghanistan. In less than two weeks after the agreement  had been struck, the Afghan Government has denied that it will allow the forcible  deportation of unsuccessful Afghan asylum seekers.   

 “Where it is safe to do so, the Greens believe that those who are found not to be in  genuine need of protection should be sent home. However, there is no evidence to  suggest that Afghanistan is suddenly safer for Hazaras, who make up more than  2500 asylum seekers currently in Australia. 

 “With the MoU in operation, and both governments disputing the interpretation of the  document,  the Australian Government must recognise that as long as we remain  fighting an ongoing war in Afghanistan, and Hazaras continue to be persecuted, we  cannot forcibly return people to a clearly unsafe environment.   

 

 “The Government must accept that this MoU is worthless and should be discarded,”  Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 Media comment - Robert Simms: 0427 604 760   

 Robert Simms    Adviser   Community Liaison & Campaigns   Office of Sarah Hanson-Young   Greens Senator for South Australia   Ground Floor, Telstra Building   30 Pirie Street Adelaide SA 5000   Ph: (08) 8231 9911 / Fax: (08) 8211 7533 

  

