---
title: "Australian Citizen imprisoned in Saudi Arabia"
date: "2011-12-07"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
source: "Office of STONE, SHARMAN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211365510
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1330944%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP  Federal Member for Murray   

 Wednesday, 7 December, 2011 

 

 Australian Citizen imprisoned in Saudi Arabia   

 Most Australians will find it hard to understand how a country could jail an individual for  blasphemy and also inflict 500 lashes as part of the punishment. That is the fate which has  befallen an Australian citizen Mr Mansor Almaribe.    

 Mr Almaribe an Australian citizen and a devout Moslem was in Saudi Arabia in order to  undertake his pilgrimage to Mecca when he was arrested and accused of blasphemy.  Some  three weeks later he has now been tried and found guilty of a religious crime which in effect  says that he has insulted the Prophet Mohammad’s companions.    

 Mr Almaribe is a father and husband. He has been in Australia since 1999, coming first as a  refugee from Iraq. He has five children including his youngest son, little 2 year old Willie.   

 The shock of the arrest and the sentence is obviously extreme given the family's capacity to  influence the outcome. Already since the arrest I have been working with the Department of  Foreign Affairs and the Minister for Foreign Affairs Kevin Rudd's office and I have  requested the help of the Australian Ambassador for Saudi Arabia. Through these  representations there was a reduction of the sentence from two years to one year.  Unfortunately the 500 lashes were not reduced.   

 Since the conviction last night our time, the offer of an appeal has been turned down by Mr  Almaribe given the advice from the court that since his sentence had already been reduced to  12 months, re-presenting before three judges may not necessarily see him with a lesser  sentence. Australian Government officials are going to pursue as soon as the woffice is open  today, a most urgent request for leniency on the basis of simple kindness and an appeal to  humanity.   

 Sharman Stone said Mr Almaribe should be given a suspended sentence and allowed to come  home safely to his family.    

 Mr Almaribe suffers a number of health problems including a severely damaged back from a  car accident in Australia; he has diabetes and a heart condition. His diet is particularly critical  in terms of his health. I have made an appeal to Mr Rudd to intervene personally in this  matter, hoping he can change the outcome.    

 

 

 M E D I A     R E L E A S E       

 

 Obviously it is a fact that when any Australian citizen travels to another country they are then  subject to that country's laws, however on the basis of Mr Almaribe's health and the needs of  his very young child, the great distress of his wife and his other sons and daughter we have to  plead that in this case Saudi Arabia releases Mr Almaribe immediately.   

 

 

 

 

 Media: Rhonda Whitehead 0458 235 588 

 

