---
title: "Frustrating policy failures"
date: "2011-08-15"
creators:
  - "Bernardi, Cory"
source: "Office of BERNARDI, SEN CORY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211358851
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1095205%22
---

 15 August 2011 

 Frustrating Policy Failures 

 It is not very often that I can recall being angry about  matters political. More often than not there is a begrudging acceptance  that sometimes things go your way and sometimes they don’t. But right  now I am mad as hell about the direction our nation is travelling in. 

 In any other time, most citizens could think of one or two government  decisions that provoked their ire, but few would be able to recall a time  when almost everything the government did was shown to be so  maddeningly wrong. But now, wherever you look there is another  example of government waste and poor public policy.  The most recent is  the so called ‘Malaysian solution’. Another policy thought bubble that was  announced and thus far cannot even be implemented. 

 Every time I see a television news report detailing the arrival of yet  another leaky boat filled with illegals who have paid big money to skip the  authorised immigration channels, I feel my frustration rising. The initial  displeasure is directed at the smiling faces of the recent arrivals who all  look well fed and well prepared for a life of comparative luxury in  Australia. I think of the taxpayer funded welfare payments, English  lessons, accommodation, education, health and legal services that will be  supporting these deliberate law breakers for years to come and I wonder  why? 

 Why are we laying out the red carpet for people who pay money to people  smugglers just so they can breach our borders? Indeed, why are we even  subscribing to an outdated United Nations convention that encourages 

 these economic refugees to rort Australia’s humanitarian immigration  intake? 

 But then I remind myself that it is human nature to push boundaries and  thus how can I blame the individuals who are taking advantage of the  Australian government’s intransigent stupidity? 

 After all, it was the Labor government which abandoned the laws that had  previously stopped the boats. Despite their protestations, Labor is directly  responsible for weakening our offshore processing regime. They are also  responsible for the additional billions of dollars required to accommodate 

 these modern day colonists - a circumstance that should infuriate every  taxpayer. 

 But Labor still clings to the claim that these new boats have nothing to do  with their policy approach. And why doesn’t that surprise me? 

 Given the policy disasters implemented since 2007, by now we should all  be conditioned to the many failures of our current government. However,  the sheer scale of their continuing incompetence beggars belief. We now  have a new $56 billion nationalised telecommunications industry that has  never had a cost-benefit analysis and was undertaken despite worrying  warnings from Treasury. We face a carbon tax, a mining tax, a plethora of  nanny state initiatives and other regulations that will stifle what remains  of our national creativity, prosperity and entrepreneurship.  

 At every turn there is a barrier between government policy and common  sense. 

 Everything this government touches seems to turn to custard. Their rock  solid promises are paper thin, their money management is reckless and  their empathy with every day Australians is almost non-existent. We have  a government that is prepared to distort, spin, mislead and lie to the  Australian people if they think it will be to their political advantage. 

 Frankly, irrespective of one’s political leanings, this government can only  be considered an incompetent embarrassment. The office of the Prime  Minister has been devalued, the public faith in their government pursuing  the national interest has all but disappeared and the credibility of our  ministerial ranks has been left wanting. 

 That’s why I’m angry and why millions of other Australians are angry too.   For all of us, the next election cannot come soon enough 

  

