---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: York Park, Canberra: 9 May 2011: York Park re-opening; immigration policy; Budget speculation"
date: "2011-05-09"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
source: "MINISTER FOR REGIONAL AUSTRALIA, REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT"
subjects:
  - "York Park re-opening"
  - "immigration policy"
  - "Budget speculation"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211352457
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/937131%22
---

 

 

 Transcript of media doorstop conducted at the re-opening of  historic York Park in Canberra this morning 

 09 May 2011  SCT025/2011 

 Main topic: York Park re-opening, immigration policy and Budget speculation 

 QUESTION: Can you tell us about your visit to York Park in Canberra? 

 SIMON CREAN: This is a Park that was planted by the Duke of York in 1927, one Oak tree.  And then when the Depression came the Make Work Program was instituted here that planted  in a grid 78 other Oak trees. It has been known as York Park and it has been central and an  earlier reminder of the ties to the British Empire of the fledging new capital of Australia at  the time. Of course since then it has become... known as an area for restoration because it had  fallen into disrepair. So as we move towards the centenary of Canberra it is fitting that we  have re-dedicated this Park, it has been placed on the cultural register in the Commonwealth  and it is entirely appropriate that we not just re-dedicate it and open it and make it a meeting  place for the public.   

 QUESTION: How important is the investment in places like York Park for Canberra?   

 SIMON CREAN: I think it is really important because it shows in many ways Canberra is  seen as a new capital because the others have been around for so long but Canberra itself is of  course approaching its 100th anniversary. The planting of 1927 the fact the tree was put in...  and have been growing ever since and the ones since 1930 some 80 years on demonstrates the  centrality of this point given that the Old Parliament House opened in 1927. Of course what  has happened over the years is that much has been built around this Park.  Of course in those  early days there wasn’t much around at all but now we have the new Parliament House... and  the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade...  [Inaudible]. It is important to remind  ourselves of our past heritage.   

 QUESTION: Do you think heritage management is essential?   

 Absolutely, and I think the more Australia can preserve and restore its heritage the better it is  for the nation. The current generation I think it does need to better understand better its  history. It’s examples like this that help them undertake that appreciation.   

 QUESTION: Minister can we get your response on a couple of other issues. How happy are  you with the level of consultation that Cabinet received prior to the deal on Malaysia on  asylum seeker?   

 SIMON CREAN: I have no quibble about the consultation in the Cabinet process. We have 

 discussed the issue [has been discussed] over many, many meetings since coming to office.  The specifics of particular announcements will always take place in that environment.   

 QUESTION: And what guarantees can the Government that human rights are going to be  protected in Malaysia given that they are no signatories to the human rights... ah to the  refugee convention?   

 SIMON CREAN: These are the discussions that the immigration minister has had with his  Malaysian counterparts. I think the agreement that’s been struck understands the importance  of that issue and it will be carried out.   

 QUESTION: And do expect the issue to be raised in Caucus?   

 SIMON CREAN: I think that people will want information about it. I don’t see that as a  problem. I mean Caucus is a place in which these sorts of issues should be discussed. But I  think it is an important foundation for moving towards a regional solution. The fact that  we’ve been able to reach agreement with Malaysia, I think is a significant breakthrough. I  think the important thing now is to see how we can build upon that foundation.   

 QUESTION: I have a couple of Budget questions.  With regards to regional Australia’s  concerns about health and infrastructure there being a main priority for them but considering  the natural disasters that we’ve seen... do you think it’s something people should be  concerned about in light of cutbacks?   

 SIMON CREAN: I think regional Australia will be very happy with the outcome of this  Budget. We have made it a major focus as I have mentioned we have a patchwork economy.  The only way you can approach the patchwork is to look at it through the lens of localism.  And I think what this Budget will have is in essence a regional dimension to it that will  demonstrate how, if you like the macro-setting applied to the various patches. There will be  important initiatives for health and for skills as well as the National Broadband Network roll  out, these are great opportunities for regional Australia. And the real challenge for the regions  now is to work out through this Budget process how they can continue to join the dots but  make sure that the initiatives that the Government is providing through national programs can  be better accessed by their particular region.   

 QUESTION: But with regards to the natural disasters we have seen and the now already  enormous funding that needs to go back into rebuilding, does this mean other areas will see  cutbacks as a result of that?   

 SIMON CREAN: Well I think we’ve already made the commitment, a very significant  commitment some $5.7 billion dollars for the rebuilding to date of the impact of the floods.  That was an announcement back at the beginning of the year when these floods happened  we’re we found the savings. The Budget process continues as always to work through how  we can allocate resources better but they will be resources that are allocated to set the nation  up for the future to take the prosperity that this resources boom will produce and to ensure  that we diversify the economic base. But if we are to diversify the economic base and  encourage people to move to the regions we have to improve the liveability of the regions and  we have to improve the sustainability of the regions.   

 QUESTION: Are there any, I guess any announcements regional Australia can look forward 

 to in the Budget?   

 SIMON CREAN: I think they’ll have wait until tomorrow night but there are a number of  initiatives in there that will please many parts of the country. Commitments to invest in their  liveability, economic diversity and their sustainability and we will be then embarking on a  pretty intensive road show to make sure they understand more clearly what is contained in the  Budget.   

 Thank you.   

 ENDS 

