---
title: "Transcript of doorstop: 4 Treasury Place, Melbourne: 23 October 2011: Latest suspected irregular entry vessel arrival; 14 year old boy in Bali."
date: "2011-10-23"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Latest suspected irregular entry vessel arrival"
  - "14 year old boy in Bali."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211362301
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1176168%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS AND JUSTICE   

 TRANSCRIPT    

 E&OE PROOF ONLY   

 Doorstop, 4 Treasury Place, Melbourne  Sunday, 23 October 2011  Topics: Latest suspected irregular entry vessel arrival, 14 year old boy in Bali   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:    I’m here this afternoon to indicate there have been three  irregular maritime arrivals overnight.    

 A vessel with 15 passengers and one crew was interdicted by HMAS Hervey Bay at  Ashmore Islands and there were, as I say, 15 passengers and one crew. And, indeed,  HMAS Pirie interdicted a vessel north of Christmas Island with 79 passengers and  two crew. And that, along with the other vessel with be taken to Christmas Island.  And, finally, there was a third vessel that was interdicted east of Christmas Island  with 44 passengers and three crew members.   

 This is a stark reminder that Tony Abbott has sought to trash border protection in  this country. He has sought to destroy, once and for all, offshore processing- which is  the strongest deterrent to people smugglers. This is very unfortunate because, as we  know, as advised by national security agencies, the government had embarked upon  the most effective deterrent to stop people getting on unseaworthy vessels on  perilous journeys.   

 Unfortunately, as a result of Tony Abbott voting with the Greens preventing  legislation, we are not in a position at this point to implement the Malaysia  arrangement which is, indeed, the most effective means to stop people getting on  those vessels. Happy to take any questions.   

 JOURNALIST:          Could you please give us a break down, boat by boat, of the  nations of origins of the asylum seekers?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:   At this point, usually the determination of ethnicities is  determined once they’ve arrived at Christmas Island. At this point, there has been no  verification of ethnicity. We just, firstly, check the number of passengers and crew.  Of course we ensure they are safe once we board the vessels and they are taken to  Christmas Island. And, of course, the security, health and identity matters will be  resolved. At which point the Government will disclose, of course, the ethnicity of  those passengers.   

 JOURNALIST:          Can you tell us how many children are on board?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:   At this point, that has not been provided. Remember, some  of these vessels are still in the water. They’ve been interdicted and they are, indeed,  going to be taken to Christmas Island where they’ll be processed for security,  identity and health purposes.   

 JOURNALIST:          So when do you expect them to arrive on Christmas Island?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:   Well, that will depend on how far each is away. As I said, the  first vessel was picked up on Ashmore Islands. That is some days away from  Christmas Island. People have to remember that Christmas Island is many days  sailing from the main land and indeed, it’s many days sailing from Ashmore Islands  and that first vessel, HMAS Hervey Bay, will be taking those passengers and the one  crew member to Christmas Island for processing.   

 But again, as I say, this is, again, as a result of Tony Abbott putting his position, his  personal ambition first, the national interest second. He’s effectively trashing  offshore processing. Even his own option, that he’d like to implement upon being  elected, is not one that can occur without the legislation being passed in the  parliament.   

 So this is a reckless act by the leader of the Opposition. And, indeed, he should  change his position, put the interest of his country first and prevent people from  getting on these dangerous, dangerous vessels on perilous journeys which, of  course, have led in some instances to some terrible maritime disasters.   

 JOURNALIST:          So what’s the Government going to do then? I mean, the Malaysia  deal doesn’t look like it’s going to go through parliament. What are you going to do  to stop these-?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:   Well, we’ve continued to work, of course, with our friends in  our region. We work very closely, for example, with the Indonesian National Police  and the Royal Malaysian Police. Only last week, we had the first gaoling of a people  smuggler for five years under the new people smuggling laws introduce by the  Indonesian government and passed by the Indonesian parliament. So that was  certainly a very strong blow against organised transnational crime- in this case,  people smuggling-  by that country and we applaud their efforts. We’ll continue to  work with the Malaysian government and the Royal Malaysian Police in preventing  people smuggling operations occurring in Malaysia.   

 So we work very closely with transit countries but, of course, our efforts to have the  most effective deterrent is being frustrated by the Leader of the Opposition, who is  the best friend that people smugglers have ever had.   

 JOURNALIST:          Can we ask about the 14 year old boy held in Bali on suspected  drug charges? Do you think he’s receiving the right advice? What do you make of this  mask he was wearing while being transported to the Immigration Detention Centre?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:   I’m not aware of any decisions he has made to prevent his  identity being disclosed. All I do know is the consulate and, indeed, the embassy in  Indonesia is providing him with the best possible support and advice. We would do  that for all of our citizens and, of course, we do so for this young person.   

 JOURNALIST:          But you’ve got to admit it does, perhaps, paint him as an- do you  think it taints his image, this particular mask he’s been-   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR::   Well, until you asked me the question, I hadn’t considered  that issue. This is a 14 year old child. He’s seeking to prevent his identity being  disclosed. But I can assure you, in terms of the support and advice he’s receiving,  he’s receiving, you know, the greatest possible advice from the embassy and the  consulate.   

 JOURNALIST:          Can you update us on the situation in terms of the Australian  government’s negotiation with Indonesia and the possibility of the boy being  transported to Australia?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:    No, look I’m not involved directly with those negotiations.  That’s a matter for, at the ministerial level, the Foreign Minister. But you already  know, as has already been recorded, that the Foreign Minister has been engaged  with the Indonesian Government on this matter. But most importantly, and quite  correctly, this matter is being dealt with by the Australian Embassy who are  representing the interests of that citizen and his family and are doing a professional  job.    

 JOURNALIST:          Just back home to the issue of asylum seekers, taking into account  these three new boat arrivals, what’s the capacity like on Christmas Island? How  many more people can you process there before that facility is full?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:    I’m not sure of the exact number. That is something you  might want to refer to the Minister for Immigration. I am aware though that there is  plenty of capacity for these vessels. But again, the impact upon resources, whether it  be the detention centre, whether it be on our customs and border protection, will  indeed be, in the end, at the feet of Tony Abbott.   

 He has chosen to support the Greens and oppose offshore processing. He has done  so even though it is against his on position, his own stated position. So where does  Tony Abbott stand on offshore processing? He votes against the proposal that was  the advice that was determined as a result of the advice we received from national  security agencies. Now Tony Abbott has to make a decision. He either has to put this  country’s interests first or put his own ambitions first. He’s chosen to put his own  ambitions first. He should choose to put the interests of this country first, and he is  not doing so, and this is a crying shame.    

 JOURNALIST:          Does this situation mean that detention centres, for example in  Victoria, that there will have to be new facilities opened up or their capacity  expanded to deal with the increasing amount of asylum seekers? 

 

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:    Well it will depend. We have said already it is likely we will  see an increase in irregular maritime arrivals without putting in place the most  effective deterrent to stop people getting on the vessels. The Minister for  Immigration has already talked about using a flexible approach to ensure, once  security, identity and health matters have been determined, to have people being  placed in the community. So we’ll have to see as we go.    

 But of course this could all be an academic discussion if Tony Abbott would support  the Government and accept the advice of national security agencies. The same  people who advised the John Howard have advised this Government that if you want  to see fewer people endangered by getting on these vessels, if you want to see  fewer vessels coming into Australian shores, you should support the legislation. Now  remembering, we understand this does not mean that Tony Abbott has to sign up to  the Malaysian arrangement. But it means that if he is ever elected Prime Minister he  will be able to implement an offshore processing option. Until he does that, there is  no chance of him introducing any offshore processing option if he were ever elected  Prime Minister, and that’s why this is such a reckless and spiteful act by the Leader  of the Opposition and he should take it, reconsider his position, put the country first,  put his ambitions second. That’s what the people of Australia would expect from a  responsible Leader of the Opposition.    

 JOURNALIST:          You, sorry you keep referring to these people as irregular  maritime arrivals. Is that how you consider them or do you consider them asylum  seekers?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:    Well, at this point, until they’ve sought asylum, we can’t  determine that. That is something they may do and it’s most likely that those on the  vessels will do. But the term I use is the terms that’s used and has been used for  years by agencies. They are maritime arrivals and not taking the regular process,  that’s the only reason we determine them to be irregular maritime arrivals. And,  indeed, at some point, they may seek asylum and if they do, of course I’ll refer to  them as asylum seekers. But there’s nothing, I’m not, there’s nothing to be made of  the reference to that phrase.   

 JOURANLIST:          Back to the boy in Bali, are you, do you welcome this move to the  immigration centre? Is this the best place for him to be in?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:    If indeed he is better, he is more secure and he’s better  placed there and appropriate to his age, then I think it’s a very good thing. And I’m  sure that our embassy is doing everything they can to make his detention as  comfortable as possible as we await the proper processes of the Indonesian judiciary  to determine this matter.   

 This is a matter to be determined by Indonesia and their judiciary and we will  provide support to our citizen- in this case this young boy and of course we hope the  best for him- but I think we should leave it to the officials to determine this matter  from this point on. 

 

 JOURNALIST:          How much influence does the Australian government have in  terms of this?   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR:    I think we respect Indonesia as a close friend and we believe  they must deal with these matters appropriately, as they would, of course, expect us  to deal with Indonesian citizens in this country. So, you know, we think that they will  give the person in question a fair hearing. We’ve got the support there from the  Australian embassy and I think we should leave it to the officials to provide such  support and not continue to really discuss these matters in the media- it’s not really  doing the young boy’s family any help at all.   

 Thank you very much. Thank you.   

 

 - ENDS -   

 

