---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Smithfield: 10 September 2011: Nauru costs, Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court, boat arrival, protests, Kevin Rudd"
date: "2011-09-10"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Nauru costs"
  - "Malaysia transfer arrangement"
  - "High Court"
  - "boat arrival"
  - "protests"
  - "Kevin Rudd"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211360044
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1120541%22
---

 Search this site   Go  

 Home

 Biographical details

 Media Centre

 Contact details

 Department

 Parliamentary  Secretary

 Links  

 

 Nauru costs, Malaysia transfer  arrangement, High Court, boat  arrival, protests, Kevin Rudd Saturday, 10 September 2011

 Doorstop interview, Smithfield

 Chris Bowen: Thanks for coming everybody. Last week  the government provided senior officials to the leader of the  Opposition and the shadow cabinet to brief them on what's  an effective deterrent for people smugglers. We wanted the  Opposition to have the same advice that the government  has, and that advice is that an offshore processing centre  on Nauru or Papua New Guinea by itself would not provide  the sort of deterrent for people making the dangerous boat  journey to come to Australia that we need.

 The advice is that to break the people smugglers' business  model is to remove the opportunity for resettlement in  Australia after making that journey. We know that under the  previous government, Nauru didn't do that, with over 90 per 

 cent of refugees who were resettled being resettled in  Australia or New Zealand.

 We know that the Malaysia agreement did do that; saying to  people that if you take the journey to Australia then you'll be  returned to Malaysia, you'll be processed in line with the  other 94 000 asylum seekers and refugees in Malaysia.

 Today, I'm also releasing my department's estimates of the  cost of a detention centre being operated in Nauru over the  forward estimates, over the four years. That cost is $980  million. Effectively, very close to $1 billion over the forward  estimates period.

 Now this is an estimate, there are a number of things not  included in this. This doesn't include capital cost - we know  that the facility at Nauru had not been used for many years,  we know that part of it has been converted into a school - 

 Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 1 of 5 Nauru costs, Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court, boat arrival, pr...

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171640.htm

 and we estimate there would be very considerable capital  costs as well. That would need a detailed survey to  estimate exactly what they would be. That doesn't include,  for example, the cost of returning people from Nauru if they  are a failed asylum seeker; that is a separate budget item.  But it is an estimate of the cost of running a significant  detention facility of around 1500 people in Nauru.

 It's expensive. It makes sense that it's expensive because  Nauru obviously is a long way away and the operational  costs would be very substantial. So we know that Nauru is  an ineffective option, now we know it's an expensive one as  well.

 Now the government has been methodically working  through the implications of the High Court decision. We've  said that it's appropriate for the Opposition to do so as well.  We've provided high level, senior briefings to the Opposition  so that they have the same advice available to them as we  do, as they work through the issues. Mr Abbott said last  week he was prepared to work with the government in good  faith and leave all options on the table. I certainly hope that  is still the case, I certainly hope that he is prepared to take  into account the expert advice that's been made available to  him as well as the estimated cost that the government is  releasing today.

 Happy to take some questions.

 Journalist: Given what you've said about Nauru, is it off the  table?

 Bowen: Our position remains the same. I said, in the wake  of the High Court decision, that we would go back and that  we would examine all options. Now we've been doing that,  and as a result, I have made those briefings available to the  Opposition and the released the estimates that we're  releasing today.

 Now of course the government will have more to say in  coming days about our response, but our position remains  the same; we want a proper regional agreement but as a  part of that we've been looking at all options. But in the  interest of transparency and so the Opposition has the  same information available to them as we do to us, we  made the briefing available and we make these estimates  available.

 Page 2 of 5 Nauru costs, Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court, boat arrival, pr...

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171640.htm

 Journalist: Will you be reaching now any agreement with  the Opposition, by taking Nauru off the table?

 Bowen: Well, our position remains that we think Nauru, by  itself, is not an effective deterrent. That's the Opposition's  policy, up until now has been, if you reopen Nauru then  that's an effective deterrent. We don't believe that and  we've seen no evidence to change that position. I'm not  going to pre-empt what the government's position will be  when it's announced in the coming period.

 Journalist: What about -Bowen: We might give someone else a chance and then  come back to you -Journalist: In terms of talking about that cost and saying  it's a fairly prohibitive price tag, is that really a surprise  given that offshore processing at Nauru has been a policy  of previous governments? Surely the $1 billion price tag is  not so much of a revelation?

 Bowen: Well it's not a surprise to me, but Tony Abbott and  Scott Morrison have in the past said it was a cheaper option  than Malaysia - that's clearly not the case, clearly not the  case. They've said it could be done as a low cost option,  well they might have a different definition of low cost to I.

 So I think it's appropriate, given that the Opposition has  previously said Nauru can be up and running quickly, it  would be cheaper than the Malaysian arrangement, which  costs under $300 million over the forward estimates, I think  they need to reflect on this new information.

 Journalist: So you've told us that Nauru is expensive and  ineffective. Can you tell us some of your own parties ideas  for where you're going to send asylum seekers?

 Bowen: Well our position has been clear, we've negotiated  the arrangement with Malaysia - that was something that  has been on the public record for some time. Now the High  Court ruled that invalid a little over a week ago. We've had  to reflect on that arrangement and reflect on our response,  and we're well advanced in doing that, and we'll be having  more to say on that in coming days.

 Page 3 of 5 Nauru costs, Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court, boat arrival, pr...

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171640.htm

 Journalist: But in light of that decision, can you tell us  where you're up to on your own ideas?

 Bowen: Our consideration of the entire matter of the  regional framework, of how to deal with asylum seekers is  well advanced and we'll be saying more in coming days.  But we've made it clear that we have all options on the  table. Mr Abbott said he had all options on the table last  week. He's since said that may or may not be the case; well  I hope it is still the case that he is willing to have all options  on the table and is prepared to work with the government in  good faith.

 Journalist: Is there a new plan that includes Malaysia that  will go to the Cabinet on Monday?

 Bowen: Well I don't pre-empt what I'll be recommending to  Cabinet. Of course, the first people to know what I  recommend to Cabinet will be the Cabinet.

 Journalist: Of course you can't say what will happen on  Monday but maybe you could tell us who you've been  consulting with in the lead up to this?

 Bowen: Well of course I've been consulting with Cabinet  colleagues both in formal Cabinet meetings and more  generally. I've consulted with members of the Caucus, as  you'd expect, and I've been taking expert advice, as you'd  expect.

 Journalist: The Attorney General said yesterday that  amending the Migration Act was a real option. Is that  something that you will do?

 Bowen: Well I said that myself. I think I said that last  Sunday on Insiders that amending the Migration Act is an  option, it remains an option.

 Journalist: Does it worry you that it if you amend the Act,  you may to open to more legal challenges?

 Bowen: Well of course governments must always be aware  that they can be challenged in the courts, but of course it's  incumbent on all involved to make sure that the will of the  Parliament is clear in any amending legislation. That's what  all governments would do in that circumstance.

 Page 4 of 5 Nauru costs, Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court, boat arrival, pr...

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171640.htm

 Journalist: Minister do you have an update on the boat  that has arrived in the last 24 hours, any more details?  There are reports that all those on board are men.

 Bowen: Oh look there is processing that's occurring and it's  only just relatively recently arrived. There is processing that  occurs and I'm happy to provide further updates as and  when that information comes to hand.

 Journalist: There are also reports today that there are  hunger strikes at Port Augusta. Do you know anything  about that?

 Bowen: We do, not irregularly, have people engaged in  protest action and sometimes that involves hunger strikes.  When that occurs we deal with that appropriately and  provide appropriate advice to them and that advice is that  hunger strikes do not change the visa outcome that they  are seeking. In relation to hunger strikes, they do occur  from time to time, but obviously we work to resolve them as  quickly as possible.

 Journalist: Just one last question. Kevin Rudd, the Daily  Telegraph is suggesting today that he is reformed, he's  ready to lead, he's a new, inclusive man. Would you like to  see him leader of the Labor Party again?

 Bowen: Julia Gillard will be leading the Labor Party to the  next election, very clearly.

 See: Index of Speeches

 URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171640.htm  Last update: Monday, 12 September 2011 at 09:03 AEST 

 Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 5 of 5 Nauru costs, Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court, boat arrival, pr...

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171640.htm

