---
title: "Transcript of doorstop: Sydney: 15 December 2011: Settlement Grants Program; anniversary of Christmas Island boat tragedy; illnesses in detention; Remuneration Tribunal; leadership; Craig Thomson; detention network"
date: "2011-12-15"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Settlement Grants Program"
  - "anniversary of Christmas Island boat tragedy"
  - "illnesses in detention"
  - "Remuneration Tribunal"
  - "leadership"
  - "Craig Thomson"
  - "detention network"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211367602
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1343661%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 SENATOR KATE LUNDY 

 PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR IMMIGRATION AND  MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS   

 *TRANSCRIPT* 

 

 

 DOORSTOP, SYDNEY  

 THURSDAY, 15 DECEMBER 2011 

 

 SUBJECTS: Settlement Grants Program, anniversary of Christmas  Island boat tragedy, illnesses in detention, Remuneration Tribunal,  leadership, Craig Thomson, detention network.   

 CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks for coming, everybody. We’re here today to launch  this round of the Settlement Grants Program, which is open from today for  organisations around the nation to apply for funding to assist their work in  settling our newest Australian residents, humanitarian migrants and others  who’ve settled in Australia, in terms of support and care. As I said inside,  Australia’s widely recognised as the best practice in the world when it comes  to settlement grants and humanitarian assistance for new arrivals, but it’s  important that we’re constantly reflecting and improving.   

 And I want to take this opportunity to thank my Parliamentary Secretary, Kate  Lundy, who’s done a first class job over recent months in consulting with the  settlement services sector, in recommending changes to me and I’ve adopted  those changes. Those changes have been widely informed by feedback from  the settlement services sector in terms of how we can best provide support  and assistance for not only new and emerging communities, but communities  which also on an ongoing basis need that extra support and assistance.   

 I’m just going to ask Kate to say a few words and then I’ll take your  questions.   

 KATE LUNDY: Thanks very much, Minister. It is great news today for  Australia’s settlement sector. We know with our unique form of  multiculturalism that we have one of the most successful examples of nations  peacefully settling millions of people; in fact, seven million people since the  end of the Second World War into our wonderful multicultural nation.  

 

 The Settlement Grants Program today the Minister has announced the round  open and a refocusing of that program, will make sure that our social  infrastructure supporting our newest arrivals, people coming under the  humanitarian entrant program and migrants coming to Australia are  supported in the best possible way. These are the building blocks for the  success of our multicultural nation and I’m really proud to be here today in 

 Cabramatta to make this announcement with the Minister.    

 BOWEN: We’re happy to take questions.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister Bowen, can you just give us a comment about the  Christmas Island anniversary?   

 BOWEN: Sure, thanks for raising that.   

 Of course, this is an important opportunity to reflect on the terrible events of  a year ago, to reflect on those who lost their lives, to thank those people who  worked so tirelessly to save so many off the coast of Christmas Island. It was  a terrible day for Australia. I think all Australians, regardless of their views on  border protection or on refugee policy, were shocked and dismayed that day  to see the terrible loss of life.    

 For me, it’s also a reminder that inevitably there have been other people  who’ve lost their lives on that dangerous journey from Indonesia to Australia  whom we don’t know about. There were no TV cameras there on the high  seas between Indonesia and Australia to record their loss and we also should  spare a thought for them as well today.   

 This is an important day, an important day for the nation. Later today there  will be a memorial service on Christmas Island, which I think will be an  important opportunity for locals again to reflect on and remember that terrible  day 12 months ago.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister, what is the situation like at Christmas Island at the  moment in terms of capacity?   

 BOWEN: Well, of course, as I’ve said, we do have capacity across the  network. The Christmas Island facility has some small capacity. We’re  constantly moving people off Christmas Island, of course, to other detention  facilities around the mainland, as has been the case for a long period now.    

 We have seen more arrivals this month. I think that’s what the Prime Minister  and I predicted would happen when we saw the announcement by the  Opposition that they would not support our legislation for offshore processing.  As we said at the time, we can now expect and brace ourselves for a lot more  boat arrivals. That remains the situation. I invite the Opposition to reflect on  their position and to support offshore processing. Here’s an idea: if you  support offshore processing, how about voting for it in the Parliament, Mr 

 Abbott?    

 JOURNALIST: That came after this terrible tragedy a year ago, that the  Opposition did turn that down. What have you actually done in the last year  to change things so something like this doesn’t happen again?    

 BOWEN: Well, in the last year, the Government has been working with  energy to negotiate a regional framework and to enter into an agreement  with Malaysia, and we’ve done that. We negotiated the regional framework  through the Bali Process meeting, the meeting of Immigration and Foreign  Ministers from around our region. We entered into that arrangement with  Malaysia, we struck an agreement with them, an innovative arrangement  which would break the people smugglers’ business model.  

 

 It’s an arrangement, an agreement ready to be implemented. All we need is  for the Parliament to pass legislation, for Mr Abbott to stop being so negative,  to get out of the way and to let the Government get on with the job. I mean,  Mr Abbott has attempted to sabotage offshore processing and then sits back  and says, ‘Oh, look, onshore processing isn’t working’. Well, if he didn’t  sabotage offshore processing, if he’d actually vote for it in the Parliament,  then we’d be able to implement offshore processing.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, there are reports of a tuberculosis outbreak in  detention because of the influx of asylum seekers. There’s also cases of  dengue fever. What’s your view on that?    

 BOWEN: I wouldn’t use the term ‘outbreak’. We do from time to time have  cases of tuberculosis identified. They are managed very carefully. They are  rare and they remain rare. Obviously there’s varying degrees of contagion and  that is managed very carefully. In most cases the tuberculosis identified will  be latent tuberculosis, but of course we take nothing for granted and we take  all necessary precautions in managing any illnesses of anybody who arrives in  Australia in that fashion.   

 JOURNALIST: Was this found to happen given the influx of boat arrivals?   

 BOWEN: Well obviously, when you have an increase in the number of people  arriving by boat, you’re going to increase the chances of some of those  people being sick; that stands to reason. There are many implications of the 

 increase in arrivals by boat, that’s why we work so hard to have a regional  framework, to have offshore processing and to ensure that was in place. That  is still what we want to implement. We could implement it very quickly if the  Liberal Party would get out of the way and pass the legislation.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister, can I just ask on a couple of other issues?    

 BOWEN: Sure.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think MPs deserve a pay rise, to be handed down  today?    

 BOWEN: Oh look, as I understand it the Remuneration Tribunal is handing  down their decision later today. I don’t know what they’re recommending,  I’ve not been apprised of that. That is something they keep to themselves  until it’s announced. Obviously we’ll look at what’s announced and we’ll all be  able to comment on it afterwards.    

 This is always a controversial issue. There’s always strong views in the  community. I think most people recognise that from time to time MPs will  have a pay rise, but it’s always controversial. We’ll need to see what the  decision by the remuneration committee is later today.   

 JOURNALIST: So just to take you back a moment. Ten News has learned  that residents have been told there’s nothing to worry about, they’re fine, but  that hospital records show otherwise. Do you know anything about this?    

 BOWEN: Look, as I say, there are rare cases of tuberculosis on Christmas  Island. They are very small numbers compared to the total number of people  maintained on Christmas Island.   

 JOURNALIST: What about other detention centres?   

 BOWEN: What we do is we do health checks on Christmas Island before  people are transferred to the mainland. So you will find rare cases of  tuberculosis and other illnesses amongst people who arrive by boat. They are  very actively managed. Where necessary, people are put in medical isolation,  as they are being managed through that process. But we always have as our  first priority protecting the health and safety of all the staff in detention  facilities, the detainees themselves, and of course, the broader community.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, in Darwin an asylum seeker was on an excursion to  the wave pool there and he’s accused of inappropriately touching girls. This  has prompted the Member for Solomon to call on a suspension of these kinds  of excursions. Do you think that’s necessary?   

 BOWEN: No. I am aware of the allegation and it’s important that that  individual have the opportunity to be interviewed by police and if charges will  be laid, that will be a matter for police. These excursions have been  happening for a long time. It’s appropriate that people in detention are from 

 time to time taken out of detention to participate in some community  activities.    

 Of course, if this sort of behaviour has occurred, it is entirely inappropriate  and he’ll be dealt with under the full force of the law. That is a matter for the  police to lay charges. I reject the suggestion that people should never be able  to leave a detention facility under supervision. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Minister, The Australian has today named you as one of the  ministers who has switched teams to back Rudd. What do you say to that?   

 BOWEN: I think the silly season might be commencing a little bit early. I’ve  worked with every ounce of energy I can muster for Julia Gillard, I will  continue to do so, she has my full support.   

 JOURNALIST: What do you think about the latest reports on Craig Thomson  allegedly plagiarising?   

 BOWEN: Well look, individual MPs’ reports are a matter for that individual  MP. I’ve not read his report, I saw the newspaper speculation this morning.  From time to time these things come up; I recall Julie Bishop was accused - 

 accurately - of plagiarising an academic work, so I wouldn’t be listening to  any Liberal Party criticism of any Labor Party MP today.   

 JOURNALIST: Well it wasn’t Liberal Party criticism, it was a journalist who  found that he plagiarised.    

 BOWEN: Well I’ve seen the newspaper report, I haven’t actually looked at Mr  Thomson’s report. Individual MPs’ reports are a matter for that individual MP  to justify.    

 JOURNALIST: Given the Remuneration Tribunal is possibly going to stop  these overseas study tours, in light of what’s come out about Craig Thomson,  do you think this is a good idea?   

 BOWEN: I expect the Remuneration Tribunal to make a series of  recommendations not only about salary but about conditions. And one of  those conditions may well be the study leave entitlements for backbench MPs,  that’s a matter for them. Obviously the community will be able to judge the  remuneration committee recommendations or decisions later today. I really  don’t know what they are. But of course, there will always be a range of  views in the community about all sorts of things when it goes to Members of  Parliaments’ salaries and entitlements.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, are you considering expanding the facilities on  Christmas Island?   

 BOWEN: No.    

 JOURNALIST: It’s not necessary?   

 BOWEN: No. I’ve made clear that we will manage our number of detainees  through a range of mechanisms. We do have some other capacity coming  online; Wickham Point recently opened; we continue to work on the Northam,  the Yongah Hill detention facility in Western Australia; we’ll continue to move 

 children and families into the community; we’ll continue to process people as  quickly as we can; we’ll continue to use bridging visas as part of the mix for  managing asylum seekers. I’ve no plans to further expand detention centres 

 on Christmas Island or anywhere else.    

 JOURNALIST: Just back on the Christmas Island tragedy. There’s been lots  of reports that are coming out this morning that survivors just haven’t been  coping since. Is there any extra support that the Government is going to be  offering them?   

 BOWEN: Look, we do provide assistance and support, obviously, for people.  I think most of them are coping as well as you can expect. It’s been a terrible  thing for those people, for those families and the rest of us can only imagine  what they’ve been through. Of course man of them will take many years to  get over what they’ve been through, if they ever do. It’s a terrible thing for  them, we do provide extra support and assistance but I’m not going to  pretend to you that that is going to solve the problem of what they’re going  through, because for many of them it will be - for all of them I suspect - the  most traumatic thing that has ever happened to them or will ever happen to  them in their lives.   

 It’s something much more traumatic than will ever happen to the rest of us.  So we’ll provide as much support and assistance as we can, but for these  people, they have been through a terrible situation and it will take some time  for them to come to terms with the tragedy that they’ve been a part of.    

 Okay? Thank you very much, guys.   

 Ends  

 

 

