---
title: "Detention no place for childen"
date: "2011-09-28"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211361055
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1115882%22
---

 Wednesday 28 September 2011    

 MEDIA RELEASE:    

 Detention No Place For Children - Greens     Remote detention centres are not appropriate facilities to house children, warn the  Australian Greens, as more asylum seeker children are being transferred to Leonora  today.    

 “Children being placed in remote, isolated  locations like this simply isn’t appropriate  or necessary. Who will be looking out for these children and making sure their rights  are being protected?” asked Senator Sarah Hanson-Young, the Greens Immigration  Spokesperson.    

 “Locking up children and young people in remote detention is not in their best  interests, it contravenes the Minister’s role as their legal guardian, responsible for  their safety and welfare.”     

 “I have spent the last few days in Darwin. I’ve spoken to many unaccompanied  minors first hand. They have tragic stories to tell and are most vulnerable as asylum  seekers. Children are innocent, they shouldn’t be being locked up like criminals.”    

 “We know the stress that detention causes. The AME has likened it to child abuse -  causing suicides, self-harm and trauma. And today, the Pacific Region  Representative of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights has correctly noted  that this undermines Australia’s human rights record.”   

 “It is time that the Government rose above about the cheap politics of this and started  putting the welfare of children first. It can do this, by ensuring that asylum seeker  children’s claims are processed in the community, not in detention,” said Senator  Hanson-Young.    

 Media contact: Robert Simms - 0427 604 760    

