---
title: "Australian peacekeepers recognised"
date: "2011-09-14"
creators:
  - "Snowdon, Warren"
source: "MINISTER FOR VETERANS' AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211360252
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1082895%22
---

 

 Subscribe to media releases at minister.dva.gov.au/subscribe.htm 

 

 Wednesday, 14 September 2011  VA075 

 

 AUSTRALIAN PEACEKEEPERS RECOGNISED    

 The Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, Warren Snowdon is encouraging all Australians to recognise  the ongoing contribution of our peacekeepers on Australian Peacekeepers Day.   

 Today marks 64 years of Australia’s contribution to peace operations around the world, starting  with the first United Nations peacekeeping mission in 1947.   

 A ceremony was held in Canberra today at the site of the future Australian Peacekeeping  Memorial on Anzac Parade.   

 Mr Snowdon said Australia has a proud record of peacekeeping and peacemaking, participating  in more than 50 United Nations and multi-national operations.   

 “Currently, almost 600 Australian Defence Force and Australian Federal Police personnel are  deployed in operations across the globe in locations including the Middle East, Timor-Leste,  Solomon Islands and Sudan,” Mr Snowdon said.   

 “Today is an opportunity for Australians to reflect on the important role of our peacekeepers and  peacemakers in providing support and assistance to victims of conflict, often in unstable and  dangerous locations.”   

 Australia’s peacekeeping roles have included military observation, logistics support, ceasefire  monitoring, landmine clearing, supporting democratic elections, humanitarian aid and  repatriation of refugees.   

 “Men and women from the Australia Defence Force, the federal and state police forces and  Australian Government agencies have all been involved in our long history of peace  operations,” Mr Snowdon said.    

 The Australian Government is continuing its support for our peacekeepers and peacemakers by  funding a University of Melbourne study that investigates the long-term effects on mental health  and quality of life of ex-serving Defence Force peacekeepers deployed from the 1990s to 2002.   

 It will consider Australian involvement in places such as Rwanda, Somalia, Cambodia, Namibia,  Western Sahara and East Timor. It is expected to be completed by the end of 2012.    

 Media Note: Images are available from the DVA Media Centre www.dva.gov.au/media   

 Media inquiries:   Minister Snowdon: Marcus Butler 02 6277 7820     Department of Veterans’ Affairs Media: 02 6289 6203 

 

