---
title: "Minister Bowen must explain his Department Secretary's role in desperate spin campaign"
date: "2011-09-09"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211360042
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1087467%22
---

 Media Release 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Scott Morrison, MP 

 

 

 9 September 2011 

 MINISTER BOWEN MUST EXPLAIN HIS DEPARTMENT SECRETARY'S ROLE IN  DESPERATE SPIN CAMPAIGN  

 The Coalition has called on Minister Bowen to explain the role of his Immigration  Department secretary Andrew Metcalfe in briefing media this week prior to meeting to brief  the Opposition, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said  today. 

 “The Coalition understands that hours prior to undertaking a formal briefing of the  Opposition, the Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, Mr Metcalfe,  was directly involved in briefing media on the advice he was about to provide,” Mr  Morrison said. 

 “If this is true, this is an outrageous breach of trust and abuse of public officials for political  purposes and significantly compromises the integrity of the advice provided,” he said. 

 “Minister Bowen must confirm immediately whether Mr Metcalfe had participated in this  media briefing and whether Minister Bowen had sanctioned Mr Metcalfe’s involvement. 

 “This matter goes directly to the integrity of this process and the Government’s good faith  in dealing with the Opposition on these serious matters. 

 “Minister Bowen must explain the reason for this briefing taking place, who was involved,  when it occurred and why the Opposition was not informed. 

 “Mr Metcalfe gave no indication when we met with the Leader of the Opposition, Senator  Brandis or myself that he had earlier briefed media on the contents of his advice. Nor did  his advice include reference to 'London style riots' or figures of 600 people turning up per  month. 

 “The suggestion of London style riots is alarmist nonsense, however the Coalition has at  no stage dismissed claims that increasing arrivals would have serious consequences. 

 “Illegal arrivals of 600 people per month would be nothing new under this government.  This level of illegal arrivals was common place last year, and arrivals have remained at  high levels throughout 2011, exceeding the number of arrivals in 2009. This is despite the  Government's absurd claims that they have had the 'people smugglers on the run'. 

 “Increasing levels of illegal arrivals is the key contributor to the collapse of our detention  network and the violence and cost blowouts that have resulted. However to co-opt the  London riots to spin the Government out of a self made political jam is simply  irresponsible. 

 “There is no doubt that illegal boat arrivals continuing at this level would further exacerbate  the rolling crisis in our immigration detention network that began in late 2009 when riots 

 first broke out on Christmas Island and tents were erected to accommodate new  detainees. 

 “Within the briefing Department officials were unable to satisfactorily explain the deep  flaws in the Government's failed Malaysia solution, which include the inability to provide  acceptable standards of protection, the establishment of a use by date with its 800  transferee cap that can be exhausted by smugglers and the necessity to create exceptions  for children and other vulnerable transferees that would be used by smugglers to  undermine the arrangement. 

 “There is also the rank hypocrisy of the Prime Minister's pledge that she would never send  asylum seekers to a country that had not signed the refugee convention. 

 “The Government has steadfastly refused to acknowledge the serious weaknesses in their  Malaysian proposal and should stop trying to spin their way out of this mess of their own  making and face up to their culpability. 

 “The Coalition is prepared to work with the Government to put the issue of offshore  processing beyond legal doubt. However, we are not prepared to accept unprofessional  behaviour and juvenile media stunts as part of this process. 

 “This is a Government that demonstrates time and again why they cannot be trusted. To  attempt to turn a serious briefing of the Opposition, accepted in good faith, into a media  stunt is cheap politics. 

 “If Australia’s most senior immigration public official was co-opted into this act, it reflects  poorly on the Government and Minister Bowen in particular. 

 “Such an abuse of trust and the Coalition’s reasonable expectations of professional  behaviour must be addressed to restore some measure of confidence going forward,” Mr  Morrison said. 

 

