---
title: "First Australian Volunteers for International Development farewelled"
date: "2011-06-22"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR PACIFIC ISLAND AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211356271
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/865900%22
---

   THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs  

 

 Minister’s Office:  0466 745 623 or 02 62774330                                    Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade:  02 6261 1555  

 

 

 First Australian Volunteers for   International Development farewelled   

 22 June 2011    

 More than 150 outstanding young Australians are about to head overseas to help  reduce poverty in developing countries as youth ambassadors under the Government’s  Australian Volunteers for International Development program (AVID).    

 Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs, the Hon Richard Marles MP, will  farewell the first group of youth ambassadors to be deployed under the new AVID  program at a function in Canberra tonight.      

 “These volunteers will support Australia’s aid efforts in 33 countries by sharing skills  and contributing to sustainable development in roles as varied as sports coaching in  Samoa, civil engineering in Solomon Islands, working on environmental biodiversity  in Fiji and supporting child refugees in Thailand,” Mr Marles said.    

 “The AVID program brings all Australian volunteers together under the one banner  and includes as a special category the Australian Youth Ambassadors for  Development, high-achieving Australian men and women aged between 18 and 30  who will live and work in developing countries across Asia, the Pacific and Africa.”    

 Twenty-three-year-old Thomas Humphries from Endeavour Hills in Victoria will  work with local communities to integrate cricket into junior programs and schools in  the Eastern Highlands of Papua New Guinea.    

 “It’s a pretty big contrast from my suburban life but I’m excited,” Thomas said.    

 “Sport is an effective but not an obvious development tool. As well as promoting the 

 

 Minister’s Office:  0466 745 623 or 02 62774330                                    Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade:  02 6261 1555   2 

 health benefits of exercise and eating the right foods, there is a social aspect that can  bring communities together.”    

 The Indonesian Ambassador to Australia, His Excellency Primo Alui Joelianto, will  join the farewell celebration at Old Parliament House and meet the 15 youth  ambassadors about to be deployed to a variety of locations and roles across Indonesia.    

 Since the 1960s the Australian Government has supported more than 12,000 people to  volunteer abroad to help reduce poverty as part of the overseas aid program.    

 This intake brings the number of volunteers supported to travel overseas to more than  800 in 2010-11, with another 900 expected to be deployed in 2011-12. 

 

 Media Contact: Pauline Braniff, Mr Marles’ office: 0466 745 623 

 Journalists interested in interviewing a volunteer from their region can contact  AusAID: 0417 680 590 

 

