---
title: "Greater support for the National Women's Alliances"
date: "2011-05-17"
creators:
  - "Ellis, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR THE STATUS OF WOMEN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211353075
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/882440%22
---

 

 

 Media Releases    Greater support for the National Women's Alliances   

 Date: 17/05/2011   

 The Australian Government will provide an additional $485,000 to support the six national  Women's Alliances in their work to advance gender equality in Australia. 

 Minister for the Status of Women, Kate Ellis announced the new funding at the annual  National Women's Alliances forum in Canberra today.  

 "The National Women's Alliances are made up of passionate and hard-working women, who  are helping to change the face of Australia and the lives of Australian women and men for the  better," Ms Ellis said. 

 "Their role is to bring together women's organisations and individuals from across Australia  to share information, identify issues that affect them and build solutions."  

 "The Alliances also engage actively with the Australian Government on policy issues as part  of a better, more informed and representative dialogue between women and government." 

 Up to $300,000 of this new funding is set aside for special policy projects responding to new  and emerging issues that the Alliances identify. 

 The funding allocation also includes $45,000 to enable Alliance members to undertake  training the help them learn new ways of engaging strategically with the Government to  ensure effective progress toward gender equality. 

 Ms Ellis said that yesterday's decision by Fair Work Australia in the Social and Community  Sector equal pay test case showed that challenges of gender equality still remain a real issue  in Australia. 

 "Each of these Alliances plays a critical role in the Australian Government's commitment to  engaging women's groups and bringing the perspective of women to policy making across  government." 

 "We value the important work of the Alliances and their efforts to ensure representation and  recognition of the diversity of women's voices," Ms Ellis said. 

 The Australian Government's vision is for a reinvigorated women's movement where the  Alliances take the lead in ensuring that the voices of as many women as possible are heard -  especially those who in the past have found it difficult to engage in advocacy and decision  making.  

 The Alliances are the Australian Immigrant and Refugee Women's Alliance, National  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Women's Alliance, Australian Women Against  Violence Alliance, National Rural Women's Coalition and Network, Equality Rights Alliance  and Economic Security4Women Alliance.  

 This new funding comes over and above the $200,000 each Alliance receives annually to  ensure government policy takes into account the experience and perspective of women.  

 For more information about the National Women's Alliances visit:  http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/sa/women/progserv/equal/Pages/engaging_womens_org.aspx  

  

