---
title: "Major crackdown on employing illegal workers"
date: "2011-07-21"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211357858
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/939559%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 21 July 2011 

 

 MAJOR CRACKDOWN ON EMPLOYING ILLEGAL WORKERS   

 The Federal Government will overhaul penalties for hiring illegal workers after an  independent review revealed the Howard Government consistently turned a blind eye  to the problem, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Chris Bowen announced 

 today.   

 Mr Bowen today released the review of the Migration Amendment (Employer  Sanctions) Act 2007 by independent legal expert Stephen Howells that looked at  penalty and enforcement arrangements for businesses employing non-citizens  working in Australia without permission.   

 “The Howells Review shows that while we have had success in locating illegal  workers, the Howard Government’s failure to implement an effective penalty regime  - despite clear advice to do so - has impeded our ability to take action against  employers doing the wrong thing,” Mr Bowen said.    

 “The Gillard Government will take action to address deficiencies in the existing laws  to ensure we have an effective sanctions system in place to deter illegal work hire  practices and take action against recalcitrant employers.”   

 The Howells Review found strong evidence of a growing number of illegal workers in  Australia, with a minimum of about 50,000 and potentially more than 100,000 people  working in the country without permission.   

 The problem is also associated with other illegal activity, including serious organised  crime, taxation and welfare fraud, sexual exploitation and abuse of vulnerable  workers.    

 However the review did find that there was only a very small number of employers  and labour suppliers that persistently used illegal workers as a cheaper source of  labour, with the great majority of employers doing the right thing.    

 Mr Bowen said the Government had accepted in-principle the review’s  recommendations and would not tolerate illegal and exploitative labour hire  practices.   

 “We will overhaul the penalties for hiring illegal workers. These illegal practices  expose vulnerable people to exploitation, distort the labour market and are often  associated with abuse of taxation, employment and welfare laws,” he said.   

 The review also found that asylum seekers arriving by sea are not part of the  problem, and are a very small number by comparison.   

 The Government has agreed in-principle to the review’s recommendations, which  include:   

 · Introducing a new three-tiered employer sanctions regime with civil penalties and  fines, as well as maintaining the current criminal penalties;  · Putting in place protections for employers that do the right thing by checking work  entitlements;  · Better education and awareness for employers and labour hire groups on their  obligations; and  · Greater powers for compliance officers to gather documentary evidence against  non-compliant employers.   

 Mr Bowen said as part of the penalty overhaul, the Government would consult with  stakeholders on the Howells Review’s recommendations and ways to better enforce  the existing law, while safeguarding the majority of employers that do the right  thing.    

 “We must ensure any regulatory impacts are balanced against the need to act on  illegal work practices. We are particularly interested in hearing the views of small  business,” he said.   

 As part of its response to the review, the Government will also take into account any  relevant recommendations made by the Australian Building and Construction  Commissioner as part of its current inquiry into sham contracting.    

 A copy of the Howells Report can be found at:  www.immi.gov.au/media/publications/compliance/review-employer-sanctions/    

 Enquiries and submissions on the recommendations of the Howells review may be  forwarded to employer.sanctions.reform@immi.gov.au by 1 September 2011.   

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

