---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 7 May 2011[5:19 pm]: border protection"
date: "2011-05-07"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211352369
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/752596%22
---

 1 

 

 

 

 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH   

 7 May 2011   

 TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR,  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW,   SYDNEY 

 

 Subjects: Border protection. 

 E&OE……………………….………………………………………………………………… 

 TONY ABBOTT: 

 Today we’ve seen a panicked announcement from a Government which is proving yet again that it’s both  untrustworthy and incompetent. This announcement of what is in effect a people-go-round might be a good  deal for Malaysia, but it’s a lousy deal for Australia. This idea that they will take one and we will take five  just risks Malaysia becoming the open back door to Australia. 

 Now, it’s clear what the Prime Minister should do, she should swallow her pride and she should pick up the  phone to the President of Nauru and she should put in place the full range of policies that have been proven  to work. She should pick up the phone to the President of Nauru, reopen the detention centre there as well as  the detention centre at Manus, she should introduce temporary protection visas and she should be willing,  where safe and where possible, to turn boats around. This is the only way to stop the boats. This is the only  way to end the crisis in border protection and to end the crisis in our detention centres. 

 What today also marks is the third solemn election commitment which the Prime Minster has junked. First  of all she junked the commitment to hospital reform. Then she junked the commitment not to have a carbon  tax. Now she’s junked the commitment to regional processing based on a detention centre in East Timor.  She said this was going to be the year of decision and delivery. In fact it’s become the year of backflips and  broken promises. 

 The other point I should make is that the whole reason why she couldn’t pick up the phone to the President  of Nauru, she said, was because Nauru is not a signatory to the UN Refugee Convention. Well, Malaysia is  not a signatory to the UN Refugee Convention. So why is the Prime Minister sending boat people to  Malaysia if she can’t send them to Nauru? 

 QUESTION: 

 Mr Abbott, would this plan appease you in principle if the numbers were different, if the 800 to 4,000 ratio  was different? 

 TONY ABBOTT: 

 2 

 

 We know what works. What works is Nauru, Manus, temporary protection visas and a willingness to turn  boats around where that can be done safely. Instead, we’ve got a Government which is floundering,  absolutely floundering, which is making panicked announcement after panicked announcement because the  Prime Minister is too proud to admit defeat and go back to the policies that worked. 

 QUESTION: 

 Will this stop the boats? 

 TONY ABBOTT: 

 Well, look, we’ll see, but the fact that the arrival of boats seems to have picked up in the last couple of  weeks suggests very strongly that it won’t. 

 QUESTION: 

 Is this good value for money? 

 TONY ABBOTT: 

 Well, again, these are the sorts of things that we’ll have to see when we get the details of how this is all  supposed to work. But a deal that means that Malaysia takes one person for every five people that Australia  takes doesn’t look like a very good deal for Australia. 

 QUESTION: 

 This could have some deterrent toward people smugglers though, could it not? 

 TONY ABBOTT: 

 This is a Government which has essentially admitted that its policies have utterly failed, and when your  policies have failed you’ve got to adopt policies that worked. We know the policies that worked and they  were Nauru, Manus, temporary protection visas and a willingness to turn boats around where that could be  done safely. I call on the Prime Minister to swallow her pride, stop being stubborn, and to pick up the phone  to the President of Nauru and get that centre reopened as quickly as possible. 

 QUESTION: 

 Ms Gillard’s flagged that this could be the first step to a regional deal. Do you agree? 

 TONY ABBOTT: 

 Well, as I said, the essential preconditions she said for sending illegal boat people anywhere was that the  country to which they were sent had to be a signatory to the UN Convention. Now, the whole point of not  picking up the phone to the President of Nauru is that Nauru is not currently a signatory to the UN  Convention. Now she tells us she’s sending people to Malaysia and Malaysia is not a signatory to the UN  Convention. It just shows that this is a Prime Minister completely lacking in consistency and conviction.  

 Thanks so much. 

 [ends] 

 

