---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Smithfield: 18 June 2011: Opposition stunt; Malaysian transfer agreement; Nauru; High Court case; polls"
date: "2011-06-18"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Opposition stunt"
  - "Malaysian transfer agreement"
  - "Nauru"
  - "High Court case"
  - "polls"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211356035
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/859155%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP  

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  

 *TRANSCRIPT*  

 DOORSTOP, SMITHFIELD  

 SATURDAY, 18 JUNE 2011 

 

 SUBJECTS: Opposition stunt, Malaysian transfer agreement, Nauru,  High Court case, polls.  

 CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks everybody.  

 Well, today we see the announcement that Mr Abbott is sending Mr Morrison  to Malaysia. This would go down in the Guinness Book of Records for political  stunts. For weeks, the Liberal Party has been railing against the Malaysian 

 arrangement. For weeks, the Liberal Party has been making all sorts of  allegations about the Malaysian arrangement. And now we see, at taxpayer  expense, Mr Abbott saying he needs Mr Morrison to go to Malaysia to find out 

 about the arrangements. This is nothing more than an expensive political  stunt at the expense of the taxpayers of Australia.  

 This also underlines Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison’s hypocrisy. Mr Abbott and Mr  Morrison say the position for asylum seekers in Malaysia is difficult, yet they  oppose us taking 4000 extra refugees, genuine processed refugees, out of  Malaysia. This takes Mr Abbott’s hypocrisy and negativity to new lows. He’s  sending a senior shadow Cabinet member to another country to be negative  about that country.  

 I suspect the Liberal Party has a real fear that this arrangement will work, not  just to pull the rug out of the business model of the people smugglers, but  pull the rug out of their business model of cheap, three-word slogans when it  comes to asylum seekers. We want to pull the rug out of the business model  of people smugglers; Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison just insist on being negative  on every single occasion and this takes their negativity to a new low.  

 Happy to take any questions.  

 JOURNALIST: Can you imagine, Minister, a situation where Scott Morrison  could come back and say, ‘Actually, it seems like a good idea’?  

 BOWEN: Well, if Mr Morrison was fair dinkum, that’s exactly what would  happen. If Mr Morrison was fair dinkum, he would look at the Government’s  arrangements, he would look at the arrangements which mean that people 

 transferred from Australia to Malaysia will be treated not as illegal migrants,  but as people transferred in terms of an agreement between two countries.  

 He would look at the arrangements and say, ‘Well, this is a real effort to pull  the rug out from under people smugglers’ and he would say, ‘Let’s give it a  go’. If the Opposition was fair dinkum, if the Opposition really cared about  this issue and not just about three-word slogans, they’d say, ‘Let’s give it a go  and let’s see if it works’. Of course, they can’t do that because that would be  too positive for their approach.  

 JOURNALIST: Do you not believe the Opposition is entitled to go on this fact  finding mission?  

 BOWEN: Never before has somebody gone so far to hold a press conference  on being negative and to attack not only this Government, but another  Government. Now, if Mr Morrison was fair dinkum, he’d sit down with the  Government, he’d go through the details of the arrangement and if he wanted  to he could check them out.  

 But he’s going off on this so-called mission. I don’t know who he’s going to  speak to. He says he’s going to visit a detention centre; people transferred  from Australia to Malaysia won’t go into a detention centre. So there’s all  sorts of indications that this is nothing more than a political stunt and what’s  worse, even worse than Nauru, a political stunt at the expense of Australian  taxpayers.  

 JOURNALIST: When it comes to Nauru, now that they’ve made the first step  towards the UN Convention, the Opposition says you’re running out of  excuses not to consider using it.  

 BOWEN: Well, the problem with Nauru is twofold. Firstly, it didn’t break the  people smugglers’ business model. People transferred to Nauru, if they were  genuine refugees, then came to Australia. So people know if you come to 

 Australia, even if you’re sent to Nauru, you’re eventually going to make it  back into Australia. So it doesn’t reduce the incentive to come to Australia.  

 The other thing about Nauru is, under the previous Government, they didn’t  break the people smugglers’ business model, they broke the people. They left  people on Nauru for so long that there was significant mental and emotional  damage.  

 And I’d make this point about Nauru as well, and it again underlines Mr  Morrison’s hypocrisy: he says he’s going to Malaysia on a fact finding mission.  When Nauru was operative, the Nauruan Government wouldn’t issue visas for  Australian journalists, lawyers, monitors to go and assess the situation on  Nauru. And I’d question Mr Morrison whether that would be the case again  should he have his way.  

 JOURNALIST: Now that it appears Nauru is making steps, you know, to help  out Australia, so to speak, on this issue, is it never going to be a viable  option?  

 BOWEN: Well, look, we welcome the fact that Nauru has made those steps,  as the Prime Minister said last week. But we believe our model is much  superior: it breaks the people smugglers’ business model in a much more  effective way than any Nauru option could. It also means that we assist  another country in our region, a friend of Australia, Malaysia, in taking 4000  people who’ve been processed as genuine refugees, and that’s a good thing.  Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison say we shouldn’t do that, we shouldn’t take these  4000 genuine refugees. I couldn’t disagree more.  

 JOURNALIST: If you’re so confident in the Malaysia solution, why are you  concerned about Mr Morrison’s visit?  

 BOWEN: I’m not concerned about Mr Morrison’s visit, but I’m making the  point that it’s a stunt at the Australian taxpayers’ expense and that is  something that they should be held to account for. I’m also making the point  that if he was fair dinkum, he’d sit down with the Government, go through  the details of the arrangement and then come to a considered view, instead 

 of opposing everything.  

 I mean, remember, Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison came out on the day of this  announcement and opposed it. And now, several weeks later, they say they  need to go to Malaysia to check it out. Well, this is ridiculous. This is nothing  more than a stunt. If they wanted to check it out, they could check it out and  then come to their view. They’ve come to their view, and now they’re going  to Malaysia to prosecute that view and to attack another Government, and  that’s outrageous.  

 JOURNALIST: Minister, are you concerned about this court case being taken  against the Malaysian deal?  

 BOWEN: Well, the court case isn’t against the Malaysian deal, the court case  is on behalf of one woman in a very particular circumstance who has been  told that she would not be processed in Australia. There have been very  particular circumstances around that case and as I’ve said repeatedly, the  people currently on Christmas Island would not necessarily be sent to 

 Malaysia. So it’s not a court case against the Malaysian arrangement.  

 But I’ve said from the day we announced this that we expected legal  challenges to the Malaysian solution. But we’re also very confident, of course,  of our legal grounds. We’ve been through this before we made the  announcement and the Government’s legal advice is very strong.  

 JOURNALIST: Are you surprised by the news in a poll showing that Kevin  Rudd is much more popular [inaudible] Gillard and how much do you think it  has to do with the Malaysian solution [inaudible]?  

 BOWEN: Look, I think governments, when they’re making tough decisions,  should expect to lose some bark, should expect to lose some popularity. If  you look, for example, at the Howard Government, for much of that 12-year  period the Howard Government was in office they were behind in opinion  polls, as I recall. Governments, when they’re dealing with difficult issues, 

 whether they be carbon pricing or asylum seekers or economic reform, tax  reform, will go through unpopular periods. Any Government worth its salt will  go through an unpopular period when they’re making tough decisions and  this Government is no different.  

 JOURNALIST: It does seem like the Government is much worse off than a  year ago, when the leadership change took place?  

 BOWEN: Well, look, as I say, governments dealing with tough issues will go  through difficult periods. That doesn’t mean that you shouldn’t deal with  tough issues. People respect governments which deal with tough issues,  which make tough decisions, and sometimes unpopular decisions or decisions  which need some explaining, some conversation with the Australian people.  At the end of the day, you act in the national interest and not your own  political interest, and the Australian people, I think, in the long run respect  governments which act in the national interest.  

 JOURNALIST: Is Kevin Rudd a viable leader once more?  

 BOWEN: Julia Gillard’s the leader of the Labor Party and she’ll remain so,  and speculation to the contrary is idle speculation on behalf of the media,  with due respect. Julia Gillard is a very strong Prime Minister and she’ll remain  a strong Prime Minister tackling the tough issues in the national interest.  

 JOURNALIST: Will you support Nauru? Sorry, I missed some of it.  

 BOWEN: That’s okay.  

 The issues with Nauru are that it didn’t break the people smugglers’ business  model: people who were processed in Nauru and were refugees were then  transferred to Australia. People who come to Australia by boat, if they’re  transferred to Nauru, would know that they’re eventually going to end up in  Australia anyway. So it doesn’t provide the disincentive to come to Australia.  

 The other thing about Nauru under the previous Government, is that while it  didn’t break the people smugglers’ business model, it broke the people. They  left people on Nauru for a very long period of time and there are still people  going through mental and emotional hardship as a result of that. So we don’t  support Nauru as part of the measures to combat people smuggling.  

 JOURNALIST: So how do you address the issue that Malaysia is not yet a  signatory to the United Nations convention?  

 BOWEN: Well, because Malaysia has given commitments at the Prime  Ministerial level to not return people to danger and to treat people with  dignity and respect, and that is a very big step forward and means that the  fundamental principles of the appropriate approach to refugees have been  accepted by the Malaysian Government. That’s a very big step forward and it  means that the appropriate standards of care and protections would be in  place.  

 Okay?  

 JOURNALIST: Thank you.  

 BOWEN: My pleasure.   

 Ends 

 

