---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 10 December 2011: Opposition's failure to act in the national interest on boat arrivals; Liberal state governments' scare campaign on birdging visas; Cabinet reshuffle speculation"
date: "2011-12-10"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Opposition's failure to act in the national interest on boat arrivals"
  - "Liberal state governments' scare campaign on birdging visas"
  - "Cabinet reshuffle speculation"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211365772
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1297136%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT* 

 

 

 DOORSTOP, SYDNEY  

 SATURDAY, 10 DECEMBER 2011 

 

 SUBJECTS: Opposition’s failure to act in the national interest on boat  arrivals, Liberal state governments’ scare campaign on bridging  visas, Cabinet reshuffle speculation.  

 

 BOWEN: Well, thanks for coming everybody. I wanted to deal with two  things today and then obviously take your questions.   

 Now, firstly, more than a month ago when it was clear that the Liberal Party  would not be passing our legislation to allow for offshore processing of  asylum seekers, the Prime Minister and I made it clear that we would see  more boats arriving because of the Liberal Party’s failure to pass that  legislation. We said we could expect more boat arrivals; now we’re seeing  more boat arrivals.    

 Now, the Liberal Party’s had a chance to reflect on the impact of their actions.  I call on Mr Abbott to stop saying ‘no’. I call on Mr Abbott to see the impact of  his votes in the Parliament. His vote in the Parliament to stop offshore  processing is resulting in more people arriving in Australia by boat. We will  reintroduce the legislation and I call on him to support the legislation. Every  time Tony Abbott or Scott Morrison complains about a boat arrival, they are 

 hollow words.    

 There is an agreement in place which could stop boats arriving in Australia  and that is the agreement with Malaysia. The Government wants to  implement the agreement with Malaysia, we’re ready to implement the  agreement with Malaysia, we could do it immediately if the Liberal Party  would pass our legislation. So again, these are important issues. There are  people risking their lives at sea more and more. I call on Tony Abbott to stop  saying ‘no’ and get behind the Government’s plan for offshore processing.    

 The second thing I wanted to deal with today is the report in The Australian  from the NSW Government primarily, but also the Victorian Government  about the Government’s decision to issue bridging visas to some people who  are currently in immigration detention. Now, context is important here. We  currently have over 9,000 people living in the community on bridging visas.  These are people who’ve arrived by aeroplane, overstayed their visa, claimed 

 asylum, 9,000 people living primarily in Sydney and Melbourne. This doesn’t  provide an impact on state government services.    

 The suggestion that the release of 27 people initially on bridging visas and a  minimum of around 100 a month going forward is going to impact on Sydney  or Melbourne is a fantasy. This is a cheap stunt from the Liberal Government  of NSW. If the Liberal Government had concerns, they could contact us. Barry  O’Farrell has my mobile phone number; he hasn’t bothered to pick the phone  up. I expect cheap stunts and populism and scare campaigns from Tony  Abbott; I must confess, I thought Barry O’Farrell was a little better than that.  He’s shown today he’s not. He’s authorised one of his ministers to engage in  a pathetic scare campaign about asylum seekers living in the community,  implying that they might be more likely to commit criminal offences than  other Australian residents.    

 I call on Barry O’Farrell to withdraw this pathetic little scare campaign and to  face the facts. The facts are there will be no burden on state government  services. The facts are that we’ve made it clear that the costs associated with  issuing bridging visas will be borne by the Commonwealth. We’ve provided  the information to the state governments; Mr O’Farrell has chosen to play  politics with that information. I thought he was better than that. Clearly, he’s  not.    

 Happy to take any questions.    

 JOURNALIST: The number of asylum seekers that you and the Prime  Minister predicted would be coming, is that as high as [inaudible]?   

 BOWEN: Well, look, we’ve made it clear that figures go up and down, that  there are various factors in play, including what’s happening in source  countries, what’s happening in places like Afghanistan and Sri Lanka.   

 But nevertheless, we made it very clear that if this legislation didn’t pass, we  would see more boats arriving. Unfortunately, the Prime Minister and I have  been proven right about that.    

 But it’s not too late for Tony Abbott to change his mind and pass our  legislation.   

 JOURNALIST: Apart from the legislation, what are some of the other driving  forces?   

 BOWEN: Well, I think the clear one, the key one is the fact that it’s now  clear to people smugglers they have a green light because Tony Abbott has  not passed our legislation. Now, when I announced the agreement with  Malaysia in May, in June and July immediately after that - including May,  because the announcement was in early May - we saw a reduction in boat  arrivals. It stands to reason, people say, ‘Well, if I’m going to be sent to 

 Malaysia or there’s a risk of that, I’m not going to spend my money on a  people smuggler.’    

 In the month after Tony Abbott announced that he’d stop the Malaysia  agreement going through the Parliament, we see a massive increase in boat  arrivals. The only thing that’s changed is Tony Abbott’s position.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you looking at other options since Abbott isn’t supporting  this?   

 BOWEN: Well, look, the fact of the matter is until and unless this legislation  passes, onshore processing is the only legal alternative. It would be the only  legal alternative for Tony Abbott if he were ever Prime Minister unless he  changes the legislation. So governments have to deal lawfully and in the  constraints provided by the Parliament. The constraint provided by this  Parliament if Mr Abbott sticks to his position is that we’ll have to have onshore  processing. That means there is not an effective deterrent in place for people  arriving by boat.    

 JOURNALIST: After the arrivals of the last few weeks, how close to capacity  is Christmas Island?    

 BOWEN: Well, look, of course Christmas Island does have a little bit of spare  capacity, but of course the detention centres across the network is what  counts. We might just wait for these bikes to go past.   

 [Motorcycle noise]   

 I was just saying, it’s the detention network across the board that we look at  in terms of all our detention centres. There is a little bit of spare capacity and  of course we see people moved into the community, both on bridging visas  and in community detention, we also see people being granted permanent  protection visas where their refugee claims are upheld. But what I’ve  indicated is that we will gradually move people into the community as 

 appropriate, with bridging visas as one of the tools at our disposal.   

 JOURNALIST: Can you say, when you say spare capacity, I mean, how  much are we talking?   

 BOWEN: Well, look, it varies, of course, because we move people around our  detention centres almost every day. We move people to where they’re best  accommodated. We’ve had people leaving detention; we’ve had boats  arriving. So we do have some spare capacity, but it does vary from day to  day. But it’s not yet at peak capacity.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, are you worried about losing your job in a potential  Cabinet reshuffle?   

 BOWEN: Oh, look, reshuffles are entirely a matter for the Prime Minister. I’m  old fashioned about these things: I do the job the Prime Minister asks me to  do. If the Prime Minister asks me to stay in this job, I’ll stay in this job; if the  Prime Minister asks me to do another job, I’ll do another job.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you want to stay in this job?   

 BOWEN: I’m very happy doing this job, but it’s entirely a matter for the  Prime Minister.    

 JOURNALIST: Just in terms of the last two weeks and arrivals we’ve seen,  when you get that call to say there’s been another arrival, what runs through  your head?   

 BOWEN: Well, whenever I get a call about a boat arrival, the first thing that  goes through my head is to make sure that it’s safe. Too often I get calls  saying there’s a boat that’s been sighted and it may be in danger. This drives  our policy of offshore processing. We’ve seen twice in the last 12 months  tragedies at sea, young babies dying at sea, people risking their lives to get to  Australia. That’s why this is so important. So my first thought always goes to  the safety of the people on the boat.   

 And frankly, I think that if only the Malaysia agreement was up and  implemented, it’s highly unlikely that this boat would have arrived, it’s highly  unlikely that these people would be risking their lives.    

 JOURNALIST: So I know that there’s been some figures that the  Immigration Department released saying that in the next six months there’s  going to be an extra 3,600 arrivals, up to. This is obviously going to put some 

 pressure on detention centres, and not just detention centres but community  services.   

 BOWEN: Look, as I say, we will manage the number of arrivals. We’ll use the  range of tools at our disposal: that includes detention, it includes community  placement, it includes bridging visas. We’ll manage the arrivals as they come.   

 But I don’t run away from the fact that we can’t process people offshore  because Tony Abbott won’t pass our legislation does put pressure on  detention. And every time Tony Abbott or Scott Morrison complains about  something in detention, complains about the number of boat arrivals, I will be  pointing out they are hollow, hypocritical, pathetic words because they have  the solution in front of them: pass our legislation. I’m not asking them to  endorse the Malaysia agreement, I’m not asking them to say it’s a good idea,  I’m asking them to let the government of the day get on with its job.    

 Ends  

 

