---
title: "$292m Malaysia people swap an admission of policy failure and gross hypocrisy"
date: "2011-07-25"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211358017
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/952350%22
---

 Media Release  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship - Scott Morrison, MP   

 $292M Malaysia people swap an admission of policy failure and gross  hypocrisy 

 Monday 25th July 2011 

 Today’s $292 million five for one people swap deal with Malaysia is an act of gross hypocrisy and 

 a humiliating admission of Labor’s border protection policy failures over the past three years, 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population and Shadow Minister for Immigration and 

 Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.  

 

 The conclusion of the agreement in Malaysia today, after almost three months, is an open 

 admission that pull factors, created by Labor’s weakened border protection policies, have been 

 responsible for ?11,839 people arriving on 235 illegal boats to Australia over the past three years.  

 

 Labor’s failed policies are also responsible for more than 6,500 boat arrivals being held in our 

 detention network - including almost 1,000 children - and the havoc that has caused and 

 continues to cause. When the Coalition left office, only 4 people who had arrived by boat were in 

 detention.  

 

 For years Labor’s policies have underwritten the people smugglers’ business model Labor now 

 claim they want to break.  

 

 Today’s arrangement is specifically designed to counteract the pull factors of Labor’s own policies. 

 Whether it works or not, Australians will be paying for Labor’s past policy failures for years to 

 come.  

 

 The cost of this failed policy to date is more than $3 billion and counting, including the $292 million 

 cost of the Malaysian agreement. The annual cost of asylum seeker management has now risen to 

 more than $1 billion per year.  

 

 For years, Labor have denied the magnetic impact of their decision to roll back the strong border 

 protection regime they inherited from the Coalition on illegal boat arrivals.  

 

 For years, Labor blamed push factors as an excuse for their own failed policies. On July 6 last year 

 the Prime Minister continued this mantra when she said:  

 

 “What drives the peaks and troughs in the numbers of boats trying to get to Australia has less to 

 do with what we do here and more to do with the conditions people are escaping.”  

 

 Today’s deal is a repudiation of Labor’s failed policies and their push factors mantra, and a 

 vindication of the Coalition’s claims that Labor‘s weaker policies started the boats.  

 

 If your domestic policies are not attracting boats, as Labor previously maintained, then you don’t 

 need to change them.  

 

 Labor’s decision to change their policies through this Malaysian agreement and by seeking to re-establish the Pacific Solution on Manus Island, demonstrates that Labor now clearly believes that 

 their policies have failed.  

 

 However, just because Labor know they have got it wrong does not mean they know how to get it 

 right.  

 

 From their failed East Timor solution to their stalled Malaysia solution and their inability to deliver a 

 Pacific solution on Manus Island, Labor have bungled this process every step of the way.  

 

 This agreement was rushed out almost three months ago without having discussed, let alone 

 having resolved, key issues with regard to human rights.  

 

 The five for one swap agreement is for just 800 arrivals only, with Malaysia given a right of veto 

 over who gets to come. This contradicts the claims made by the PM in Parliament on 10 May when 

 she categorically denied Malaysia having any role in the selection of the 800 people sent to 

 Malaysia.  

 

 The 800 will be sent to Malaysia at an average cost of $95,000 per person, with cheques made out 

 to the Malaysian Government, the UNHCR and the IOM.  

 

 Australia will also be responsible for the cost of sending back asylum seekers from Malaysia who 

 prove not to be refugees, as well as giving them a further right to claim protection in Australia 

 under other human rights convention.  

 

 Once these 800 places are exhausted, it will be back to business as usual.  

 

 Since the Malaysia deal was announced almost three months ago, 11 boats have arrived in 11 

 weeks carrying 567 passengers. If they were all off to Malaysia, this deal would almost be 

 exhausted.  

 

 Instead, we had 567 asylum seekers being held indefinitely in detention, due to the Government’s 

 failure to deliver on their pledge that all those arriving after May 7, will be transferred to a third 

 country for processing.  

 

 Once again, Labor made a rash promise that they have been unable to deliver. Once again, their 

 failure has added further stress to a detention network already in a rolling crisis. Once again, the 

 Government has been forced into a humiliating back down. Now that those who arrived since May 

 7 will be processed in Australia, the Government should admit they misled the Australian people.  

 

 The Government’s agreement with Malaysia also demonstrates gross hypocrisy.  

 

 After demonising the Howard’s Government’s policies for a decade as being too harsh, they now - 

 through this new punitive arrangement - seem to believe those policies were too weak.  

 

 Malaysia is not a signatory to the Refugee Convention or the Convention against Torture. A UN 

 Human Rights Council report in February 2011 also noted that Malaysia had not committed to 

 compulsory primary education under the Convention for the Rights of the Child.  

 

 There is simply no legal framework in Malaysia to protect asylum seekers consistent with the 

 requirements of the Refugee Convention or other important international standards. Australia 

 simply cannot practically guarantee Australian style human rights in Malaysia.  

 

 Under this agreement, asylum seekers will have to fend for themselves in a highly vulnerable 

 environment where refugees are already regularly arrested and detained, regardless of holding 

 documentation.  

 

 We understand children sent to Malaysia under this arrangement will also be denied access to 

 public schools, having to attend makeshift refugee run schools where teachers receive ten days 

 training and many operate on a volunteer basis. Equally, access to health care will be significantly 

 less than would otherwise be available on Nauru or an Australian run detention centre.  

 

 Asylum seekers sent to Malaysia will spend an indefinite period of time that will be counted in 

 years, not months. And there will be nothing to prevent them simply getting back on a boat to 

 Australia and being processed in Australia, once the deal has been exhausted.  

 

 It is also important to note that unlike the tripartite agreement involving the UNHCR, Australia and 

 Afghanistan last year for returns, the UNHCR is not a signatory to this arrangement as flagged.  

 

 The only arrangement the UNHCR and the IOM have signed up to is to receive tens of millions in 

 Australian taxpayer funds, to supplement their own already overwhelmed resources, to support the 

 94,000 refugees and asylum seekers already in Malaysia.  

 

 The Coalition believes the Malaysian agreement is unnecessary as a proven, more humane and 

 more cost effective solution is available by reopening the processing centre at Nauru that has now 

 signed up to the Refugee Convention, and reintroducing temporary protection visas.  

 

