---
title: "Food security in the Asian century: Sir John Crawford memorial address, Canberra"
date: "2011-08-15"
creators:
  - "Emerson, Craig"
source: "MINISTER FOR TRADE"
subjects:
  - "Food supply"
  - "Asia"
  - "Foreign investment in Australia"
  - "Export subsidies"
  - "Agricultural trade"
  - "Regional development"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211358857
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1005885%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE   

 

 

 

 

 Dr Craig Emerson  Minister of Trade   

 Sir John Crawford Memorial Address   

 Food security in the Asian Century   

 Mural Hall, Parliament House  Canberra   

 

 

 15 August 2011 

 

 

 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY   

 

 It is a great honour to have been asked by John Kerin to deliver the Sir John  Crawford Memorial Address, for it reconnects me with two great Australians who  have shaped my approach to public life.   

 I acknowledge, too, Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, President of the Asian Development Bank.   

 In delivering this oration just a day after returning from leading a 100-strong business  mission to China, I have much to report about the boundless opportunities for further  economic integration between our two countries.   

 But first to Sir John Crawford.   

 2 

 

 Sir John was a mentor of mine at The Australian National University when I was  undertaking my PhD course under the supervision of another great Australian,  Professor Ross Garnaut.   

 Unlike Professors Garnaut, Max Corden, Peter Lloyd and Peter Warr, Sir John did  not directly work with me in the subject matter of my PhD dissertation, but he was  always available to give me guidance about positioning Australia to take its place in  the Asian region.   

 Indeed, Sir John gave me some personal advice too.   

 When I informed him that I had been asked to meet Australia’s Resources and  Energy Minister, Senator Peter Walsh, to discuss the possibility of taking up an  advisory position in the Minister’s office, Sir John counselled me to avoid  participating in the large-scale consumption of alcohol for which the occupants of  Parliament House had gained notoriety.  (I believe Sir John’s observation was a  bipartisan one, for former Treasurer John Howard had gained a reputation for  throwing the best end-of-session parties).   

 Anyway, the interview with Senator Walsh turned out to be a dinner in the  Parliamentary Dining Room at the Old Parliament House.  Three bottles of wine  later, at about 11 o’clock that evening, Peter said: “So when can you start?”   

 I was happy to have passed the interview and the alcohol tolerance test but felt bad  about ignoring Sir John’s advice.  And for the ensuing six years as a staffer for Peter  and then Bob Hawke I have to confess I never heeded it.   

 John Kerin happened to be the Primary Industries Minister when Bob gave me the  task of improving his government’s environmental credentials.  This put us on a  collision course on Tasmanian forests, as the government, through a difficult and  protracted process, added 282,000 hectares, much of it prime timber country, to the  World Heritage List.   

 During our many meetings, John would say to me: “I’m not too worried if my personal  popularity in the bush falls from 4 per cent to 2 per cent, because that’s only a 50 per  cent slump, and if I can get it back up to 4 per cent when this is all over, it’ll be a 100  per cent increase.”   

 But John’s exasperation with the handling of such contentious land-use issues  directly led to the Hawke government embracing his proposal of integrating  economic and environmental considerations through the pursuit of ecologically  sustainable development.   

 Ecological sustainability became the guiding principle of the Labor government’s  approach to land use directly as a result of John’s insistence on a new way that  sought to take as much conflict as possible out of land management.   

 As Bob’s environmental adviser I established the first-ever working group on  ecologically sustainable development, with just nine members including Phillip  Toyne, Rick Farley, Peter Garrett and ACTU leader Simon Crean. 

 3 

 

 

 It’s great to see the principle of ecological sustainability again guiding government  policy making in Australia.  The Tasmanian forest issue is finally being settled, the  Gillard government is putting a price on carbon and the sustainability of water flows  in the Murray-Darling is at last being addressed seriously.   

 So John, your legacy from having had to endure the land-use conflicts of the 1980s  and finding a better way lives on.   

 And now, in the second decade of the 21st Century, we confront a big, new land-use  challenge - the issue of food security.   

 It is entirely possible that the quest for food security will become one of the defining  issues of the 21st Century.   

 Around the world one billion people already go to bed hungry every night.   

 That’s one in seven of our fellow human beings.   

 Images from the refugee camps on the border between Somalia and Kenya are a  daily reminder of the suffering in the Horn of Africa.   

 World food prices spiked in 2008, with the price of rice trebling and the price of  wheat and palm oil doubling.   

 Food riots broke out in more than a dozen countries.   

 Better seasonal conditions and the global recession caused an easing in food prices  for a couple of years, but now they are surging again.   

 Rising food prices have been a contributing factor in the Arab Spring, first in Tunisia,  then in Egypt and now in several other Arab countries.   

 Rising food prices explain much of China’s 6.5 per cent inflation rate and Indonesia  is worried about the impact of rising food prices on the poor.   

 Food shortages and high food prices would be a powerful force for instability within  nations and potentially a source of conflict between them.   

 Governments understandably will want to feed their people, and at affordable prices.   

 If they cannot do so, food riots will follow and the instability witnessed in 2008 and  now evident in much of the Middle East will spread to their countries.   

 Yet the response of many governments to rising food prices has been precisely the  wrong one.   

 Of 81 developing countries surveyed by the Food and Agricultural Organisation, 25  applied export controls on their food production during the 2007-2008 food price  surge.   

 4 

 

 

 While the role of speculators in food price rises has been greatly exaggerated, it is  clear that the imposition of export controls has led to speculative activity that has  amplified the price effects - to the great cost of the world’s poorest countries  dependent on food imports.   

 Now that high food prices have returned we must learn the lessons of recent history  and respond in a rational way.   

 To determine the rational policy pathway we must first diagnose the problem.   

 Rising food prices are not the product of speculation.  Nor are they a temporary  phenomenon, a consequence simply of poor harvests.   

 Rising food prices are a market response to fundamental imbalances between the  demand for and supply of food.   

 The world’s population is forecast to reach 9.3 billion by 2050 an increase of 2.4  billion on today’s level.   

 And, as incomes rise, especially in Asia, demand for high-quality protein foods such  as beef, pork, poultry and sheep meat will soar.   

 If these meat types are raised intensively in feedlots, using grain for animal feed, the  pressure on grain prices will be all the greater.  Depending on the meat type,  between three and 10 kilograms of grain would be needed to produce one kilogram  of meat.   

 And if they are raised extensively within high-population countries, land clearing will  damage or destroy ecosystems and carbon sinks while releasing even more carbon  into the atmosphere.     

 Though the natural instinct of governments of emerging economies will be to drive  for self sufficiency in as many basic foodstuffs as possible, they will tend to give the  highest priority to self sufficiency in staples such as rice and wheat.   

 By doing so, they will create what economists call an opportunity cost.  That is, to the  extent that governments succeed in substantially achieving self sufficiency in staple  grains they will foreclose on opportunities to achieve self sufficiency in other grains  and in high-protein meat sources.   

 Pessimists and political opportunists see the desire for food security of major  emerging countries as a threat.  In truth, it is an unsurpassed opportunity for  Australian farmers.   

 Over the last quarter century Australia has established itself as a reliable supplier in  meeting Asia’s minerals and energy security needs.  In the next quarter century  Australia can establish itself as a reliable supplier in meeting Asia’s food security  needs.   

 5 

 

 In seeking security in minerals and energy supplies from Australia, importing  countries such as Japan, Korea and China have not sought to own all of Australia’s  mines or energy sources.  Rather, they have wholly owned some, taken equity  positions in others, or acquired no equity and instead relied just on binding long-term  contracts.   

 So it can be the case with food security.     

 Attaining secure supplies of food doesn’t of itself necessitate the purchasing of large  areas of prime agricultural land as shrill political opportunists would have you  believe.   

 It might involve our regional neighbours who possess large investible surpluses  taking equity positions in existing agribusinesses.  It might involve new joint  ventures.  It might involve some land purchases.   

 It’s not as if the history of pastoral development in Australia has been dominated by  Australian-only investment.   

 At first British and then American investors brought in the foreign savings needed to  develop Australian agriculture.   

 Nowadays, our large agribusiness companies have extremely diverse ownership.   

 The only product Hansonite opponents of foreign investment in Australian agriculture  are interested in harvesting is votes.   

 The world’s need for food security to the middle of the 21st Century will open up  exciting new commercial opportunities for the development of Australian agriculture.   

 As the real price of food continues to rise, ideas that have lacked a commercial basis  will gain one.  Water catchment and conservation proposals that have been  dismissed or never conceived at pre-existing food prices may become viable in a  world seeking food security.   

 At higher real food prices, technologies and infrastructure to lift the productive  capacity of Australia’s rangelands may come into play.   

 So rather than diverting existing food supplies into foreign investors’ home markets,  a visionary approach to the food security issue would involve growing more food  from more productive land holdings in countries such as Australia.   

 Already alarmists are warning that foreign investment in Australian agriculture to  meet the region’s food security needs will involve the export of Australian produce  into those markets at below-market prices.    

 Of course, no such proposal has ever been made.   

 6 

 

 At the same time as Australia exports food to international markets at international  market prices, we should be doing everything in our power to ensure those markets  function efficiently.   

 Just as the imposition of export controls has exacerbated the food security problem,  so have other interventions in the market.   

 Government support still accounts for 22 per cent of the total receipts of agricultural  producers in OECD countries.   

 Farm subsidies in the United States and Europe are low at present by historical  standards, owing to high food prices, but the budgetary costs are still huge.  For the  period 2007-2009, farm subsidies in the US averaged US$30 billion per annum and  in the EU they averaged US$128 billion per annum.     

 What better time to lower them further and put binding limits on them?   

 The US Congress is searching for Budget savings to rein in the country’s burgeoning  public debt.  Farm subsidies should be a prime candidate.   

 So, too, should the European Union, many of whose members are heavily burdened  with debt, be looking to cut its farm subsidies.    

 And agricultural export subsidies, the scourge of the 1980s, could be eliminated by  agreement in the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations.   

 Average tariffs on agricultural products in middle-income countries and high-income  countries exceed 22 per cent - four times the average tariffs on non-agricultural  products.   

 Member countries of the World Trade Organization should be offering each other  much better access to each other’s markets for agricultural goods.   

 That none of this is happening is a real tragedy that throws into doubt the strength of  the world’s resolve to come to grips with the global food security challenge.   

 Through a visionary approach to meeting the region’s food security needs, rural and  regional centres could expand, boosting regional development in Australia and  taking the population pressure of our big cities.   

 Developing regional Australia was the centrepiece of my 2006 book, Vital Signs,  Vibrant Society.  Now the market is creating the opportunity for that regional  development to proceed.   

 We should seize that opportunity instead of regarding it as a threat.   

 At the turn of this century, mining and agriculture were being regarded as old  economy and the information technology revolution as the new, weightless economy.   

 7 

 

 China’s and India’s transformational industrialisation and urban development have  proved that analysis for mining to be wrong.   

 And urbanisation and wider economic development in China, India, Indonesia and  other parts of the Asia Pacific region will prove the analysis of agriculture as old  economy wrong too.   

 If only we have the vision and the courage to let it be.    

 Sir John Crawford had the vision of Australian economic integration with Asia.  Let’s  draw on his vision and do the right thing by Australian farmers, the nation and the  region by rejecting the economic Hansonism of political opportunists and meeting the  food security challenge head-on through rational economic policy making.  That’s the  Labor way.   

 

 

 

 

 END 

