---
title: "Elizabeth O'Neill Journalism Award fostering understanding between Australia and Indonesia"
date: "2011-12-15"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211367579
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1307640%22
---

 

 

 

 

 Minister’s Office:  02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                                       DFAT:   02 6261 1555 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP 

 ELIZABETH O’NEILL JOURNALISM AWARD  FOSTERING UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND INDONESIA 

 

 Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd announced today that two top journalists - Mr Auskar Surbakti,  an Australian reporter with the Australia Network, and Ms Devianti Faridz, an Indonesian TV  Producer for Metro TV- had won the 2011 Elizabeth O’Neill Journalism Award.   

 This award is in memory of Liz O’Neill, the Public Affairs Counsellor at the Australian  Embassy in Jakarta who died tragically on duty on 7 March 2007 in a plane crash in  Yogyakarta, Indonesia.   

 The Award recipients will spend up to three weeks in the other’s country meeting  government officials, academics, industry representatives, non-government organisations  and community leaders, to build a stronger understanding and appreciation of the issues  facing contemporary Indonesia and Australia.   

 “Each year I am impressed by the quality of the winners.  By encouraging excellence this  Award reflects Ms O’Neill’s own professionalism and commitment to furthering relations  between Australia and Indonesia,” said Mr Rudd.   

 Formerly a reporter with SBS, Mr Surbakti is a journalist with the Australia Network in  Melbourne.  Mr Surbakti will explore issues of Indonesia’s future leadership; Australian aid  in Indonesia; and Indonesian environmental policy and issues, including the connections  between Indonesia and Australia through carbon emissions pricing.   

 Ms Faridz is an experienced reporter, anchor and producer with Metro TV.  She is currently  the producer of a daily English news program called “After Hours”.  Ms Faridz will explore  Australian disaster management programs; asylum seeker issues; Australia’s counter-terrorism efforts; and the growing demand for Islamic schools in Australia.   

 The Elizabeth O’Neill Journalism Award is sponsored by the Department of Foreign Affairs  and Trade and the Australia-Indonesia Institute and is conferred annually on one Australian  and one Indonesian journalist.  It is open to print, radio, television and internet journalists.   

 WASHINGTON  15 DECEMBER 2011 

