---
title: "New council and ambassadors support Australia's diversity"
date: "2011-08-22"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/242216927
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1022264%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  CITIZENSHIP 

 PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL  AFFAIRS   

 

 NEW COUNCIL AND AMBASSADORS SUPPORT AUSTRALIA’S DIVERSITY   

 The Gillard Labor Government today launched a new local ambassadors  program to champion inclusion and highlight the benefits of Australia’s diversity.   

 The People of Australia Ambassadors program was formally announced by  Prime Minister Julia Gillard today at the launch of the new independent  Australian Multicultural Council.   

 The Prime Minister encouraged Australians to nominate local champions from  their own neighbourhood and communities who have helped to promote inclusion  and participation in their community.    

 Up to 40 people will be selected as ambassadors to provide grassroots advice to  the Australian Multicultural Council (AMC) about effective initiatives which  promote inclusion and leverage diversity in our communities.   

 The AMC will provide advice to Government on multicultural policy and emerging  issues and ensure Australian Government services respond effectively to the  needs of Australia’s diverse communities.   

 The Council was appointed as part of the Government’s new multicultural policy,  The People of Australia, released in February this year.   

 The former advisory council recommended the new independent body be set up  to advise and consult the Government on multicultural issues and inform national  policy.   

 The 10 member Council will have a formal role in a strengthened access and  equity strategy, play a research advisory role for public policy, and lead cultural  diversity celebrations and Harmony Day activities.   

 The launch of the new AMC demonstrates the Gillard Labor Government’s  commitment to policy and programs that build on the strength of Australia’s  cultural diversity.    

 The new Council will provide a strong voice on multicultural issues and contribute  constructively to the broader deliberations of Government.   

 Information in relation to the AMC and the People of Australia Ambassadors  program can be found at www.amc.gov.au    

 CANBERRA  22 AUGUST 2011   

 PRESS OFFICE (02) 6277 7744  PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY LUNDY’S OFFICE 0407 926 077   

 BACKGROUND   

 Members of the Australian Multicultural Council (AMC)   10 members (including one youth member) and two ex officio members   

 Judge Rauf Soulio (Chair) (SA)  Judge of the District Court of South Australia  Judge Soulio is President of the Football Federation of South Australia and the  current Chair of the Migrant Resource Centre of South Australia. He was recently  appointed to the Council for the Order of Australia. He is on the Judging Panel of  the Governor’s Multicultural Awards program and Chair of State Government  Sporting Advisory Committees. In 2003, he was appointed as Honorary Consul-General for Albania in Australia and is active in the Albanian community. Judge  Soulio was the Deputy Chair of the Australian Multicultural Advisory Council until  the completion of the Council’s term in June 2011.   

 Ms Gail Ker OAM (Deputy Chair) (QLD)  CEO, Logan and Beenleigh Migrant Resource Centre (ACCES Services) and  Vice Chair, Settlement Council of Australia  Ms Ker has worked extensively in multicultural affairs positions and is presently a  board member of the Ethnic Communities Council in Queensland. She has been  actively involved in labour market programs such as SkillShare, and played a key  role in developing and leading a community-based non-government organisation  in Logan, Queensland. Ms Ker was a member of the Australian Multicultural  Advisory Council from January 2009 until its end in June 2011.   

 Dr Tanveer Ahmed (NSW)  Psychiatrist and opinion columnist for the Sydney Morning Herald  Dr Tanveer Ahmed is a psychiatrist, author and opinion columnist at the Sydney  Morning Herald. He is the author of The Exotic Rissole, and has present and past  involvement in several Boards, including the Australian Medical Association, the  Advertising Standards Board and as a Governor of the Smith Family. Dr Ahmed  manages a private practice with an interest in transcultural clients both in western  Sydney and Armidale in rural New South Wales. He is of Bangladeshi ancestry.   

 Dr Hass Dellal OAM (VIC)  Executive Director, Australian Multicultural Foundation  Dr Dellal has considerable experience in multicultural affairs and sits on several  boards, including the National Centre of Excellence for Islamic Studies  Consultative Committee; International Steering Committee, International  Metropolis Project (Canada); Deputy Chair of the Victoria Police Multifaith  Council; and Chair of the Centre for Multicultural Youth. He is Deputy Chair of the  SBS Board and was a member of the Australian Multicultural Advisory Council  from January 2009 until its end in June 2011.   

 Ms Carmel Guerra (VIC)  Chief Executive Officer of the Centre for Multicultural Youth  Ms Guerra was founder of the Centre for Multicultural Youth, a community-based  organisation in Melbourne that advocates for the needs of young people from  refugee and migrant backgrounds. She received the Centenary Medal in 2003 for  services to young people, migrant and refugee communities, and was entered  into the Victorian Women’s Honour role for services to the community in 2005.  Ms Guerra has been a member of the Refugee Resettlement and Advisory  Council since its inception.   

 Dr Tim Soutphommasane (VIC)  Research fellow at Monash University's National Centre for Australian  Studies   

 Dr Soutphommasane is a research fellow at Monash University’s National Centre  for Australian Studies and a senior project leader at Per Capita, a think tank. He  is also a fellow at St James Ethics Centre.   Dr Soutphommasane is a columnist with The Weekend Australian and author of  Reclaiming Patriotism (2009). He completed his doctorate at the University of  Oxford.   

 Mr Peter Wertheim AM (NSW)  Executive Director, Executive Council of Australian Jewry  Mr Wertheim was a practising solicitor for more than 30 years, consultant to law  firm Slater and Gordon, and is the Executive Director of the Executive Council of  Australian Jewry. He was honorary solicitor for the East Timor Relief Association,  the Australian International Fund for Disadvantaged Children in Vietnam, and  Aboriginal Medical Service Co-operative, Redfern NSW.   

 Prof Samina Yasmeen (WA)  Director of the Centre for Muslim States and Societies and Professor of  Political Science and International Relations at the University of Western  Australia  Professor Yasmeen is a specialist in political and strategic development in South  Asia, the role of Islam in world politics, and citizenship among immigrant women.  She was a member of the Australian Multicultural Advisory Council from January  2009 until its end in June 2011. Professor Yasmeen was granted the Sir Roland  Wilson Leadership Award as part of the WA Citizen of the Year awards in 2011.   

 Mr Talal Yassine OAM (NSW)   

 Founder and Managing Director, Crescent Investments Australasia Pty  Limited, Director Sydney Ports, Director the Whitlam Institute Limited,  Deputy Chairman, Gulf Australia Business Council Ltd  Mr Yassine has held a number of executive and non executive roles during his  career. He was a Director of Babcock & Brown Limited, director/lawyer at 

 PricewaterhouseCoopers and a Solicitor in the Corporate Practice at Dunhill  Madden Butler.   

 YOUTH MEMBER:   

 Ms Yassmin Abdel-Magied (QLD)   President, Youth Without Borders (Qld)  Ms Abdel-Magied is the founder of Youth Without Borders and a mechanical  engineering student at the University of Queensland. She is a member of the  Queensland Museum, the Queensland Design Council and the Youth Affairs  Network Queensland. Ms Abdel-Magied was Young Australian Muslim of the  Year for 2007, Youth Premier at the 2008 Qld Youth Parliament and the Vice  President (Policy) for the UN Youth Association of Australia. In 2010, she was  named Young Queenslander of the Year.   

 EX OFFICIO MEMBERS:   

 Mr Andrew Metcalfe, Secretary of the Department of Immigration and  Citizenship   

 Dr Helen Szoke, Race Discrimination Commissioner   

