---
title: "Government releases Solicitor-General's advice on High Court decision"
date: "2011-09-04"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211359721
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1060779%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP 

 4 September 2011 

 GOVERNMENT RELEASES SOLICITOR-GENERAL’S ADVICE  ON HIGH COURT DECISION   

 New legal advice from the Solicitor-General casts further doubt on offshore  processing of asylum seekers, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris  Bowen MP, said today. 

 

 Mr Bowen said the advice from Solicitor-General Stephen Gageler SC confirmed that  the High Court’s decision cast doubt on offshore processing, wherever that may be.    

 The advice looks at the implications of the High Court’s decision on offshore  processing on Papua New Guinea and Nauru, as well as transferring minors to third  countries.   

 “The Solicitor-General’s advice confirms the significant doubts over whether or not  the Government and Immigration Minister could make a valid declaration for either  Papua New Guinea or Nauru,” Mr Bowen said. 

 

 “Indeed it says the past declarations of Nauru under the Howard Government would  have in all likelihood been invalid. Mr Abbott needs to know that simply picking up  the phone to Nauru just isn’t going to cut it.   

 “He has ignored scientists, he has ignored economists, and now Mr Abbott is  ignoring the legal experts.”   

 Mr Bowen said the advice also made clear that the Immigration Minister would need  to give personal consent for each unaccompanied minor to be transferred offshore  and this would be judicially reviewable.   

 “The High Court has made it very clear that the current laws create significant  obstacles to children being sent offshore - which was a key part of the Pacific  solution,” he said.   

 “Mr Abbott, he needs to move beyond his Nauru dream world and simplistic  solutions, and admit that whichever way you cut it, offshore processing under the  current law is no longer an easy option.”   

 Mr Bowen said the new legal advice confirmed the view that there was no clear or  easy response to the High Court’s judgment, and the Government would now  carefully consider all its options. 

 

 The Solicitor-General’s advice can be found at:  www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/media-releases/_pdf/SG21-implications-of-migration-decision.pdf and www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/media-releases/_pdf/SG22-implications-for-unaccompanied-minors.pdf   

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802   

