---
title: "Supporting refugees on World Refugee Day"
date: "2011-06-20"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211356073
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2548218%22
---

 

 Supporting refugees on World Refugee Day  Monday, 20 June 2011 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, recognised World  Refugee Day celebrations today by presenting scholarships to refugees and  launching a new publication on Australia's role as one of the world’s top refugee  resettlement countries. 

 'World Refugee Day and Refugee Week provide an opportunity to acknowledge  Australia's generosity in giving vulnerable people a new life and the contribution that  refugees make to our society,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'The recipients of the Canberra Refugee Support scholarship are a great example of  triumphing over persecution and hardship as they strive to make the best of their  new lives in Australia.' 

 The not-for-profit Canberra Refugee Support scholarship program has been  delivered for the past six years, and is supported by individuals, work groups,  businesses and other organisations in the Canberra community. 

 This year, scholarships were awarded to 22 refugees from Burma, Iraq, Afghanistan,  Sudan, Iran and Ethiopia who are students at the Canberra Institute of Technology,  students at the International English Centre, or are community members who would  like to begin studying in the near future. 

 'I congratulate them on the contribution they have made to their communities and  wish them all the best in their future endeavours,' Mr Bowen said. 

 Mr Bowen also officially released the new edition of Refugee and Humanitarian  Issues: Australia's Response, which includes information on Australia's humanitarian  program and recent initiatives developed to assist refugees. 

 'This publication contains personal stories from former refugees who have come to  Australia under the humanitarian program, which the government recently expanded  to 14 750 places per year over the next four years,' Mr Bowen said. 

 Refugee and Humanitarian Issues: Australia's Response will be distributed to  schools, libraries and community organisations with an interest in Australia's efforts  to assist in the protection of refugees worldwide. 

 An electronic version can be downloaded from the Department of Immigration and  Citizenship's website.  See: www.immi.gov.au/media/publications 

 

