---
title: "High Court decision slams brakes on Malaysian deal as asylum policy chaos continues"
date: "2011-08-08"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211358598
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/987938%22
---

 Media Release   

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship - Scott Morrison, MP   

 8 August 2011 

 HIGH COURT DECISION SLAMS BRAKES ON MALAYSIAN DEAL AS ASYLUM  POLICY CHAOS CONTINUES  

 The High Court’s decision today has once again confirmed the Government’s asylum  policy chaos according to Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population & Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison. 

 “The decision by the High Court today to grant a further injunction preventing the transfer  of asylum seekers to Malaysia is a major embarrassment for the Labor Government who  have presided over complete asylum policy chaos for the past three years,” Mr Morrison  said. 

 “Within two weeks of the agreement being signed, more than 100 people have turned up  and the High Court has now slammed the brakes on the arrangement. This comes on top  of the Government’s inability to make a decision about whether children will be sent to  Malaysia. 

 “The High Court decision demonstrates once again that the Government has simply failed  to think through their Malaysia people swap policy. 

 “The Malaysian people swap has been twice condemned by the Australian Parliament,  first in the Senate and then in the House of Representatives. And it has now been twice  rebuffed by the High Court of Australia in the space of just twenty four hours. 

 “This is a Government that simply can’t take a hint, and refuses to listen, whether it is the  Parliament, the High Court or most importantly the Australian people,” he said. 

 “The Coalition’s policy to reopen Nauru is proven, having cleared these legal hurdles in the  past and having been part of a comprehensive solution that did stop the boats and did  break the people smugglers’ business model. 

 “The Government’s decision to first abolish this proven solution and then reject it’s re-establishment demonstrates the stubborn pride and bloody mindedness of this  Government. 

 “For the past three years the Rudd and Gillard Governments have made an absolute mess  of asylum policy. Today’s decision will mean this chaos will continue,” Mr Morrison said. 

