---
title: "Australia works with World Food Programme to save lives in the Horn of Africa"
date: "2011-07-25"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211357997
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/950044%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS   

 AUSTRALIA WORKS WITH WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME TO SAVE  LIVES IN THE HORN OF AFRICA    

 The Prime Minister and Foreign Minister today announced the Government  will provide $20 million in additional emergency humanitarian support for the  11.6 million people affected by the looming catastrophe in the Horn of Africa. 

 

 The United Nations estimates that this is the most severe food security  challenge in Africa for 20 years. But if we learn lessons from the past and act  fast, we can save hundreds of thousands of lives.   

 UNICEF has labelled the situation the "children's famine", with reports saying  that two million young children across the Horn of Africa are malnourished and  in need of immediate help.   

 Minister Rudd visited Gedo region in southern Somalia, one of the worst  affected areas in the crisis. In parts of this region, more than 50% of children  are malnourished.    

 There are more than half a million Somalis in the refugee camps, and 50,000  arrived last month alone - with nearly half of the children under five starving.    

 Minister Rudd, who is travelling with World Food Programme (WFP) Executive  Director Josette Sheeran, witnessed firsthand the difficulty in delivering aid to  the region and paid tribute to World Food Programme and other humanitarian 

 agencies that are working in difficult conditions. Operations in Somalia are  among the highest risk in the world. Tragically, since 2008, fourteen WFP  relief workers have been killed there.    

 The Australian Government channels its support through trusted partners to  get life-saving help to those who need it most. Australia’s additional support  will help the WFP scale up their operations to assist an additional 2.2 million  people in the previously inaccessible south of the country. The WFP have also  allocated $22 million to the Horn of Africa famine from Australia's annual core  commitment to the agency.   

 This brings Australia's total commitment to the crisis to more than $80 million.   

 The UN estimates total humanitarian requirements for the response to this  crisis to be around US$1.8 billion, of which only one half is currently funded.    

 25 JULY 2011   

 PRESS OFFICE (02) 6277 7744  MINISTER RUDD’S OFFICE (02) 6277 7500   

 

 

