---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Auckland: 15 February 2011: Australia-New Zealand relationship; funerals for Christmas Island tragedy victims"
date: "2011-02-15"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Australia-New Zealand relationship"
  - "funerals for Christmas Island tragedy victims"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211349359
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/570412%22
---

 

 

 Transcript of doorstop interview, Auckland  TUE 15 FEBRUARY 2011 

 Prime Minister 

 Subject(s): Australia-New Zealand relationship; Funerals for Christmas Island tragedy  victims 

 PM: Well, thank you very much. 

 It’s great to be here in New Zealand. I’m very much looking forward to this visit. Of course,  I’ll have the opportunity now to speak to some of New Zealand’s business leaders. There’s no  closer economic partnership between Australia and any country in the world than the  economic partnership we have with New Zealand and we are seeking to build on it. 

 I’ll also have the opportunity this afternoon to talk about something very dear to my heart,  and that is education and the creation of opportunity when I visit a local school with Prime  Minister Key. 

 I’m also very much looking forward to the opportunity of addressing members of the New  Zealand parliament tomorrow. Australia and New Zealand are very close friends. We share a  strategic outlook. We share common bonds. We share our longstanding Anzac tradition, and  of course we share a partnership based on our economic integration, and I will be talking  about that over lunch today. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you disappointed that you won’t be speaking during the  session of parliament tomorrow and that that plan is being kyboshed by the Green Party? 

 PM: I’m absolutely honoured to have the opportunity to speak to members of the New  Zealand parliament in their parliamentary chamber. The details of these arrangements are  properly a matter for the parliament of New Zealand, but I will be very, very honoured to be  there. 

 JOURNALIST: How would you describe your rapport with Prime Minister Key? 

 PM: We’ve got on very well in the various international fora that we’ve worked together. I  think our close partnership reflects the close partnership between our two countries. 

 JOURNALIST: You’re polar opposites politically. 

 PM: Well, when it comes to dealing with many of the strategic challenges in the world,  strategic challenges in our region, defence challenges like working together in pursuit of the  Anzac tradition in Afghanistan, when it comes to dealing with the consequences of the global  financial crisis, for international regulation, we’ve taken very common approaches and  worked closely together. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there are funerals in Australia today for some of the asylum  seekers who were killed off Christmas Island. Scott Morrison has drawn some questions  about whether or not the Australian taxpayer should be funding relatives coming out for  funerals. Do you have any comments? 

 PM: The Acting Prime Minister, Wayne Swan, and the responsible Minister, Chris Bowen,  will deal with those matters back home. 

 Thank you.  

 

