---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Brisbane: 01 September 2011: Malaysia agreement"
date: "2011-09-01"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211359629
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1211729%22
---

 Transcript of joint press conference,  Brisbane  THU 01 SEPTEMBER 2011 

 Prime Minister 

 Subject(s): Malaysia agreement 

 PM: I’m joined today by Chris Bowen, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and  we’re here today to speak about some of the implications from yesterday’s High Court  decision. Can I say at the outset, yesterday’s High Court decision was a deeply disappointing 

 one. The Government had worked for some period of time on the arrangement with Malaysia,  we had done that because we wanted to send the strongest possible message to people  smugglers that we wanted to put them out of business, that we wanted to break the people  smugglers’ business model. 

 We had been advised and understood from the past that the most effective thing you can do,  the strongest possible message you can send to people smugglers is to deny them the product  that they sell, they are selling people a passage to Australia and we had taken advice and 

 considered all options and possibilities and believed that the arrangement with Malaysia  would take that product out of the hands of people smugglers. They would no longer be able  to say to people that they were able to get them to Australia because people would come here  only to be taken to Malaysia. 

 The Government therefore pursued this agreement because we thought it was the strongest  possible message we could send to people smugglers to end the plying of this very evil trade.  The Government first discussed internally the arrangements with Malaysia last year and the 

 Minister made the first contact with Malaysia in December last year. Over a considerable  period of time we worked through the details with Malaysia and internally to Government  and of course along the way we took the best possible advice including legal advice. Our  legal advice was that our ability to do this was in the current law, we were advised that our 

 legal case was strong, we were advised that our legal case was strong in part because the  courts have considered similar questions in the past and looking to those precedents we were  advised that if those precedents were followed our legal case would be a strong one. 

 Yesterday in the High Court what we saw was the High Court enter into a different  construction of the relevant section of the Migration Act. Effectively, if you like, yesterday  the refugee and asylum seeker law of this country changed, changed from how it had been  known and understood before with a different interpretation of the legislation. The High  Court’s decision basically turns on its head the understanding of the law in this country prior  to yesterday’s decision. 

 In that case we of course need to consider as a Government what is the best way forward.  Last night Cabinet met for a consideration of this matter and we received oral advice from the  Solicitor-General, now I do want to stress that his advice is preliminary and it was oral  advice, I have requested the Solicitor-General to provide advice in writing as soon as it is  possible for him to do so and as a matter of urgency, however I do want to say based on the 

 general understandings we have at this point of the meaning of yesterday’s High Court case,  that it appears that the following is its meaning. I do want to caution that advice of course is  preliminary, but I do believe that it’s worth saying, that there are questions over the future of 

 offshore processing arrangements that must be considered and it’s far from clear, it is far  from clear, whether the Court’s ruling would practically speaking permit the operation of  offshore processing in other locations even in locations where offshore processing has been  conducted in the past. 

 Now it’s on these matters that of course the Solicitor-General’s written advice will deal and it  is our intention when that advice is received to release that advice publically. 

 Can I say looking at yesterday’s High Court decision I believe that it represents a missed  opportunity in preventing us from transferring asylum seekers to Malaysia at this time it  represents a missed opportunity. A missed opportunity to enhance our region’s response to  the evil of people smuggling, a missed opportunity to make a real and important contribution  to the region’s approach to the transnational crime of people smuggling through the Bali  framework, the framework that the Minister for Immigration and of course the Minister for  Foreign Affairs worked on in Bali earlier this year with our regional friends and neighbours  and it is a missed opportunity, a missed opportunity to send the strongest possible message to  people smugglers, a missed opportunity to send a message to asylum seekers not to risk their  lives at sea and get into boats and we tragically saw at Christmas Island around Christmas  time what that can lead to with the loss of life of men and women and children. 

 The Government will received the written legal advice from the Solicitor-General and we  will digest that advice and at the appropriate point make a comprehensive statement about the  Government’s plans following the High Court decision. 

 The Minister for Immigration yesterday made his first instance responses to the High Court  case, I’ll turn to him now for some comments on an aspect of the case that to date hasn’t been  as publically reported on as other parts. 

 MINISTER BOWEN: Thank you very much Prime Minister. As the Prime Minister said,  yesterday’s judgment casts into question a range of matters in relation to offshore processing.  One matter which there has been some questioning about is the situation of unaccompanied  minors. It’s quite clear from yesterday’s judgment again that the situation with  unaccompanied minors has changed under law. Yesterday the High Court ruled that no  unaccompanied minor could be removed from Australia to any other place without the  written permission of the Minister for Immigration as guardian and that would be a matter  which would in all likelihood be judicially reviewable which would make the removal of  unaccompanied minors to any offshore location under any regime one which is highly  problematic. That again, as the Prime Minister said, is something the Government will need  to consider in the light of revised advice from the Solicitor-General and of course it would  impact on any offshore processing scheme that was conducted by this Government or any  future government. 

 PM: We’re happy to take questions. 

 JOURNALIST: So it’s the end of offshore  processing for asylum seekers? 

 PM: As I said we have received oral advice from the Solicitor-General and we will receive  his written advice, however what I can say at this stage is that there are very clear questions  over whether or not this judgment permits offshore processing, practically speaking, in other  locations including locations where offshore processing has occurred before. Now we’re in a  situation, preliminary, oral advice from the Solicitor-General to Cabinet last night, we will  receive his written advice and we will publically release it. 

 JOURNALIST: You presided over the failed East Timor solution, you jumped the gun on the  Malaysian solution, how much responsibility do you bear and do you owe the people of  Australia an apology? 

 PM: Well let’s get the facts right because it always helps to do that. We worked hard on this  Malaysia arrangement, an innovative arrangement, an innovative arrangement to transfer  people back to Malaysia so we could send the toughest possible message of deterrence to  people smugglers who ply a very evil trade. Now we acted on legal advice, on legal advice  that our case was sound. The High Court decision yesterday has effectively changed our  understanding of refugee and asylum seeker law in this country. Now of course, based on  further legal advice from the Solicitor-General we will respond to that decision. 

 JOURNALIST: Has Minister Bowen offered you his resignation at all? 

 PM: Well let’s be clear about what’s happened here. The High Court yesterday took a  decision that has effectively changed refugee and asylum seeker law in this country.  

 JOURNALIST: So that’s a no? 

 PM: Well I’ll finish my sentence thank you, and if you look at the public reporting of this  today there are now many legal experts out there commenting on the decision, some of them  are saying that they are greatly surprised by this decision, some of them are saying that they  find the decision in comprehensible, beyond understanding, some are obviously saying that 

 they do understand the decision, but when you’ve got that wide diversity, that really wide  diversity of legal responses after the judgment is taken, I think that’s telling us something  about the nature of this decision. 

 Minister Bowen at all times acted on the best advice available to him and acted with a clear  determination and resolve to break the people smugglers’ business model and that’s what I  asked him to do as Minister. 

 JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard have you spoken to the Opposition or any of the crossbenchers  about what happens next? 

 PM: No I haven’t. 

 JOURNALIST: Would you consider amending the Migration Act? 

 PM: As the Minister made clear yesterday we will work through all options but we’ll do it  with a careful and methodical approach, and so the first thing that you need to do is get legal  advice on the meaning of this decision. As soon as we Cabinet took oral advice from the  Solicitor-General, that happened last night, the evening the decision came down. 

 Understandably the Solicitor-General needs some time to put his advice in writing, that is  being done now, when that advice is received then we will release it publically.  

 JOURNALIST: How embarrassing is this for you as Prime Minister? 

 PM: Well we are not the first Government to go to the High Court and to have legislation  overturned, it’s happened to governments in the past, it’ll happen to governments in the  future. What you need to do as a government is respond when the High Court has made a  decision and we will, we will respond with our determination, to act on people smuggling.  What I don’t want to see as Prime Minister of this country, is men, women and children  getting on boats and potentially losing their lives, and it was our determination to not see men  and women and children get on boats that drove us over the many months that we worked on  the arrangement with Malaysia. Now the High Court’s made a decision- 

 JOURNALIST: But Prime Minister you haven’t been particularly successful in achieving that  or trying to achieve that have you? 

 PM: Well let’s once again deal with the facts because they come in handy. Dealing with the  facts, and Minister Bowen can give you all of the statistics on this, we have seen a far less  number of arrivals in the past few months since we announced the arrangement with  Malaysia than we saw in the same period last year. We had been aiming of course to send a  tough message to people smugglers, we have been acting on the legal advice that we had  been provided with. Now yesterday the High Court changed from interpretations of the past,  and to give you just a flavour of that because I think it’s important, the current Chief Justice  of the High Court, His Honour Mr Justice French, considered comparable legal questions  when he was a judge of the Federal Court and made different decisions to the one that the  High Court made yesterday. So we acted on legal advice, we’ve seen yesterday’s decision  from the High Court, we will respond to it but we will respond in the way in which we go  about our work; carefully, methodically and that means we’ll get the written advice from the  Solicitor-General. 

 JOURNALIST: So have you spoken with Malaysia (inaudible). 

 PM: I’ll go to the Minister on that question. 

 MINISTER BOWEN: Yes, I’ve been in -  

 JOURNALIST: Are you still committed (inaudible). 

 MINISTER BOWEN: I’ve been in contact with my ministerial counterpart Minister  Hishammuddinas you would expect he understands the legal situation in Australia, he is very  supportive of our position, he has recommitted Malaysia to working very closely with  Australia on all these issues of people smuggling and border security and he has indicated  that from his point of view this does not in any way diminish or effect the very warm working  relationships between Australia and Malaysia. 

 JOURNALIST: Will you still have to accept those refugees from Malaysia? 

 MINISTER BOWEN: As I indicated yesterday, this was an arrangement negotiated in good  faith with Malaysia. The High Court decision yesterday is in no way down to any action of 

 the Malaysian Government so we would view it in that light and our inclination would be to  continue with that. What we have said is that we will reserve the right and consider our  position in relation to the overall humanitarian intake. 

 JOURNALIST: Minister are you considering resigning (inaudible)? 

 MINISTER BOWEN: Look my response to that question is the same as it was yesterday. I  have a job to do, I have an obligation to this Prime Minister, to this Government and to this  country to see this job through. This Prime Minister gave me a job to do and I intend to  continue to do it. The easy option would be to resign, the only thing that would happen if I  resign would be my quality of life might go up but nothing else is going to be impacted by  that. I have a job to do and I intend to continue to do it.  

 JOURNALIST: Who (inaudible) that this was announced before it was signed, sealed and  delivered? 

 PM: Well with respect, what’s the relevance of that to the High Court decision yesterday?  Nothing. 

 JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard what’s your advice on an increased risk of additional boats  arriving in Australian waters and has there been any preparation for that? 

 PM: Well we maintain a constant vigilance when it comes to the prospect of boats making  their way to Australia, we obviously invest heavily in efforts in our region to detect and  prevent people getting on boats, paying a people smuggler, giving their money over to what  is a transnational crime and risking their life at sea. We’ve got more assets patrolling our  border than we’ve ever had before as a result of the actions of the Labor Government, so  we’ll continue to do everything that we do to patrol and protect Australia’s borders. 

 I used the language of missed opportunity before and I think it is the right language. This is a  missed opportunity through transferring people to Malaysia to send a very strong message of  deterrence to people smugglers. 

 JOURNALIST: Is there an increased risk because of this decision and have you taken any  steps as a result of that and have there been any steps taken to step up security or make  preparations at Christmas Island? 

 PM: We are always on the highest possible alert in terms of patrolling our borders, that’s  what we do and I do believe that this is a missed opportunity. I am obviously concerned that  in a circumstance where we can’t transfer a plane load of asylum seekers to Malaysia and  send that very tough message, I am concerned about what that means in terms of boats trying  to make their way to Australia and so of course we’ll continue to do all of the prudent work  that we do in relation to patrolling and protecting our borders. 

 JOURNALIST: Have you guaranteed to the left factions of your party that you’ll rule out  using Naurr and temporary protection visas? 

 PM: The only guarantee I ever give is that every decision we take will be taken in the  national interest. 

 JOURNALIST: You went down the path of off-shore processing when increased boats were  a real (inaudible) headache. (Inaudible) for you? 

 PM: It’s not about that, it’s about doing the right thing in circumstances where we are dealing  with people smuggling, we’ve got people who are making money, profiting off the misery of  others and we all watched some dreadful, dreadful images on our TV screens around  Christmas time last year of children losing their lives at sea. Our motivation here has been to  stop that evil trade, to stop the risk of those drownings, that’s what motivated us in putting  together this arrangement with Malaysia, that’s what will motivate us as we look at options  following the High Court decision. 

 JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard why are temporary protection visas still an option, that’s  something Labor’s (inaudible). 

 PM: We will make a comprehensive statement when we’re in a position to. I think the  prudent thing now is to work through and get the written legal advice from the Solicitor  General and we’ll do that. 

 JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible) 

 PM: Just one second, we’ll go here first, yes. 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 

 PM: Clearly we can work through questions of cost, we are focused at the moment on dealing  with the consequences of this decision so any of those issues we’ll deal with at the time of the  comprehensive statement. 

 JOURNALIST: There’s speculation that Peter Beattie might run for Federal politics and even  has his eye on your job. Are you shaking in your boots at that prospect? 

 PM: I’ve got a lot of important things to do and I don’t much worry about newspaper idle  gossip and speculation. 

 JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, also on cost, the part of the cost that was announced before  associated with sending the 800 asylum seekers to Malaysia, are we still spending that  money? 

 PM: Spending the eight? 

 JOURNALIST: The money that paid for sending the 800 asylum seekers to Malaysia, setting  up infrastructure and all the related costs with that. Are we getting some of that- 

 PM: I think it’s best for us to give a complete accounting of all of these questions when we  do the comprehensive statement, but obviously, given that there won’t be people transferred  to Malaysia following yesterday’s decision, we were ready for a transfer. As you know, that 

 transfer cannot go ahead. Given that transfer is not going ahead, clearly some costs that  would have been associated with that transfer won’t be incurred, but we’ll give a complete  view about costs and consequences at the time that we respond to the High Court decision. 

 JOURNALIST: Has Australia already made commitments to spend money in Malaysia  (inaudible)? 

 PM: It’s not a question of that, no. The money was associated, the money for facilitating  people being transferred was about facilitating people being transferred so clearly we’re in a  situation where the transfer we had hoped to do will not be going ahead. 

 JOURNALIST: Will any of the 4,000 go to Western Australia? 

 PM: Well we’ll make a statement about that matter at the relevant time as the Minister said  during the course of this press conference. 

 JOURNALIST: Are arrangements being made a detention centres around the country to  accommodate more asylum seekers? 

 PM: Look I’ll turn to the Minister about detention management arrangements but obviously  the Minister keeps all of these things under daily watch and prudent preparation. 

 MINISTER BOWEN: As the Prime Minister said, this is something we manage on a regular  basis. Of course over the last three months we’ve seen a significant reduction in the number  of people in detention facilities around the country, it was over 6,000 people just three  months ago, it’s now around 4,000 and falling, that’s as a result of a number of measures this  Government has taken - faster processing, better security processing, the movement of 

 families and children into the community and of course the reduction of boat arrivals  particularly since the announcement of the Malaysia arrangement. All have contributed to a  very substantial reduction in the number of people in our detention centres and facilities  across the country. 

 JOURNALIST: About less than 20 rooms were burnt out in the Northern Immigration  Detention Centre yesterday or the day before, sorry, what’s happening to those people that  were staying in those rooms, where are they being moved to? 

 MINISTER BOWEN: There have been people who were involved in that that have been  moved to the correctional facility in Darwin in conjunction with the Northern Territory Police  and those investigations will continue- 

 JOURNALIST: It wasn’t 20 people involved in the fires so however many, I’m asking the  people that were staying in those rooms not the people that lit the fires. 

 MINISTER BOWEN: More than 20 people have been moved to the correctional facility at  Darwin. 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) open for six months, will that stay open longer now? 

 MINISTER BOWEN: No. 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen how many of the 4,000 have been settled in Australia already and  does this decision impact in any way on the rate at which those people will be resettled here? 

 MINISTER BOWEN: Some have already been transferred to Australia and that’s a great  thing and I think it’s been very important to see those people who didn’t have the money to  pay a people smuggler, couldn’t dream of having enough money to pay a people smuggler to  come to Australia, to have the chance of a new life in Australia. 

 In terms of the exact number that had been already resettled in Australia we could provide  you that figure but the, as I’ve said, and my inclination, the Government’s inclination would  be to continue as we had agreed with the Malaysian Government 

 JOURNALIST: You said earlier that the numbers in detention had gone down, does that  include the numbers that have come from Malaysia? 

 MINISTER BOWEN: Well they’re not going into detention because they are genuine  processed refugees who get immediately settled into the community. 

 JOURNALIST: You mentioned earlier that you had discussions with your ministerial  counterpart in Malaysia and your inclination is to proceed with receiving those refugees. Did  he tell you that he expects you to continue (inaudible)? 

 MINISTER BOWEN: No, he told me that he regarded the arrangement as a good solid and  sound one and that he was committed to working with Australia on these and related issues  into the future. 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)  

 MINISTER BOWEN: Sorry? 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 

 MINSTER BOWEN: It’s just around 4,000 in detention facilities and then there’s other  people living in the community, families and children in particular. 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) warn you internally that the Malaysia deal might fall over prior to  the High Court challenge? 

 PM: Our legal advice was that our case was sound. 

 JOURNALIST: So there was no internal- 

 PM: Our legal advice was that our case was sound, in terms of the way in which our case was  put, I’d refer you to the submissions of the Solicitor General before the High Court. But  included, of course, in those submissions was relying on earlier precedence of courts dealing  with comparable questions including precedence authored by the current Chief Justice of the  High Court to take just one example. 

 JOURNALIST: You mentioned that fewer asylum seekers have arrived since announcement  of the deal. Now that the High Court has made this decision do you feel the reverse?  

 PM: Well as I made clear in answer to the question from over here, we are obviously  concerned about the prospect of further arrivals. We had sent a message of deterrence by the 

 announced of the Malaysia arrangement. We wanted to send an even bigger message by the  implementation of the Malaysia arrangement. We’re obviously concerned now that the  prevention of the transfer that we were positioned to do sends a different message to people  smugglers. We are concerned about that. 

 JOURNALIST: Have there been any discussions with the leader of Papua New Guinea  related to the Manus Island centre or with Nauru or any other country in the region? 

 PM: As has been a matter of public record for some time now we’ve been in negotiations  with PNG- 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) decision? 

 PM: No, not to my knowledge. 

 MINISTER BOWEN: As the Prime Minister says we have a Memorandum of Understanding  signed with Papua New Guinea for the Manus Island detention facility. Of course we’ve  indicated to Papua New Guinea that this High Court case will need to be examined and its  implications will need to be considered and Papua New Guinea completely understands that. 

 JOURNALIST: Have you spoken with other countries? 

 MINISTER BOWEN: No. 

 JOURNALIST: How long will it take to get this advice in writing? 

 PM: We’ve asked the Solicitor-General to do that as a matter of urgency. 

 Thank you very much 

  

