---
title: "Morrison's myths get more misleading"
date: "2011-08-01"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211358280
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2548219%22
---

 

 Morrison's myths get more misleading  Monday, 01 August 2011 

 The Opposition continues to spread misleading and plainly false information about  the Malaysia transfer agreement, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris  Bowen MP, said today. 

 Mr Bowen said the Opposition's immigration spokesman Scott Morrison either didn't  understand the arrangement with Malaysia or was purposely spreading falsities to  undermine the groundbreaking deal. 

 'Mr Morrison's myths are stacking up and I urge him to take the time to read through  the Malaysia transfer arrangement and the operational guidelines to familiarise  himself with the facts to avoid further confusion,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'The Opposition is so afraid this landmark arrangement will work they are willing to  do and say anything to undermine it.' 

 Despite Mr Morrison's claims, people arriving to Australia irregularly by boat and  transferred to Malaysia will not be part of the additional 4000 genuine refugees taken  as part of this arrangement, as the Minister clearly said on Sky News Australian  Agenda yesterday: 

 'Well, we've made it very clear that they will get no special treatment in terms of  resettlement, so that anybody who gets returned from Australia to Malaysia would  not be part of the 4000 that get returned.' [Sky News Australian Agenda, Sunday 31  July, 2011] 

 Mr Bowen said people transferred to Malaysia would go into the mix alongside the  more than 90 000 registered refugees and asylum seekers already seeking  resettlement. 

 'Transferees will get no preferential treatment ahead of that existing caseload. The  message is clear: there is no advantage in coming to Australia by boat,' Mr Bowen  said. 

 'People coming to Australia by boat will be sent to Malaysia. An asylum seeker's best  chance of being resettled in Australia is applying through the UNHCR as part of the  humanitarian program - not undertaking that dangerous boat journey.' 

 Despite Mr Morrison's claims to the contrary, the 4000 extra genuine refugees  Australia will resettle as part of this transfer arrangement are in addition to the  current humanitarian intake from Malaysia. 

 'Only this government is committed to a truly regional solution to break the people  smugglers' business model and deliver a greater humanitarian outcome for refugees  in the region,' Mr Bowen said. 

 

 

