---
title: "Transcript of joint doorstop interview: Melbourne: 6 August 2011: carbon pricing; economy; Malaysian agreement; Jim Stynes"
date: "2011-08-06"
creators:
  - "Roxon, Nicola"
source: "MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING"
subjects:
  - "carbon pricing"
  - "economy"
  - "Malaysian agreement"
  - "Jim Stynes"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211358534
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1003421%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  MELBOURNE   

 6 AUGUST 2011   

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:      Carbon pricing; economy; Malaysian agreement; Jim Stynes   

 PM: I'm joined today by Ministers Roxon and Shorten and we are here at the Braybrook-Maidstone Neighbourhood House. I've had the opportunity to have a tremendous  morning tea with people in this neighbourhood house and to answer their questions  about the impacts of carbon pricing on them. I'd like to thank them for the opportunity to  share some conversation and some very good cake, we've all enjoyed that, and to give  them some of the information that they need to work out the impact of carbon pricing on  them.   

 Here in Braybrook and Maidstone and in many parts of Melbourne's west, people are of  lower income compared with the Australian, and I've been making the point to people  today that as we price carbon, our 500 biggest polluters will be paying the price. There  will be some flow through impacts, less than 1 per cent on the CPI, that's less than a  cent in a dollar, and people will see assistance, with around 4 million households  actually coming out better off, with  more assistance than they need to meet the average  impact of carbon pricing on them and their family.   

 So we’ve talked today about the tax cuts for Australians earning less than $80,000 a  year, and that the vast majority of them will see a tax cut of around $300. We’ve talked  about the increase in the tax free threshold, meaning a million Australians will no longer  be in the tax system, no longer have to file a tax return and will see a tax cut. So for  example someone on $20,000 a year will see a tax cut of $600. We’ve talked today  about the increases in family payments of up to $110 per child, and we’ve talked as well  about the impact for pensioners, will pensioners seeing an increase in their pension and  on average pensioner households coming out $210 in front.   

 So it’s been a good discussion, I very much enjoyed it, and we’re very happy to take  your questions.   

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)   

 PM: On the current economic climate can I say this, obviously Australians are seeing  some turbulence in global financial markets and in local markets, in the share market.  It’s not my intention to engage in running commentary on share market movements. But  I do want to say something about the Australian economy. We are not immune to global  events, but I think we should have confidence, we should have confidence that our  economic credentials are amongst the best in the world, we should also have confidence  that we have handled in the past global instability. This Government has a proven track  record of handling global instability. And we should also have the confidence of the  strong fundamentals of our economy. We have low debt, low unemployment, the budget 

 coming to surplus in 2012-13, a AAA credit rating, and we are looking to strong  economic growth. And we are in the right part of the world, a part of the world that  continues to grow, that means we will continue to see economic growth in our region,  we’ve got a strong pipeline of investment, more than $400 billion of investment in the  pipeline, and that means our economy will continue to experience economic growth.   

 Now I understand that many Australians will looking and this news and be thinking what  it mean for them, I would say to Australians look to the strong fundamentals of our  economy.   

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) how concerned should retirees be about their super funds?   

 PM: People did see impacts on their super funds during the days of the global financial  crisis and many Australians will be looking now on impacts here on super funds and on  their direct share investments. It’s not my intention to have running commentary of  movements on share markets, but I would say to self-funded retirees that of course they  have the ongoing support of the various benefits that we provide to self-funded retirees,  many of them are part pensioners too, so they’ve seen the benefits of the flow through  from the historic pension rise that we put in place. So people will continue to work  through themselves what all of this means for them, but I would say to Australians the  fundamentals of our economy are strong - low unemployment, low debt, a budget  coming to surplus, we are going to continue to experience economic growth, that is what  will happen in our economy.   

 JOURNALIST: But can you understand though why this kind of thing does make people  nervous?   

 PM: Certainly, I can understand people watch TV and they wonder what it will mean for  them, and then they reflect back to our economy and they say what’s happening here,  and when they do that reflection back to our economy people would see that we’ve got a  low unemployment rate, I mean if you compare our unemployment rate with the US or  the UK or parts of Europe people can see the huge stark contrast. We’ve got an  unemployment rate of less than 5 per cent, we’ve got low Government debt, we’ve got  the budget coming to surplus in 2012-13, we live in the part of the world that is  continuing to grow and demand the things that we have for sale. We’ve got a huge  pipeline of investment and we will continue to experience economic growth.   

 JOURNALIST: Regardless of the relative strength of the Australian economy in global  terms, there have been mixed messages out of the States overnight. There was some  small fall in their unemployment rate, but Standard and Poors has just downgraded long-term US debt which might be said in some circles is bordering on catastrophic, is it still  the case that if the US sneezes Australia catches a cold despite the strength in our  region?   

 PM: Well let me just talk about events in the US and then come to the strength in our  region. First let’s look at the facts here, it is true that Standard and Poors have  downgraded their rating of the American economy, now Standard and Poors had been  signalling for some time that unless they saw a certain figure of budget cutbacks out of  the discussion that there’s been in Washington about the American budget and fiscal  consolidation, that they were intending to do that downgrade. At the same time, the other  two major ratings agencies, Moody’s and Fitch, continue to have the American economy  rated at AAA. So I think people just need to look at all of the facts. 

 

 On our own economy when we look at our own economy, people I think understand now  that a quarter of our exports go to China with its huge demand for our resources, that  what we are therefore seeing are the best terms of trade in 140 years, and as a result of  those best terms of trade and the profitability of the resource sector, we’ve got a pipeline  of investment of more than $400 billion. This is the circumstance of the Australian  economy.   

 And let me just say again very clearly, people should look with confidence at our  economic credentials and fundamentals and people should look with confidence at the  ability of this Government to deal with global instability, we’ve done it before, we came  out of the global financial crisis without having gone into recession, the only advanced  economy in the world to have achieved that. We achieved that because of the  Government provided economic stimulus and because of the hard work and resilience of  the Australian community, and now of course we’ve got economy with strong  fundamentals, growth, low unemployment, low Government debt.   

 JOURNALIST: Just on the issue of asylum seekers do you reject claims that it’s a  breach of the UN Convention of the Rights of the Child to send unaccompanied children  to Malaysia?   

 PM: Look we’ve worked through all of this and made the determination that we would  enter the agreement with Malaysia. As you have seen from the arrangement we struck  with Malaysia there are protections for the asylum seekers returned.   

 JOURNALIST: What have you been told (inaudible)   

 PM: Look I’ve seen reports that effect, obviously our Immigration Department officials  will handle any issues, but as we’ve made clear all along, the returns to Malaysia aren’t  a question of volunteering, this will be done.   

 JOURNALIST: Is three days long enough to properly assess those arrivals before  they’re sent on to Malaysia?   

 PM: When the system is in full operation we anticipate 72 hour turnarounds, we always  said that the first turnaround would take slightly longer than that and it is taking slightly  longer than that, and yes it’s a satisfactory amount of time to do what needs to be done  for pre-transfer assessment.   

 JOURNALIST: Despite criticisms of the UN that it’s too short?   

 PM: Well we’ve made determinations on the best of advice from our officials about what  be achieved in that time period. And let’s be clear, our aim is to smash the people  smugglers business model, our aim is to not see people put themselves in boats and be  at risk of losing their lives. At Christmas time this year, the Christmas that’s just gone,  that we saw those tragic scenes off Christmas Island as people including children  drowned, we do not want to see people getting on boats, we want to smash this evil  trade. At the same we will take 4000 genuine refugees from Malaysia and of course  included in that number will be children.  JOURNALIST: It’s been commented upon in Canberra in particular, that you seem more  confident in your public performance in the past week, do you agree with that?   

 PM: I’ll let the commentators do their commentary, that’s what they get paid for.   

 JOURNALIST: You’ve got a few things that you’ve rolled out now, you have an agenda,  a program that you’re pushing hard, Tony Abbott’s been out of the country (inaudible)  the phrase relaxed and comfortable-   

 PM: Look I’ll let the commentators do what they do.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think public sentiments changing with regards to the carbon tax?   

 PM: With carbon tax what I’ve said all along is we’re doing this because it’s the right  thing for the nation’s future, I want us to have a clean energy future, I want us to have  the jobs and investment that go with that. Carbon pricing will start on 1 July next year  and it will mean that from 1 July next year we are embarked on the same sort of  economic reform, hard economic reform, which this country has fronted up to in the past  and which explains today’s prosperity. So we need to continue to engage in hard  economic reform so that we can enjoy prosperity into the future, and a big part of the  prosperity is going to be a clean energy future with new investment and new jobs that  will flow. As I’ve talked to people about pricing carbon, I’ve just been wanting to make  people have got all of the information to judge for themselves, and I’ve talked about that  here this morning, and people can get that information from our  cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website.   

 JOURNALIST: As a footy fan do you have any thoughts for Jim Stynes at the moment?   

 PM: Look I’ve had the very great privilege of meeting with Jim Stynes and talking to him  about the remarkable work he does for young and disadvantaged Australians, and I’ve  been very pleased that the Government’s been able to partner with him in some of that  remarkable work, which is so close to his heart and which he’s continued to do even as  he’s confronted illness. So I think we’re all thinking about Jim, he was a tremendous  footballer, he’s a great Australian, and a person of remarkable courage, just amazing  courage, to keep coming out, being there with his beloved football team, and doing so  much great work amongst the Australian community, so our thoughts are certainly with  him and his family.   

 Thank you very much.   

 [ENDS]   

 

 

