---
title: "Address to the Lowy Institute, Sydney"
date: "2011-06-08"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Bilateral agreements"
  - "Malaysia"
  - "Nauru"
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Regional processing"
  - "Liberal Nationals Coalition policy"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211355593
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/830488%22
---

 1 

 

 

 

 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH   

 

 **CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY** 

 

 8 June 2011   

 TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR,  ADDRESS TO THE LOWY INSTITUTE,   SYDNEY   

 E&OE……………………….……………………………………………………………………   

 Julia Gillard called the Howard government’s Pacific Solution “costly”, “unsustainable” and wrong in  “principle”. Immigration minister, Chris Evans, said that it was “ineffective and wasteful”, “neither humane  nor fair”. It’s little wonder, then, that Labor MPs now despair of their own government because the Prime  Minister has devised a border protection policy with less regard for human rights than that of her  predecessor.  

 One Pacific Solution denigrator, the academic and writer Robert Manne, now concedes that abandoning the  Coalition’s border protection policies was a massive mistake. He also accepts that the Howard critics have  been dishonest in not admitting that his policies had at least stopped the boats.  

 Who would have thought that key members of the refugee lobby would one day say that John Howard’s  border protection policies were morally preferable to those of Julia Gillard? The conclusion that refugee  advocates have reluctantly reached - that “the Prime Minister should finally pick up the phone to the  President of Nauru” - is a reflection on the current government’s lack of moral compass as well as its utter  administrative incompetence.  

 Between 1999 and 2002, the Howard government successfully reduced a flood of illegal boat arrivals to a  mere trickle. Between 2002 and 2007, less than 20 illegal entry boats arrived with fewer than 300  passengers. In November 2007, there were just four illegal boat arrivals in immigration detention. This was  the current government’s inheritance, a policy that worked, but its leading members have lacked the  character to know when to leave well enough alone.  

 There were four main elements in John Howard’s border protection policy: first, people who arrived  illegally by boat were processed offshore, often in a third country; second, the government reserved the right  to turn illegal-entry boats around, when it was safe to do so; third, even boat people found to be refugees  gained temporary protection only rather than permanent residency; and fourth, close and cooperative  relations with source and transit countries meant that non-refugees could sometimes be returned to their  original homes.  

 It was pretty effective even if it wasn’t pretty. There were disturbances in detention centres. Detainees often  engaged in self-harm, sometimes in front of TV cameras. Naval personnel and public servants were swept  up in bitter recriminations over whether children had been thrown overboard and who knew what, when. As 

 2 

 

 the SAS boarded the Tampa to prevent it from entering Australian waters and to help manage a forcible  transfer of asylum seekers to a warship, many questioned what had become of civilised standards. The Labor  Party should have appreciated from its own time in government that there is no nice way to deal with people  who are determined to exploit Australians’ goodwill. Instead, it was vociferous in its denunciation of the  former government as cruel, incompetent and racist.     

 As long as government policy announces to people smugglers and to their customers that “if you can get  here, you can stay here”, boats will still come, people might still drown, and detention centres can still burn.  Those who could pay more than a poor villager’s lifetime savings to get on a leaky boat to Australia are not  bad people. The Coalition has not asserted that they are. Like generations of newcomers to Australia, they  want a better life. The difference between them and other migrants is that they are coming without our  permission, not with it.   

 People have to understand - if necessary, they must be made to understand - that the only way to gain  permanent residency in Australia is to arrive legitimately in accordance with the rules. There can be no  alternative if the boats are to stop. Why should they when the prize for turning up on Christmas Island is a  new life in Australia and material comfort scarcely imaginable for average citizens in most of the countries  of the world.     

 The Howard government understood this. That’s why it progressively strengthened the border protection  measures, such as mandatory detention for illegal boat arrivals, which its predecessor had put in place. The  Rudd/Gillard government failed to understand this - or, if it did, let moral vanity overcome judgment. That’s  why it announced that the border protection measures its predecessor had so painfully put in place were  being dismantled. This undoubtedly burnished the government’s credentials with the “moral middle class”  but it immediately put the people smugglers back in business because they once more had a product to sell.   Since that announcement in August 2008, there have been more than 220 boats carrying more than 11,000  people demanding a new life in Australia. There are currently about 6000 illegal boat arrivals in immigration  detention including about 1000 children. Asylum seekers have deliberately destroyed one boat to ensure that  they were taken to Australia. They have effectively commandeered an Australian government vessel to  prevent their return to Indonesia. They have rioted several times, burning down parts of the detention centre  at Villawood, and also at Christmas Island which police had to retake by force.    

 The government has taken a long time to learn some bitter lessons: that it’s impossible to have secure  borders without taking strong action against those who violate them; and that governments that are a soft  touch won’t be taken seriously. These are lessons that an adult government would never have needed to be  taught and that no previous Australian government has ever had to absorb. It is a policy failure akin to that  of pre-World War Two Australian governments’ over-reliance on others for the country’s defence, this time  unmitigated by the fact that folly was bipartisan.    

 People have had to pay a very high price for the government’s failures. Taxpayers have faced about $3  billion in border protection cost blowouts. Much worse, large numbers of people have died attempting  unauthorised trips to Australia. There’s the 50 who are thought to have perished when their boat hit  Christmas Island last December. There’s a boat that’s almost certain to have left Indonesia late last year  never to be heard of again and another that’s highly likely to have left Sri Lanka in 2009 to have met a  similar fate. The government can’t be held responsible for the deaths of people in unseaworthy boats but it is  responsible for putting temptation in their way. This is an extreme example of the dire consequences that can  flow when governments shirk their responsibility, if all the options are bad, to choose the lesser evil.   

 Even now, the Gillard government still can’t bring itself to acknowledge, even if only to itself, that its  predecessor basically had it right. As prime minister, Kevin Rudd tried to stop the boats without reviving  any key element of the Howard government’s policy. As soon as she became prime minister, Julia Gillard  adopted her own version of the Pacific Solution while desperately pretending that it was utterly different.    

 3 

 

 First, she said that the government would stop the boats by sending their passengers to East Timor even  though the East Timorese had hardly heard of her plan let alone agreed to it. Then, she said that boat people  would be sent to Manus even though no deal had actually been concluded with the PNG government (and  she herself had declared in 2007 that there would be “no offshore processing in Manus Island”). Finally, also  before any agreement had actually been concluded, she said that Australia’s next 800 boat arrivals would be  sent to Malaysia in return for Australia accepting 4000 of theirs.    

 The one country in our region with which the current government seems to have had no discussion at all  about processing illegal boat arrivals is the one which was the key to the previous government’s success.  “Anywhere but Nauru” is the Prime Minister’s thinking for no better reason, it seems, than Nauru was John  Howard’s idea first and the Coalition has been calling on her to “pick up the phone to the President of  Nauru” since she first announced the always-implausible regional processing centre in East Timor.   

 This Prime Minister invariably claims credit for deals before they are actually done and finds it hard to be  honest about what they really mean. Her insistence that Malaysia would have no say over who Australia sent  there and would treat people in accordance with Australian standards rather than its own was not just  implausible but insulting to our neighbour. No less than Australians, Malaysians take the view that “we will  decide who comes to our country and the circumstances under which they come”. Not only would we be  paying all the costs of Australian illegal arrivals in Malaysia and all the costs of Malaysian illegal arrivals in  Australia, we would be sending people to camps run in accordance with Malaysian standards of human  rights, not Australian ones.   

 The Prime Minister’s original justification for shunning Nauru as a site for third country processing was its  failure to ratify the UN convention on refugees but Malaysia is not a signatory to the convention either. The  Prime Minister is yet to explain how it can be wrong to send illegal boat arrivals to Nauru but not to send  them to Malaysia especially when Australia would run a centre in Nauru in accordance with our own  standards.    

 We could hardly expect Malaysia to maintain two regimes for illegal arrivals: a superior one for those  coming via Australia and an inferior one for everyone else. The Malaysians could hardly admit that the way  they currently treat people is deficient yet that is precisely what would be implied if the Gillard  government’s assurances of special treatment were meant to be taken seriously. In fact, claimed safeguards  are no more than a sop to an increasingly restive caucus.    

 Under Malaysian law, immigration violations such as breaching conditions of entry are punishable by  caning with a rattan. According to Amnesty International’s 2010 Report, tens of thousands of illegal  migrants, including asylum-seekers, have been caned. Unlike Nauru, Malaysia is not a signatory to the UN  Convention against Torture or the International Covenant on Civic and Political Rights.   

 There is no possibility that any boat people sent to Nauru would ever be caned but no such assurance could  ever be given for boat people sent to Malaysia because caning is part of the normal regime to which  unlawful arrivals there are subjected.  If the government is serious about not allowing boat people to be  caned, it simply can’t send them to Malaysia. This realisation is now dawning on the caucus: that the  treatment the Gillard government is about to inflict on illegal arrivals is far less humane than that of its  predecessor.   

 If it ever happens, the Malaysian one-for-five people swap will cost taxpayers $300 million: that’s $90,000  for each illegal arrival we send to Malaysia and $54,000 for each one we accept. The arrangement would  only cover the first 800 arrivals into Australia and there have already been six boats carrying nearly 300  people in the four weeks since its announcement. In response to United Nations’ concerns about sending  unaccompanied minors to Malaysia, the government is already conceding that not all new arrivals would be  sent there, seriously undermining its claims that the people smugglers would at last have no product to sell.  Finally, because established people smuggling routes already pass through Malaysia, there is every chance  that illegal arrivals sent there (unlike those that might go to Nauru) would boomerang back to Australia.  

 4 

 

 

 A further problem with the Malaysia deal is Australia’s obligation, under the UN Convention Against  Torture, not to send people to a country where their rights could be abused.  There is every chance that  illegal arrivals caught in Labor’s people swap could launch court challenges against being sent to Malaysia  under the government’s new complementary protection laws.   

 The former Human Rights Commissioner Sev Ozdowski has condemned sending asylum seekers to a  country that is not a signatory to the UN conventions on refugees or against torture. Along with refugee  advocate Marion Le and human rights lawyer Julian Burnside, his conclusion is that offshore processing in  Nauru was preferable.  “With Nauru” he said, “we could put the conditions, we were responsible for their  accommodation, their food; we were responsible for access to medical services and also our immigration  officials were looking to find a place for them, if not Australia another country”.    

 As well as human rights activists, the Greens and 14 Labor members of the West Australian parliament have  now condemned the people swap. In the parliament next week, the Coalition will support a Greens’  resolution calling on the government to abandon it. A successful resolution would not bring down the  government or necessarily change the government’s policy even if it were supported by some Labor MPs. It  would, though, be the most powerful possible plea to the Prime Minister not to let her pride make a bad  situation worse.    

 Stopping illegal arrivals would be an important part of restoring confidence in Australia’s immigration  programme. As the ANU’s Katherine Betts has noted, except between 1998 and 2004 in the Howard years,  polls have consistently shown that far more people think that Australia is taking too many migrants, than  taking too few. From 1972 until 1996, upwards of 50 per cent thought that immigration numbers were too  high. Similarly, a Morgan Poll last year found 39 per cent agreement to the proposition that immigration  “should be reduced”. Only 12 per cent wanted it increased.    

 The only extended period when Australians have been more-happy-than-not about immigration numbers  was the time of the Howard government. For most of the Howard era, Betts has noted, the percentage  thinking that immigration numbers were about right rose from about one third to about two thirds. The  former government boosted the skills component of the overall immigration programme from about 30 per  cent to more than 60 per cent, extended the waiting period before new migrants could claim welfare, put  more emphasis on Australians’ unity than their diversity and, above all, largely stopped unauthorised  arrivals by boat. Betts speculates that opposition to immigration declined during the Howard era because  many people believed “that the major problems with immigration (had) been fixed”.  More people thought  that the immigration programme was being run firmly in Australia’s national interest.   

 In the aftermath of the Tampa incident, temporary visas, offshore processing, heightened cooperation with  Indonesia and turning boats around denied the people smugglers a product to sell and all but stopped further  arrivals. After the Tampa’s passengers were detained and processed in Nauru, people smugglers and their  customers got the message and boat arrivals virtually ceased.  There’s every reason to think that what  happened before can happen again and that what was stopped before can be stopped again by making use of  Nauru. In Nauru, Australia could continue to discharge our obligations to illegal arrivals without giving  them any assurance that they would end up in Australia.   

 It’s my intention to travel to Nauru this week, along with the shadow minister Scott Morrison, to establish  beyond any shadow of doubt that Nauru remains ready, willing and able to take illegal arrivals from  Australia. It’s my intention to inspect the Australian taxpayer-funded processing centre there to assure  myself that it can swiftly be made suitable to house arrivals from Australia. I’ll also seek assurances from  the President and the Foreign Minister of Nauru about the treatment that arrivals from Australia would  receive. The Prime Minister should by now have made a similar trip to Malaysia if she really thinks that  illegal arrivals from Australia ought to be sent there and can be looked after in accordance with Australian  standards.   

 5 

 

 In addition to reopening the Nauru processing centre, a Coalition government would: 

  Tighten the current appeals system for illegal boat arrivals processed offshore by using the UNHCR  model of review by a single case officer and end taxpayer funding for further appeals.   

  End Labor’s no-document entry process for illegal boat arrivals. Less than one in five has  documentation on arrival at Christmas Island even though this is needed to enter Malaysia or  Indonesia. Using existing powers, the Coalition would ensure that destroying or discarding  documentation gave rise to a presumption against refugee status.    

  End the Gillard government’s pressure on ASIO to set an inflexible time limit of three months to  conclude security assessments on illegal boat arrivals. Completing security checks often requires  liaison with foreign partners who aren’t influenced by Australian deadlines. Under the Coalition,  ASIO would have as much time as it needed to establish whether those seeking protection visas  represent a threat to our national security.   

  Provide tougher penalties against people smuggling, including mandatory prison sentences. Under the  Coalition, every convicted people smuggler would spend at least a year in prison and the worst  offenders and repeat offenders would face a minimum of ten years behind bars.  Currently there are no  minimum penalties for people smugglers convicted of non-aggravated crimes and the minimum for  aggravated people smuggling is eight years.   

 

 As a way to build community support for the refugee and humanitarian component of our immigration  programme, a Coalition government would enable reputable groups in Australia to sponsor refugees over  and above our regular intake on a fully bonded basis.  This pilot scheme, modelled on one that’s operated  successfully in Canada, would be introduced in the first term of a Coalition Government with a view to  establishing a permanent program in a subsequent term. This private sponsorship program, if successful,  would enable Australia to lift our refugee intake to 15,000 within three years.    

 The Coalition has a strong record of support for a non-discriminatory immigration policy. Not long after the  future Labor leader Arthur Calwell defended the White Australia policy with the joke that “too wongs don’t  make a white”, the Menzies government was extending the migrant intake to Mediterranean countries such  as Lebanon and Egypt. It was Harold Holt who ended the White Australia policy, not Gough Whitlam, who  notoriously regarded Vietnamese boat people as “effing Yellow Balts”. It was Malcolm Fraser, not Bob  Hawke, who first allowed Asian boat people to settle in Australia.    

 Australia has a proud history of giving shelter to those facing persecution but the obligation to refugees has  to be balanced against our obligation not to become a soft touch for anyone who wants a better life. The  alternative to mandatory detention is the risk that people might disappear into the community - as has  clearly happened on a massive scale in Britain. The alternative to strict border protection is tacit  encouragement for people to risk their lives at sea. Giving boat people what they want is not morally  preferable to strict deterrence if it encourages more of them to take great risks making ocean voyages in  leaky boats.    

 A strong border protection policy is perfectly consistent with a sizeable and inclusive immigration  programme. In fact, it’s probably essential if the public is to be convinced that Australia’s immigration  policy is run by the government rather than by people smugglers.    

 [ends]   

