---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 16 June 2011: Carbon Farming Initiative; carbon pricing policy; Malaysia"
date: "2011-06-16"
creators:
  - "Combet, Greg"
source: "MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY"
subjects:
  - "Carbon Farming Initiative"
  - "carbon pricing policy"
  - "Malaysia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211355945
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/851351%22
---

 

 

 THE HON GREG COMBET AM MP  Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency   

 TRANSCRIPT 

 GC 176/11   

 16 June 2011 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA    

 SUBJECT: CARBON FARMING INITIATIVE; CARBON PRICING POLICY; MALAYSIA   

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY    

 12:35PM    

 COMBET: Thanks very much for coming out. There’s two things I wish to address, the first  one being the passage of the Carbon Farming legislation through the House of  Representatives which is very welcome. This is a piece of legislation that when ultimately  enacted, will provide very good opportunities for farmers, foresters and other land  managers to be able to generate a revenue stream from the storage of carbon through  improved land management practices. And so it’s a very important piece of legislation to  complement the Government’s efforts to establish a carbon price. It’s very important for  the agricultural sector. It’s astonishing though that the Coalition voted against it. The early  indications had been that the Coalition would be supportive of such a initiative that, of  course, is important for farmers and the legislation has the support of important  stakeholders including the National Farmers Federation, there’s been wide stakeholder  consultation about the legislation, but at the end of the day the Coalition couldn’t get its act  together on something that’s of benefit to constituents of what you would expect to be on  the conservative side of politics. But nonetheless the legislation will now head towards the  Senate and I hope that the Coalition splits are able to be, over this issue are able to be  repaired in time to see that legislation through the Senate.   

 The second thing I wish to turn to though is to inform you that the Government has now  committed an amount of $12 million for a national advertising campaign to provide  information to the public, both through television and print about the Government’s  policies and plans for establishing a carbon price. Of course there’s been a lot of debate over  recent months about these matters, the Government considers that it’s extremely  important that the community has access to appropriate information about the policies and  plans for carbon pricing, that will be important for people to have very clear understanding  of the issues involved and the objectives of policy and how it will influence themselves  whether at a household or business level. In so making that announcement though I want to  emphasis that there are a couple of provisos. One is that, no final decision has yet been  taken, despite the commitment of the funding to conduct the national advertising  campaign. The Government will take a final decision about that following further discussions  in the context of the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee and also to ensure that there is 

 satisfaction of the guidelines on campaign advertising, the Government Guidelines on  Campaign Advertising. There’s been consultation through my Department with the  independent communications committee, through our consideration of this issue. And it’s  the Government’s clear intention that any advertising campaign once a final decision is  committed, would conform with the Guidelines. But it is an important initiative and we  wanted to at the earliest opportunity to make an announcement about it.    

 It does compare, the $12 million commitment the Government has allocated, I think it’s  necessary to be borne in mind, with an amount that was more than ten-fold that committed  by the Howard Government in promoting Work Choices. For example, $121 million was in  fact expended by the Howard Government to promote Work Choices. The carbon price  mechanism is an extremely important environmental and economic reform. It’s very  important for the community to have access to factual information about the nature of the  reforms that are proposed and I think a quantum of $12 million is a modest commitment to  endeavouring to achieve that task. I’m happy to take any questions you might have.   

 JOURNALIST: Will you spend any money on the ad campaign before you get the carbon tax  deal?   

 COMBET: As long as it conforms with the guidelines and there’s an announced policy, yes.   

 JOURNALIST: But if you don’t have a deal with the Greens, how do you know what you’re  advertising?   

 COMBET: Well I think it depends on the content of the advertising of course, but the  Government has every intention of trying to conclude an agreement with the other  members of the MPCCC, and as I said a moment ago, no final decision will be taken about  the national advertising campaign until such time as we work those issues through further.   

 JOURNALIST: So that means that you won’t spend any money until after you get a deal with  the Greens?   

 COMBET: We’ve committed the $12 million, we’re endeavouring to finalise an agreement as  you’re aware, and the Government will take a final decision about a national advertising  campaign a little bit further down the track.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Combet, do you plan the advertising campaign to focus on the deal, and  what is included in the deal, and how the carbon price will work, or the need for a carbon  price?   

 COMBET: Well through my Department and in conformity with the guidelines - the  guidelines on campaign advertising - you know research is conducted, appropriate  contractors are engaged through the Department and advertising concepts formulated. So  it’s not really appropriate for me as the Minister to be having a view about what should be  constructed. The advice that it needs to be obtained by my Department along the way, is  that, the information provided is appropriate and reaches the audience that it’s intended to  reach.   

 JOURNALIST: Is money for this advertising campaign coming from the pool of money that  got rolled over in the last Budget? I think it was $13.7 million?   

 COMBET: No, it’s not. There was - that money was allocated for a public engagement  strategy, which doesn’t include paid television advertising for example. The rest of the  money from what was termed the Climate Change Foundation Funding, I think, in the  previous term of Parliament was returned to the Budget, in the recent Budget. And this is  new funding that has been committed.   

 JOURNALIST: So have you tenders - have you let any tenders yet? Have you actually  contracted any work on any ads or any pre-research for any ads yet?   

 COMBET: My Department’s been engaged in that, and market research firm and an  advertising agency has been engaged.   

 JOURNALIST: But you might not get a deal? You might not get a deal and you might not  have anything to advertise.   

 COMBET: Well, we have every intention of getting a deal and we’re obviously going to work  extremely hard to achieve it. This is - let me come back to the basic issue here - it is  extremely important that Australia take action on climate change. It’s important that we do  it at the lowest cost to our economy, to households, to communities, to businesses. It is a  complex economic and environmental reform. There’s been, I think you’d have to agree, a  very significant degree of community debate about the issues and it is appropriate for a  Government in these circumstances, and trying to finalise a policy position, then to forecast  that we would conduct an advertising campaign to explain that to the community.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister, when the legislation is finalised, obviously there will be pushes for a  senate inquiry or a house of reps inquiry, what do you think would be an appropriate  timeframe for that do you think? Can you see it strung out for months? Or would you like  something short and sharp? Or what would the Government’s position be on that -?   

 COMBET: Well broadly, broadly our intent and desire is to finalise a package, obviously  announce a policy, formulate exposure draft legislation, get legislation into the House of  Representatives and through to the Senate, and have it enacted before the end of the year.  So we’re hopeful that we can work within those time constraints.   

 JOURNALIST: If you’re advertising, Minister, for a carbon price, as I understand it, although  you’ve been a bit nebulous, if you’re trying to educate people about a carbon price, that is  the Government’s policy, the Opposition is opposed to that, you don’t have an agreement,  you don’t have the legislation, you don’t have a Bill, you know, there’s no law, why isn’t this  just utterly political, and why shouldn’t the ALP be paying for this advertising?   

 COMBET: Well it’s not political. You know, under the Campaign Guidelines that the  Government is working to in respect of this advertising campaign, it’s perfectly appropriate  for a Government to explain policy positions, and that is what we are intending to do.  Obviously with the intention, as I’ve just described, of formulating legislation, getting it  through the Parliament so it can be enacted. But I come back to the fundamental  proposition, that is, this is a very very important reform, it’s appropriate there’s a lot of  debate about it, and it’s also appropriate that Government, in conforming with the  Campaign Guidelines provides information to the community about the nature of the  reform and the things that are being achieved in our economy at the moment with respect  to renewable energy for example, which is a well established piece of legislation, for which  there’s a lot of support. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Is the need for an ad campaign an admission that you’re losing the public  debate?   

 COMBET: No not at all. And I refer again to some of the initiatives of previous Governments  in spending vastly greater sums of taxpayers money to promote particular policies - $121  million on Work Choices and I think there was $118-7 million, 118, $118 million I’m sorry,  spent by the Howard Government to advertise the GST.  We’ve committed and come to  announce the allocation of $12 million to explain carbon pricing and what is being achieved  in our community to support cleaner energy sources and no final decision on the advertising  has yet been taken. So I think we’re taking perfectly appropriate steps.   

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) ...could that amount go up over time? You’ve said $118 million has  been spent, could that $12 million ramp up?   

 COMBET: $118 million spend by the Howard Government on the GST.    

 JOURNALIST: Yeah, but could your advertising spends go up?   

 COMBET: Well this is what we’ve committed to now and that’s all I’m in a position to  announce.     

 JOURNALIST: Has the MPCCC signed up on this decision? Is this an MPCCC decision or have  they been consulted about this?   

 COMBET: This is a Government decision. But I emphasise again, that a final decision on  running a campaign is still pending and we’ll make decisions about that following further  consultations in the MPCCC.   

 JOURNALIST: Just on the MPCCC - The Government sort of said the CPRS is the starting  point for negotiations, how much are you prepared to compromise on the CPRS in order to  get a deal?   

 COMBET: Well, that’s not appropriate for me to speculate about I’m sure you’d appreciate.    

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) is this an admission that you’re losing the public debate? Surely  you don’t think you’re winning it?    

 COMBET: Well it’s obviously a tough, hard debate but that’s fine. It’s very important reform  and we’ll continue to argue it out. But it is entirely appropriate that an amount of this order,  I think, be committed in order to provide information to the community about the policies  that are involved.  It is very important for our long term future and I think, you know, the  Government’s committed to work within the guidelines that have been established for  government advertising. This will be further consultation taking place before a final decision  on it has been made.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister which advertising firm have you engaged?   

 COMBET: I actually don’t know Sid. The Department has engaged those - the market  research and the advertising firm and I imagine that in due course that will go up on their  website. 

 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)...Craig Thomson remains in Parliament given the seriousness of the  allegations against him?   

 COMBET: Well I haven’t seen any recent news about Craig Thomson, but he’s a close  colleague of mine and I’ve worked with him for a number of years and not aware of any  more recent suggestions.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister, isn’t it the case that under the advertising guidelines you require an  existing policy for legislation in order to, in order to advertise? Wouldn’t you be breaching  those guidelines by advertising before you have a policy agreed to by the MPCCC?   

 COMBET: No. The Government is entitled to provide information about policies that it  announces. And for example -   

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)   

 COMBET: Well, I‘ve indicated that we’ve committed funding towards an advertising  campaign with the final decision yet to be made, pending further discussions. And we  anticipate and are working very hard to achieve a policy outcome through the MPCCC.   

 JOURNALIST:  What wrong with the Government’s message Minister? You’re announcing  $12 million, you don’t know what you are advertising, you don’t know what it’s going to say  and you are deferring to you Department. What are you actually announcing?   

 COMBET: I’m announcing a commitment of $12 million which I think you might have  appreciated in fact that we’ve made a decision to commit $12 million to an advertising  campaign. A final decision won’t be made subject to those two things - there’s got to be  further discussion about the policy package through the MPCCC, but there will be  conformity with the guidelines. I think that is an appropriate thing too for us to indicate.   

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)...as Martin Ferguson’s said, are they in danger of falling over if the  adequate compensation somewhat for the steel and coal sectors is not reached?   

 COMBET: Well, again it is not appropriate for me to speculate about what we’re discussing  within the MPCCC. There are obvious areas of policy difference and policy emphasis that  you’d be well familiar with from the past and we just have to keep on working away through  them. But everyone’s at the table and everyone’s approaching it in good faith, trying to get  an outcome.   

 JOURNALIST: Just on the advertising campaign, is this like the MRRT campaign where the  Government had to seek an exemption? Or will it be in line with -    

 COMBET: No it’s not. And I think now for the 14 or 15 time, I’m emphasising that there will  be conformity within the Government Guidelines on Campaign Advertising.        

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) will you be involving an independent body which vets advertising  before you proceed?   

 COMBET: Correct and the Department has consulted with the independent committee  along the way to date, I’m advised. And the independent communications committee will  have its role under the guidelines properly applied if this advertising campaign proceeds.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, is there speculation (inaudible) the Government to defy the rule of  the Parliament on the issue of the Malaysian refugee swap?   

 COMBET: Look, we’ve got to finalise the policy formulation for that and I’m certainly  supportive of the, of the policy position. I think we all know the reality of the House of  Representatives make-up and from time to time there’s going to be decisions of this nature.  However, the Government is very committed to the policy and we’ll see it through.   

 ENDS   

