---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Australian Ambassador's residence Jakarta, Indonesia: 17 March 2011: co-operation between Australian Federal Police and Indonesian National Police; bombing in Jakarta"
date: "2011-03-17"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "co-operation between Australian Federal Police and Indonesian National Police"
  - "bombing in Jakarta"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211350655
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/658785%22
---

 

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS AND JUSTICE   

 

 TRANSCRIPT   

 

 

 E&OE PROOF ONLY   

 Doorstop at Australian Ambassador’s Residence   Jakarta, Indonesia  Thursday, 17 March 2011  Topics: Co-operation between Australian Federal Police and Indonesian National Police;  bombing in Jakarta    

 Minister: Well thanks for joining us today. I just wanted to make a number of opening  comments.     

 This has been a very important visit.  I have been accompanied by the Secretary of the Attorney  General’s Department and the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police and the People  Smuggling Ambassador. We have been discussing those concerns that Indonesia and Australia  share in dealing with transnational crimes. I have had the good fortune over the course of the last  two days to meet with the Foreign Minister and discuss our concerns about combating 

 transnational crimes.  I have also met with the Kapolri [Indonesian Chief of Police] yesterday  and was able to inspect the Cyber Crime Facility that’s being established with the resources of  Australia contributing to that important facility. I also met this morning with the Attorney  General and discussed with him the cooperation that’s required between our two countries to  fight transnational crime.    

 The one thing that’s clear is the Indonesian Government understands the evolving nature of  crime.  The fact is that crime is increasingly transnational, no longer recognising national borders  and indeed exponentially growing into transnational arrangements which make it more difficult  for law enforcement agencies in Australia, and indeed law enforcement agencies here and in  other countries, to prosecute those that are responsible for this criminal behaviour. But I believe  through the discussions today, through the close cooperation between the Australian Federal  Police and the Indonesian National Police, the close cooperation between other agencies, we are  seeing very effective work being done and that is of course a high priority for the Gillard  Government so I have been very pleased with the hospitality of the Indonesian Government, the  candour and constructive conversations I have had with various ministers and heads of agency,  and I believe as a result of this visit, the Australian Government is confident that our two  countries will continue to work together to combat shared concerns, in particular, terrorism and  transnational criminal behaviour that is certainly a national security threat to our country and  other countries in the region.   

 I am happy to take any questions.   

 Fairfax: While here you have also met with UNHCR representatives?   

 Minister: I did meet the representative of the UNHCR briefly last night but we are meeting him  again today. And of course we will be discussing with that organisation the very important role  they play in dealing with the management of people seeking asylum and making sure that we 

 comply with the Refugee Convention. As a signatory it is important that we do that, but also deal  with what is a global problem - deal with what the UNHCR recognise is about 45 million  displaced persons around the world, 15 million of whom it is deemed are refugees. And for that 

 reason, as signatory to the convention, Australia has a very important role working signatories to 

 

 

 that convention, working with countries of origin and transit in order to ensure that people don’t  profit from the exploitation of people that are seeking asylum and for that reason I will be  looking forward to discussing those issues with the representatives of the UNHCR today but we  are very much of the view that the role UNHCR plays is critical to the management of what is a  very difficult problem.    

 AAP: Is the UNHCR supportive of the idea of a refugee processing centre in East Timor?   

 Minister: Again I think you should direct those questions to the UNHCR but I do understand  that they agree firstly, that this is a very complex issue. The UNHCR also agree that there needs  to be regional solutions to regional problems.  They also agree there has to be ongoing dialogue  between or amongst countries of origin, transit and destination and indeed through the Bali  Process we look forward to continuing to develop the regional protection framework which I  believe will indeed be supported by the UNHCR. But I again say in terms of getting a specific  response to that question it would be good to direct that to matter to the UNHCR itself.   

 AAP: In terms of people smuggling, do you know of any progress made on extradition matters,  there are a number of people smugglers in Australia to be extradited.  Today I was told there has  been some progress made on the case of Said Abbass Azad.  Is it your hope that these people  smugglers will soon be extradited?   

 Minister: I can’t comment on applications that are before us or indeed any applications that we  make of any other countries seeking the extradition of persons for alleged criminal offences but I  can say that firstly, both governments work very closely on dealing with people smuggling issues  and crimes that are committed in attempting to lure people onto unseaworthy vessels, on perilous  journeys at sea which in many cases, too many cases, people perish at sea.  I can also say of  course that we have had successful extradition of people from Indonesia and indeed not that long  ago, sometime last year, we had a person extradited to Australia. That person was prosecuted and  jailed for criminal offences and I do thank the Indonesian Government for its assistance in  bringing that person to justice. So we will continue to work with the Indonesian Government on  human trafficking, people smuggling other transnational crimes and indeed wherever it is  suitable we will certainly assist in the extradition of those who have committed offences in  Indonesia or indeed in Australia and our close legal cooperation bodes well for the future in  terms of our efforts jointly.    

 AAP: Have you been able to share any intelligence on this trip with Indonesian authorities about  people smugglers or discuss with authorities about people smugglers that may still be in  operation that you are seeking the arrest of?    

 Minister: Our agencies work very closely together and it doesn’t require a minister as you can  imagine, to visit Jakarta to share information on crimes. The Australian Federal Police have a  very strong relationship with the Indonesian National Police and indeed share information in  order to successfully prosecute people who commit criminal offences.     

 It is also true that there is a great relationship between Customs and Border Protection and their  counterparts in Indonesia and it’s those relationships between agencies that ultimately lead to the  successful prosecution of people who commit criminal offences.    

 Fairfax: In terms of the effort here in Indonesia to combat people smuggling, is corruption a  problem and corrupt immigration officials - is that something hampering the effort?   

 Minister: Look I can only say that the Indonesian National Police have done a magnificent job  in responding to these criminal matters.  The fact is that they have established sixteen task forces 

 

 

 within the Indonesian National Police to focus on people smuggling matters.  They have worked  very closely with the AFP on dealing with other transnational crimes.    

 The visit yesterday to the cyber crime facility illustrates that the Indonesian National Police want  to ensure that they lead the way in the region working on these emerging threats to their country  and countries in the region. So I am very impressed with their efforts and I believe that they  work very hard to bring to justice those people who commit criminal offences.   

 AAP: Just on the East Timor Solution, do you have any converts [inaudible]..    

 Minister: The Australian Government are one on dealing with this matter and establishing a  regional protection framework through the Bali Process and indeed I’ve had discussions just  yesterday with the Indonesian Foreign Minister and he is looking forward to meeting Mr Rudd  and Mr Bowen at the Bali Process Conference held later this month.    

 The Foreign Minister here has made clear to me that he would like to see some progress on these  matters and I know that Minister Rudd and Minister Bowen are very focused on the need to get a  regional protection framework in place.     

 We need a regional solution for this regional problem. I believe the Indonesian Government  understands that.  The Australian Government understands that and has one voice on the matter.    

 Fairfax: How would you characterise the feedback from the Indonesians about the East Timor  Solution? Have you discussed that?   

 Minister: Well, because I was here primarily to discuss transnational crimes, and deal with  successful prosecutions of people who commit criminal offences, my focus has been on those  issues.  They are indeed the greatest threats to the citizens of this country and Australia and it is  for that reason my visit has really been focused upon what we can do in responding to terrorist  threats. Only two days ago we saw three threats that were made one resulting in serious injury to  a police officer here in his attempts to diffuse a bomb.   

 Again today, as I understand it, there has been another bomb sent to an entertainer in Indonesia,  in Jakarta, and this is a worrying trend and I want to make very clear that my efforts over the last  two days have been focused on these very important issues. How we combat terrorism, how we  deal with counter-radicalisation of home grown terrorists and indeed I think Australia has  something to learn from the way in which Indonesia has dealt with these issues. I did appreciate  the advice we received on those matters. How we deal with cyber crime and those other  emerging threats, I think these are the priorities of the Australian Government and that’s been  my focus.     

 In the broader sense, talking to the Foreign Minister about people smuggling, my discussions  went to the regional protection framework. The Foreign Minister was very positive in his view  on wanting to see progress on this matter. Through the process led by Indonesia, we pay tribute  to their efforts in establishing the mechanism by which we can see a proper framework in order  to tackle this very complex issue.   

 AAP: What about the bombs; in fact one of those bombs was found at one of the locations you  were due to visit last night. Were you told by any of the Indonesian authorities that they share  your concerns about these threats?    

 Minister: Well, they have responded very effectively to these threats and I acknowledge their  efforts in successfully confronting and dealing with these threats.  I also extend my sympathies  to the injured officers and in particular the one that was seriously injured and I hope he has a 

 

 

 speedy recovery. But these issues that arose over the last two days underlines the constant threat  of terrorism for Indonesia and Australia and that is why we need to work very closely.   

 Our two law enforcement agencies, our intelligence agencies working on mitigating against the  threats that exist.    

 AAP: I checked yesterday the Smart Traveller had not been updated in relation to these threats -  is that something that needs to be done?   

 Minister: Well I haven’t checked out that website.  I was informed immediately and I know of  course that we send out advisory notes to citizens when there are threats and I believe that we do  that in a speedy fashion and of course if there are any threats people should be informed so that  they do not place themselves at harm.   

 Thanks very much.    

 

 

 

