---
title: "Draft legislation to combat people trafficking and slavery, boat arrivals, offshore processing, community detention onshore processing, Nauru"
date: "2011-11-23"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211364643
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1380215%22
---

 Search this site   Go  

 Home

 Biographical details

 Media Centre

 Contact details

 Department

 Parliamentary  Secretary

 Links  

 

 Draft legislation to combat people  trafficking and slavery, boat  arrivals, offshore processing,  community detention, onshore  processing, Nauru Wednesday, 23 November 2011

 Doorstop Interview, Parliament House,  Canberra

 Chris Bowen: I will briefly say a few words on what Kate  and I have done this morning. It's a pleasure to be here with  Kate Ellis, the Minister for the Status of Women, and of  course apologies from Brendan O'Connor, the Minister for  Home Affairs, who has been delayed in the House.

 Today, of course, we've been participating in the Fourth  Annual Roundtable on Human Trafficking. Human  trafficking is a significant problem; it's a problem which  doesn't get the public attention it deserves. These are  people who are having their innocence, their childhood, and  in some cases, their lives taken away from them. It's  important, of course, that we keep the focus on human  trafficking, which of course emphasises its effects on the  most vulnerable members of our community, women and  children in particular. Around the world, governments must  do more to deal with human trafficking and certainly we are 

 doing so.

 Today Kate, Brendan and I are announcing a series of  legislative reforms that are being released in draft form  today to make the law crystal clear, beyond doubt that  forced labour, forced marriage, involvement in human 

 trafficking is regarded as a serious crime in Australia and  will be dealt with accordingly. This legislation is out for  consultation in terms of its detail, but nobody should  underestimate the government's intention and 

 Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 1 of 8 Draft legislation to combat people trafficking and slavery, boat arrivals, ...

 30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180543.htm

 determination to make sure that we do everything possible  to stamp out exploitation, whether it be forced labour in the  construction industry, whether it be forced prostitution,  whatever it may be, these are serious issues which this  government is determined to tackle.

 Kate, did you want to say something in introduction?

 Kate Ellis: And it's encouraging to see such interest in the  important issue of human trafficking here this morning. I  would just say that none of us like to believe that slavery  continues to exist and we most certainly don't like to believe  that it exists and exists in Australia.

 But sadly, that is the truth and we are now seeing an  increase in the patterns of the victims of trafficking amongst  Australia, but we're also seeing a change in those patterns.  Whilst predominately we've seen women being trafficked to  Australia to work in the sex industry, we know that this is  expanding. We are seeing increasing numbers of men  trafficked to work in forced labour and we're also now  finding clients who are children and we have one client as  young as 16.

 Now this is clearly a serious issue, it's an issue which the  Australian community needs to be well aware of, but it's  also an issue where we need the most robust legal  framework possible to ensure that we have every  opportunity to prosecute those who have committed these  most disgraceful of crimes.

 Importantly, the draft legislation which we're releasing today  on slavery and slavery-like offences tightens up the  legislation when it comes to the trafficking of humans. It  also makes it a specific offence to harbour those who have  been trafficked, and importantly we are also now creating a  new offence when it comes to forced marriage. Now, we  know that it is an important right that people have the right  to enter into a marriage freely and to choose who it is that  they will marry going forward.

 So these are really important developments and we'd like to  thank all of those community workers who joined with us  today, who worked so hard in partnership to make sure that  we can stamp out trafficking in Australia, that we can do 

 better to find people who have been trafficked, that we can 

 Page 2 of 8 Draft legislation to combat people trafficking and slavery, boat arrivals, ...

 30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180543.htm

 do better to raise awareness and that we can make sure  that all hands are on deck to end modern-day slavery.

 Bowen: We're happy to take questions.

 Journalist: Do you have any sort of numbers on how big a  problem forced marriage is currently?

 Bowen: Well, in relation to human trafficking generally—I'll  get to forced marriage—for example, in the last financial  year we've issued various types of visas, but we're looking  at about 80 visas that have been issued in Australia to  victims of human trafficking. That would cut across the  entire gamut of marriage, of slavery, whether it be sexual or  otherwise.

 In relation to forced marriage, of course this is an issue  which cuts both ways.: it's not only people coming to  Australia, it is equally and if not more so, people leaving  Australia and going to other countries to enter into 

 marriages which they are not entering into of their own free  will. It's difficult to put a figure on it. We have detected some  cases and there have been some successful prosecutions,  but it is of course by its nature an offence which is difficult  to detect. But even if it's one or two, it's a serious enough  issue considering the impact on that person's life for the  government to pay it the necessary attention.

 Journalist: With the student visa figures you released, can  you give us an idea of how many student visas there are in  Australia right now [inaudible]?

 Bowen: Sure. As we speak today, there's 363 000  international students in Australia. If you look at the period  over the last 16 years, there'll be hundreds of thousands or  more international students who've come to Australia. So I  made the point inside that the number of international  students who we've detected as having been involved in the  sex industry is tiny as a proportion of the total number of  people who would have studied in Australia over that time.

 Nevertheless, as I said in relation to forced marriage, even  a small number is an issue of concern, if it is an indication  of trafficking, or an indication of people being involved  against their will, or people having been issued a student  visa under false pretences. That's why we're doing the 

 Page 3 of 8 Draft legislation to combat people trafficking and slavery, boat arrivals, ...

 30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180543.htm

 further work, the further study and analysis to determine  just how much of an issue it is.

 Journalist: With the forced marriage, would that cover  arranged marriages too, where the bride may not be willing  but the purpose isn't exploitation?

 Bowen: Yes, it's any marriage where the bride or the  groom for that matter is entering into it against their will. It  may be that there is duress involved, so obviously there's a  process for them to be involved, but they are doing it not of  their own free will, either with duress or with some other  mechanism forcing them into it.

 Journalist: Minister, given another boat arrived yesterday,  the Opposition says that the offshore processing policy  needs to be revised before Parliament rises. Are you 

 expecting more boat arrivals over the summer break if this  is not dealt with?

 Bowen: Let me make a few points. Firstly, when Tony  Abbott and Scott Morrison announced that they would not  support the legislation for offshore processing, we predicted  and warned there would be more boat arrivals.

 If the Opposition is saying today that they want to see  offshore processing revived, good, let them vote for it in the  House of Representatives. If the Opposition wants to see  offshore processing, we want to see offshore processing;  the only difference is we're prepared to vote for it. The  Opposition have said they will oppose offshore processing if  it was introduced into the Parliament.

 Now, any complaints by Scott Morrison or Tony Abbott  about boat arrivals are hollow words. They have an  opportunity to introduce and to approve what is an  arrangement which all the expert advice says would break  the people smugglers' business model. They have made a  political decision, a calculation, that it is not in their political  interest to see boat arrivals in Australia stop. And therefore,  anything they say is a hollow complaint because they won't  vote for the legislation which would allow us and allow  them, if they were to form a government, to implement  offshore processing. Therefore, their comments today are  nothing more than hypocrisy.

 Page 4 of 8 Draft legislation to combat people trafficking and slavery, boat arrivals, ...

 30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180543.htm

 Journalist: What about their legislation, that you could  support and therefore have offshore processing?

 Bowen: Our legislation allows for their policy and allows for  our policy. Mr Abbott says you can have any type of  offshore processing you like, provided it's his type of  offshore processing. We say, as the government of the day,  we want to implement the policy that all the experts tell us is  the most effective way of breaking the people smugglers'  business model.

 Now, what we're seeing, frankly, is Tony Abbott's addiction  to saying 'no'. He says 'no' to any sensible suggestion  because he makes a calculation that's what's in his political 

 interest. Now, if he won't act in the national interest when  he's leader of the Opposition, what hope do we have that  he'll act in the national interest if he were ever Prime  Minister?

 Journalist: Are you expecting the boats that are going to  be arriving to have a lot more people on board?

 Bowen: Well, look, we have seen large boats arriving,  boats with large numbers of people on them. I don't  comment or predict in relation to intelligence, but we have  seen that occurring.

 I think very clearly, as the Prime Minister and I said on the  day that Tony Abbott announced he would not support  legislation, we can predict more people arriving in Australia  by boat. Whether that's small boats or big boats is  something that will play out. But we can predict more  people arriving in Australia by boat because Tony Abbott is  putting politics before the national interest.

 Journalist: Minister, you're in government and these boats  are still coming. Has the government lost control of our  borders?

 Bowen: We have a clear policy. It's a policy that we have  articulated very clearly: that is, we support a regional  framework, we support offshore processing as part of that  regional framework. We need the approval of the  Parliament to implement it.

 Mr Abbott could have offshore processing this afternoon if  he would actually vote for the policy he says he believes in, 

 Page 5 of 8 Draft legislation to combat people trafficking and slavery, boat arrivals, ...

 30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180543.htm

 which is offshore processing. We are operating in a  parliamentary system in which we need the approval of the  Parliament. We're prepared to vote for this at any time of Mr  Abbott's choosing. All Mr Abbott's got to do is pick up the 

 phone, call the Prime Minister and say he's changed his  mind, he'll vote for the policy that he says he believes in.

 Journalist: Have any asylum seekers been moved into  community detention as a result of these latest arrivals?

 Bowen: Well, we've had a community detention program  now for over 12 months.

 Journalist: But is Christmas Island packed? Is it full? Has it  reached capacity?

 Bowen: Let's just deal with this issue by issue. A little over  12 months ago, I announced a community detention  program. Since then, I've approved over 2000 people  moving into the community, with a focus on families and  children.

 I've also announced more recently the use of bridging visas.  I'll provide further updates on that in the coming period. We  do have some spare capacity in our detention network. We  move people off Christmas Island regularly as a matter of  course in terms of our management of the detention  network. But we do have some spare capacity.

 At the same time, I've indicated we'll continue to use  community detention, as we have done over the last 12  months, and we'll also use bridging visas where  appropriate. I'll provide further implementation updates in 

 due course.

 Journalist: Just on the people trafficking legislation, how  does this reflect other legislation in different countries  around the world?

 Bowen: Well, look, every country has its own approach— Kate may wish to add—but every country has its own  approach. For example, the United States Department of  State provides an annual report, which marks countries'  determinations. Australia has always scored well on that.  But there's always room for improvement.

 Page 6 of 8 Draft legislation to combat people trafficking and slavery, boat arrivals, ...

 30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180543.htm

 You'd need to compare our legislation with likeminded  countries, but we've identified this as a deficiency in relation  to our own legislation. Some countries would have 

 legislation which has similar deficiencies; other countries  would have dealt with this deficiency as well.

 Do you want to add anything to that?

 Ellis: Well, I'd just say that this is an issue which remains  very hidden in Australia. There is a much greater  awareness in some other nations. But we've made very  clear that we intend to do everything we can as a  government and that's why this is the Fourth National  Roundtable we've had. Every year we've strengthened the  protections that we've got in place. We've put in place more  support programs for those that we find and the release of  this draft legislation is the next stage in making sure that  we've got the toughest laws possible as well.

 Journalist: Minister, it appears Tony Abbott's not going to  budge on this. The boats are still coming. Is it time for a  Plan B?

 Bowen: Well, look, we have a Plan A and we want to  implement our Plan A.

 Journalist: [inaudible]

 Bowen: Well, the government of the day should be able to  implement its plan, its Plan A, which is the plan which every  expert has told us would stop boats arriving in Australia,  would break the people smugglers' business model.

 Now, if Mr Abbott has a view that we should have offshore  processing, I don't think it's too much for the government to  ask that he vote for it. We will continue to argue for our  policy. We will not implement a policy which we do not  believe will work, will cost a billion dollars over four years  and will not break the people smugglers' business model.

 Now, if Mr Abbott wants to do that were he ever Prime  Minister, we believe he should have the right to do that.  That's why we have legislation which would give him the  right to do that. But we also believe we should have the  ability to implement our policies that we've worked on,  which we believe would work.

 Page 7 of 8 Draft legislation to combat people trafficking and slavery, boat arrivals, ...

 30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180543.htm

 Journalist: Wouldn't it be better to have a policy that's  slightly less effective than no policy at all?

 Bowen: Well, it would not be better to have a policy which  would cost a billion dollars of taxpayers' money, which  would see people who are processed on Nauru—which is  what I assume you're referring to—transferred to Australia  when they're found to be genuine refugees.

 I mean, if Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison think their policy  would break the people smugglers' business model, here's  a challenge to them: today come out and tell us where  people who are processed on Nauru would be resettled.  Which countries have they made arrangements with?  Which countries would see people processed on Nauru and  then resettled to them? Last time, we saw over 90 per cent  of people processed on Nauru who were found to be  refugees resettled in Australia or New Zealand.

 Unless Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison can today tell us  which countries they would resettle people in, then the  Australian people and even more importantly the people  smugglers and asylum seekers could assume that they  would be resettled in Australia and therefore they have not  broken the people smugglers' business model and they've  spent a billion dollars of taxpayers' money as part of the  process.

 We will not be embracing or implementing policies which  will not work. Thanks very much, ladies and gentlemen.

 See: Index of Speeches

 URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180543.htm  Last update: Wednesday, 23 November 2011 at 17:03  AEST 

 Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 8 of 8 Draft legislation to combat people trafficking and slavery, boat arrivals, ...

 30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180543.htm

