---
title: "Matter of public importance: speech, Canberra"
date: "2011-09-20"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Migration Legislation Amendment (Offshore Processing and Other Measures) Bill 2011"
  - "Regional processing"
  - "Refugee boat movements"
  - "Liberal Nationals Coalition policy"
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "GILLARD, Julia"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Bills"
  - "Legislative amendments"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211360618
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1258556%22
---

 Home About Tony Warringah Pollie Pedal Latest News Useful Links E-newsletter Contact Tony

 Latest News  Speeches  

 Speeches 

 Current Articles | Archives | Search   

 Matter of Public Importance, Parliament House,  Canberra   Posted on Tuesday, 20 September 2011 

 E&OE……………………….  …………………………………………………………………    

 Well, Mr Speaker, we’ve seen from the Prime Minister in the parliament  earlier today we’ve seen anger, we’ve seen frustration, we’ve see  vituperation, we’ve seen thwarted pride. Mr Speaker, I respectfully  suggest to the Prime Minister that she should be directing her  frustration to the failures of her Government and herself. That’s who  she should be directing her frustration towards, not towards an  Opposition which has a proven record of success when it comes to  border protection in this country. Mr Speaker, this is a Government, it’s  a Government which closed down offshore processing in February  2008, it’s a Government which hasn’t been able to restart offshore  processing for the best part of 15 months and now it says that the real  enemies of offshore processing are the people who invented offshore  processing and who have been in favour of it all along. Well, I say, Mr  Deputy Speaker, this Prime Minister should not project her faults and  her failings onto others. It is a serious psychological weakness in this  Prime Minister.    

 Mr Deputy Speaker, let the house take note of the facts. The facts are  that the Coalition under the leadership of the former prime minister Mr  Howard, we found a border protection problem and we created a  solution. It wasn’t easy, it took time, it took very unpopular decision  making, but we found a problem and we created a solution. What this  Government did; it found a solution and it created a problem. The  current problem, Mr Deputy Speaker, is all this Government’s own  work. Let the record show that the problem that we have now on our  borders is all because this Government gave the people smugglers a  business model. They didn’t have one for the best part of eight years  and this Government gave it back to them, this Government gave it  back to them, this Government has caused the problem that this  country now faces.     

 Now, Mr Speaker, this Coalition has been utterly and absolutely  consistent for a decade. There is a solution to the problem of border  protection. There is a solution to the problem of people smugglers and  it involves three essential ingredients. It involves offshore processing at  Nauru, it involves temporary protection visas and it involves keeping  the option of turning boats around where that safely can be done. Mr  Speaker, that solution that the former government put in place, it  worked. It worked. From 2002 to 2007 there were fewer than three  boats a year. Since that solution was unravelled by the current  Government there have been almost two boats a week.     

 The Prime Minister says that she has expert advice that the Malaysian  option, the Malaysian people-swap is the only option that will work.  Well, Mr Deputy Speaker, there are 1,000 boat arrivals that say she’s  wrong. 1,000 boat arrivals since it was announced that say she’s  wrong and 400 illegal arrivals by boat since it was signed that say  she’s wrong. By contrast, Mr Deputy Speaker, the lack of arrivals under  the Coalition’s policy shows that it’s right. Now, Mr Speaker, what we  have seen is a desperate and floundering government, a desperate  and floundering government because it is too proud and too stubborn 

 Latest News    Ã‘ Interview Transcripts   Ã‘ Press Releases   Ã‘ Articles written by Tony   Ã‘ Speeches   Ã‘ Video   Ã‘ Blog  

  

    Search this site  

  Page 1 of 3 Matter of Public Importance, Parliament House, Canberra > ...

  28/11/2011 http://www.tonyabbott.com.au/LatestNews/Speeches/tabid/8...

  to admit that the Coalition has it right. Too proud and too stubborn to  admit that John Howard had it right.     

  So ever since the beginning of 2009 they have been desperately  floundering around for some kind of policy of their own. Last year they  brought in the freeze, the processing freeze, on people from certain  countries rightly described by my colleague, the Shadow Minister, as  the most discriminatory immigration policy since White Australia. Then  they brought in the so-called East Timor solution which they hadn’t  even discussed with the East Timor Government. Then they  announced the Manus solution which they hadn’t discussed with the  right people in the PNG Government. Finally, Mr Speaker, back in May  we had the Malaysian people-swap. Well, Mr Speaker, they could have  had offshore processing at any time. This Government could have had  offshore processing at any time in the last 12 or 15 months. They could  have had it whenever they wanted. All they needed to do was to pick  up the phone to the President of Nauru and it didn’t happen because of  the pride and the stubbornness of this Prime Minister, the pride and the  stubbornness of a Government which didn’t have the magnanimity to  leave well enough alone. That’s the truth, Mr Speaker. That’s the truth.     

  Now, Mr Speaker, let’s go through the Prime Minister’s own  inconsistencies on this whole question of border protection. On every  single element of policy whether it be turning boats around, whether it  be temporary protection visas or whether it be offshore processing this  is a Prime Minister who has had every position and no position, every  position and no position, Mr Deputy Speaker. In 2002 she said it was  right to turn boats around. Then in 2010 she said it was disgraceful to  turn boats around. Now she says it’s alright to turn boats around as  long as it’s a virtual turnaround through Malaysia.   

  Mr Speaker, back in 2002 she said that temporary protection visas are  a good thing. Now she says that temporary protection visas are an  almost diabolical thing. Mr Speaker, she once said, repeatedly the  Prime Minister said, that offshore processing, the Pacific Solution, was  and I quote, “costly, unsustainable and wrong in principle.” Now not  only has she done a 180 degrees, she’s accusing the people who have  a patent on offshore processing, a patent on offshore processing, the  inventors of offshore processing of somehow being against something  that we have always been for and have always been prepared to  facilitate. Then of course, Mr Speaker, we have the Prime Minister’s  attitude towards countries that have or haven’t signed the UN refugee  convention. Oh yes, oh yes, this is what is gnawing at the consciences  of members opposite. This is what is eating at what’s left of the  consciences of members opposite. We had the Prime Minister say “I  would rule out any countries that are not signatories to the UN  convention” a commitment now as notorious as her commitment  that “there will be no carbon tax under the government I lead” and just  as much betrayed.     

  But let’s not just focus on the Prime Minister. I remind the Minister at  the table, I remind the Minister at the table what he said not very long  ago, not very long ago at all, hardly a year ago and I quote, “now from  our point of view we’ve said that the regional processing centre would  need to be for the sake of decency, for the sake of decency in a  country which is a signatory to the refugee convention.” Now let me…  this is a very important statement Mr Speaker. I want to repeat this. I  can understand why he wants to resign because let me repeat, “from  our point of view we’ve said that the regional processing centre would  need to be for the sake of decency in a country which is a signatory to  the refugee convention.”     

  Well, Mr Speaker, no wonder this is a Government which is dying of  shame. No wonder this is a Government which is dying of shame. No  wonder members opposite, left wing members of the caucus, left  Question Time today rather than listen to the stuff they were getting  from the Prime Minister. I say to the Minister at the table, how do you  justify now doing that which you said for the sake of decency you  would not do? You would not do? Now, we have the Minister at the 

  table trying to throw this back at us. Now, I know the Minister at the  table, when he’s in trouble he lifts the volume. When he’s in trouble he  lifts the velocity so you can hardly hear in the torrent of words that this  Minister gives us that I would respectfully, politely, genuinely ask the  Minister, how does he justify what he is doing with what he has always  said in the past? You owe it to this parliament; you owe it to the  Australian people to give us an answer.     

  Now, Mr Speaker, this Coalition has been entirely consistent for the  last ten years. Absolutely and entirely consistent at every point over the  last decade we have supported Nauru, temporary protection visas and  turning boats around where it can safely be done. The only position  that this Prime Minister hasn’t had is the one that works. The only  position she hasn’t had, and she’s had a few Mr Deputy Speaker, the  only position she hasn’t had is the one that works and, Mr Speaker,  this is a Prime Minister who stands for everything. She stands for  everything because she believes in nothing. She believes in absolutely  nothing at all and that is what we have seen repeatedly from this  Government on this particular issue.  

  Page 2 of 3 Matter of Public Importance, Parliament House, Canberra > ...

  28/11/2011 http://www.tonyabbott.com.au/LatestNews/Speeches/tabid/8...

  

  Now Mr Speaker, lest there be any doubt let it be clear in this Chamber  that last Friday, late in the day in Melbourne, my senior colleagues and  I were given the Government’s preferred legislative arrangements.  Those legislative arrangements completely stripped out the human  rights protections that the Howard Government had deliberately and  self-consciously built into the Migration Act where offshore processing  was concerned. That’s what they did. This Minister, this Prime Minister  who once said that as a matter of decency there had to be protections,  had completely stripped them out of the legislative amendments that  they gave to us on Friday. That wasn’t offshore processing, Mr Deputy  Speaker, it was offshore dumping. That’s what it was and Mr Speaker,  my colleagues and I were very honest with those officials. We said that  our reaction to what the Government proposed was that it was a  serious detraction from human rights. That’s what we said and when I  went into see the Prime Minister on Monday I said we will give your bill  a second reading but we will move amendments to it because we  believe as it stands it betrays the human rights standards which a  decent country like Australia should always observe, which the  Coalition has always believed in.     

  Then what did the Prime Minister do? Oh, the policy that I put to you on  Friday hasn’t even survived the weekend. We now have a new policy,  the new policy writes back in those standards but doesn’t make them  compulsory. These are the Claytons obligations, the obligations you  have when you don’t have any obligations. Well, Mr Speaker, even  then, even then we went to probably the best lawyer in this country on  these issues, the former Solicitor-General David Bennett QC. We didn’t  reject the Government’s proposals out of hand. We went to David 

  Bennett QC, we got his opinion. His opinion is that the Government’s  proposals - both of them - continue legal risk but strip out protections.  By contrast our proposal, as far as is humanly possible in this uncertain  world, restores certainty, restores the ability of the executive  government to make these decisions but does so in a way which is  entirely consistent with human rights protections. What this  Government has done, it’s paid lip service to human rights protections  without guaranteeing them. That is the disgrace of this Government.  That is why they had such a fractious caucus meeting today. This is  why this Government is now so totally ashamed of itself because it has  betrayed every principal which it has ever claimed to believe in.    

  Mr Deputy Speaker, we have a report today, the Left of the party,  quoting one of the Left caucus spokesman, the Left of the party does  not believe we should go back to Howard era politics. Well, they’ve  done something which is far worse. The Howard Government would  never have done what they are now attempting to do and Mr Speaker,  this is a Prime Minister, this is the Prime Minister who now expects the  Opposition to rescue her from the disastrous position that she has put  herself into because of her own failures of principle. Well, I say if she  can’t get a majority in the parliament she has options available to her.  A Government which has lost control of our borders does not deserve  to stay in office.     

  [ends]     

  Home 

  About Tony 

  Pollie Pedal  

  Useful Links  

  E-newsletter 

  Site by Datasearch Web Design 

  Login 

  Warringah 

  Warringah Electorate Profile  

  Map of Warringah 

  Local Newsletters 

  Walking in Warringah 

  Photos 

  Warringah Newsletters 

  Take our Local Survey

  Latest News  

  Interview Transcripts 

  Press Releases 

  Articles written by Tony 

  Speeches 

  Video 

  Blog 

  Privacy Policy & Disclaimer 

  Accessibility Policy

  Contact Tony 

  Leader of The Opposition 

  Parliament House, RG109 

  Canberra ACT 2600 

  Phone: (02) 6277 4022 

  Federal Member for Warringah 

  Level 2, 17 Sydney Rd 

  MANLY NSW 2095 

  Phone: (02) 9977 6411 

  © Tony Abbott MHR 2010 | Authorised by Tony Abbott MHR, Level 2, 17 Sydney Rd, Manly NSW 2095

  Page 3 of 3 Matter of Public Importance, Parliament House, Canberra > ...

  28/11/2011 http://www.tonyabbott.com.au/LatestNews/Speeches/tabid/8...

