---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Perth: 14 May 2011: Galaxy Poll; Federal Budget; border protection"
date: "2011-05-14"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "Office of BISHOP, JULIE, MP"
subjects:
  - "Galaxy Poll"
  - "Federal Budget"
  - "border protection"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211352968
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/915316%22
---

 Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade   

 

 Doorstop interview, Perth 

 Saturday, 14 May 2011 

 Subjects: Galaxy Poll; Federal Budget; border protection 

 E&OE… 

 JOURNALIST    The Galaxy Poll shows some pretty bad results for Labor’s Budget this  week? 

 JULIE BISHOP    This is the feedback that the Opposition is receiving from the public.  They are saying it is a poor Budget, more focused on keeping the Greens and the  Independents on side to stay in power than focusing on cost of living increases and keeping  pressure off interest rates.  

 People are saying it is a bad Budget because it takes $2 billion off families but puts in about  $2 billion to cover Labor’s incompetence in the detention centre blow-out costs and border  protection. 

 It is a dishonest Budget because it doesn’t include the impact of the carbon tax, the cost of  jobs, the loss of investments and compensation the Government has to pay. And they say that  it is just not believable because the Government doesn’t believe its own Budget. 

 It is trying to increase the credit card limit. The Government wants to increase the debt limit  by another $50 billion so even the Government doesn’t believe that it can rein in its wasteful  spending. 

 JOURNALIST    What do you think about the fact that 60 per cent of older of Australians  that were done in this Poll didn’t even want the set top boxes, they don’t think it is a good  idea? 

 JULIE BISHOP    This Government can’t be trusted to even give away free insulation.  There is no way people would trust them to come into their homes to install a set top box, an  overpriced set top box. The Government has got form, people don’t trust them. 

 JOURNALIST    Even some Labor voters, quite a few Labor voters that were polled as well,  didn’t support the Budget so its not just Liberal voters. 

 JULIE BISHOP    The Budget has been poorly received across the country. It is more  focused on keep the Greens and the Independents on side than it is on focusing on the 

 increasing costs of living and taking pressure off interest rates. It is more focused on having  to pay for the blow out in detention centre and asylum seeker costs than it is in providing  support for families. 

 JOURNALIST    There was another boatload of asylum seekers which was picked up and is  being taken to Christmas Island and then taken to, we believe, another country either  Malaysia or Papua New Guinea. What do you think about that? 

 JULIE BISHOP    It is business as usual for the people smugglers. There is no arrangement  in place to take these boat people to Manus Island or Malaysia or East Timor or anywhere  else. They will come to Christmas Island; they are more than likely to end up in Australia.  There is no other arrangement in place at this time. 

