---
title: "Transcript of interview: Press Conference, Canberra : 08 September 2011: Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court case"
date: "2011-08-08"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Malaysia transfer arrangement"
  - "High Court case"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211358545
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1120548%22
---

 Search this site   Go  

 Home

 Biographical details

 Media Centre

 Contact details

 Department

 Parliamentary  Secretary

 Links  

 

 Malaysia transfer arrangement,  High Court case Monday, 08 August 2011

 Press Conference, Canberra

 Chris Bowen: Good evening. I said on the 7th of May  when I announced with the Prime Minister in this room, that  Malaysia and Australia had reached in-principle agreement  for a transfer of asylum seekers, that we could expect  resistance, protest and legal challenge.

 I said at that time that nobody should doubt our resolve. I  say that again today. As you know, the government's of  Australia and Malaysia have been working very hard to  implement the arrangement that was announced on May 7.  A lot of work has been done, transit centres are operational  and the first transfer was due to occur this morning. Justice  Hayne today extended an injunction preventing that transfer  to August 22nd. This is an interim injunction, this is not a  finding, this is not a legal outcome. This is a decision that a  case should be heard and a transfer should not occur while  that case is being heard.

 This does not indicate in any way the outcome of the case.  Now I'm not going to comment specifically on the matters  traversed in the court case today. To do so, for a minister to  do so, would be inappropriate. Suffice it to say that our legal  advice remains the same as it has been all the way  through. The Commonwealth Government is on very strong  legal grounds. Very strong legal grounds in this case. We 

 will vigorously argue in the full bench hearing that this  agreement meets not only our domestic legal requirements,  but our international obligations. As you might be aware,  the Solicitor General has reserved the right to seek a more  urgent hearing - something the Commonwealth will  consider.

 Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 1 of 9 Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court case

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169899.htm

 Our resolve remains undiminished, because breaking the  business model of the people smugglers remains important.  Stopping people smugglers selling passage to Australia on  leaky boats like the one which smashed against the rocks  on Christmas Island last December, remains important.  Giving 4000 individuals the chance of a better life in  Australia - 4000 people who cant afford a people smuggler,  or don't want to risk their family's life on a boat, remains  important. The government's commitment to implementing,  delivering and honouring that commitment remains  important and undiminished.

 I'm confident that when the full bench considers the case,  the injunction will be lifted, the transfer will occur and the  arrangement will be implemented. My message to people  contemplating the dangerous journey to Australia remains 

 the same: don't.

 The option of being processed and resettled in Australia is  not one the government is supplying - not today, not  tomorrow, not in the future. To all watching, whether they  be a people smuggler, whether they be an asylum seeker,  or an Australian citizen who's interested: the Australian  Government's commitment to implementing this  arrangement remains rock solid. We intend to implement it,  we implement to argue it in the High Court and we intend to  make it very clear that the people smugglers can no longer  sell their product, and that people in Malaysia and  elsewhere who are contemplating seeking a better life in  Australia, can do so through the normal channels of the  UNCHR and maximise their chances.

 Now I'm happy to answer some questions. Obviously,  because there is a court case underway, as I said earlier,  as a government minister there will be some questions that  I will not answer, in terms of specifics. But I'll do my best to  answer as many of your questions as I can. Mr Coorey -Journalist: Mr Bowen, you say anticipated a legal  challenge from the outset, but were you under prepared for  it?

 Bowen: No. We had prepared with the Solicitor General  extensively for legal challenges and the potential basis that  they could be made and of course we are confident, as I  say, we remain confident in our prospects. Mr Kenny

 Page 2 of 9 Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court case

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169899.htm

 Journalist: Mr Bowen can you confirm that (inaudible) of  the claim in that injunction, that all of those things are  matters that you considered. And did your legal advice  contemplate it?

 Bowen: Our legal advice was very comprehensive indeed.  Mr Marr

 Journalist: If you were prepared for it, if you were  expecting a legal challenge, and if you were prepared for a  legal challenge, why was the Crown unable to present an  affidavit to the court until half way through hearing this  afternoon, something that enraged the judge?

 Bowen: I'm not going to comment on the specifics other  than to say that the Australian Government Solicitor is a  very professional organisation and I'm not going to  comment on the specifics of paperwork issues before the  court. That was dealt with by the Solicitor General before  his honour.

 Journalist: Mr Bowen are you disappointed that the  (inaudible) for the Commonwealth indicated today that  wanted it to be heard next week instead of in two weeks  time, because it would send the wrong signal to people  smugglers? Are you worried about that and are you  disappointed that it's not happening?

 Bowen: I do think it would be better if the case were heard  as urgently as possible. As I said, the Commonwealth is  considering its options for seeking a more urgent hearing  because I think any uncertainty around this issue of course  has the danger of playing into people smugglers hands and  so we are contemplating seeking a more urgent hearing.

 Journalist: Two questions. Does this affect the  arrangement with Malaysia? And obviously the injunctions  the plaintiff mentioned in the case. What will happen to the  people who come to Christmas Island, in the mean time  between this and when their cases are heard.

 Bowen: Can I just get you to clarify the first question, what  you mean 'Does it affect the arrangement with Malaysia'?

 Journalist: Well, is it going to stop people coming out from  Malaysia? What happens to people who are (inaudible)

 Page 3 of 9 Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court case

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169899.htm

 Bowen: Right, well we're committed to implementing the  arrangement in total and we'll continue to implement the  arrangement and make all preparations including 

 processing the people making their way to Australia. It  would be unfair in the current circumstances - you saw a  young family for example, in the media on Sunday, the first  of our 4000 resettlement - I'm not going to put those 

 people's lives on hold, they'll continue to be processed. In  terms of the people on Christmas Island, we'll continue with  the preparations for transfers to Malaysia. They will be told 

 that they can work on the basis that they will continue to be  transferred to Malaysia. Of course we respect the court's  findings, we will not transfer them. We will respect the 

 interim injunction, but all the necessary preparation and  work will continue.

 Journalist: Sorry, what about the ones that will come  between now and when the judgement is made, so a boat  arriving tomorrow or next week? What happens to those  people?

 Bowen: Those people should work on the basis that they  will be transferred to Malaysia.

 Journalist: They won't be transferred until the court  hearing?

 Bowen: We will respect the spirit and - the letter and the  spirit of the court's judgement today. Ms Grattan

 Journalist: If your advice was so solid that everything was  ‘ridgey didge', are you surprised that these injunctions have  been first granted and then the injunction extended?

 Bowen: Look, I think courts, when it comes to injunctions,  do err on the side of letting cases be heard. I'm not going  to, again, comment on the specifics. I think that it is well  known that, you know, that judges traditionally, err the side  of cases, letting cases be heard, for obvious reasons. Ms  Kirk

 Journalist: You're the unaccompanied minors' legal  guardian. How can it ever be seen to be in their best  interest, which is what your responsibility is to protect, to  send them to Malaysia.

 Page 4 of 9 Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court case

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169899.htm

 Bowen: My obligations as the guardian of unaccompanied  minors are important and they go to ensuring that their best  interests are considered. I also, as minister, have 

 responsibility to ensure that the best interests of, in my  view, unaccompanied minors in Malaysia are considered  and that those people have a chance for resettlement in 

 Australia and it is in nobody's best interest, nobody's best  interest, to be told that the best way to get resettled into  Australia is to take a dangerous boat journey to Australia. It  is also my responsibility and obligation, in my view, to  ensure appropriate support and protection for all, including  in the arrangements we've put in place in Malaysia, which  I've been very, working very hard to do.

 Journalist: How do you reconcile the difference then  between the responsibility to those unaccompanied minor  asylum seekers and all of your other interests if there are  conflicts?

 Bowen: Well, as I say, I have, as minister, I have acquitted  my responsibilities in my view to ensure we have the  appropriate policy settings in place. That we have, as I have  said repeatedly, appropriate case-by-case assessment of  the vulnerabilities of minors, and that goes to the decision  about whether to transfer, and if transfer occurs the support  and protection that should be in place. It is also completely  appropriate and important, as I have said more times than I  care to remember, that blanket exemptions would send all  the wrong messages and encourage children onto boats,  encourage people smugglers to target children, and  encourage families to put their children onto boats -  something that, to me, is not morally acceptable.

 Journalist: Have you ever rejected the claims of  unaccompanied minors? Have you ever rejected their  asylum claims and sent and rejected the asylum claim  (inaudible)?

 Bowen: Well, asylum claims are dealt with on a case by  case basis. If an asylum claim is not made out, if the claim  is rejected, including for an unaccompanied minor, then of  course we've put appropriate steps in place. For example -Journalist: But has that ever happened?

 Bowen: Well, just a moment, Alex. For example earlier this  year Australia signed a Memorandum of Understanding 

 Page 5 of 9 Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court case

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169899.htm

 with Afghanistan and the UNHCR for return of unsuccessful  asylum seekers and that included unaccompanied minors,  as is appropriate. It also had a range of support  mechanisms in place, as is appropriate. I think Ms Grattan  had another question.

 Journalist: What is the (inaudible) with the unaccompanied  minors?

 Bowen: Their processing, their pre-transfer processing  continues. Vulnerabilities would be considered

 Journalist: There's been no exemption so far?

 Bowen: No decisions have been made to exempt anybody.

 Journalist: Have any been found to be vulnerable?

 Bowen: That work continues.

 Journalist: Minister, you mentioned how this might look to  people smugglers, with delays and challenges. How do you  think the Australian public will view the challenges and  delays?

 Bowen: I think the Australian public would recognise that  the legal system is appropriate and important, that the legal  system be allowed to operate. Of course, people respect  the role of the High Court. I think people will recall that  these things do occur. For example, as I recall - Mr Marr  might have a better recollection than me - as I recall the 

 Nauru option was ruled as invalid by the Federal Court at  one stage before that was overturned on appeal. Mr Marr is  telling me I'm correct. So, from time to time legal decisions  are taken and the courts make their determination, and that  should be allowed to play out. Government's reserve their  right to continue and appeal, as this government reserves  its right to continue to implement the Malaysia arrangement  and to proceed with its argument before the High Court that  it meets all our obligations, domestic and international.

 Journalist: How much will these legal challenges cost?

 Bowen: I don't know what the cost will be, but we will have  appropriate representation.

 Page 6 of 9 Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court case

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169899.htm

 Journalist: Can I just clarify, if the High Court makes its  decision and Australia ends up sending no asylum seekers  to Malaysia at all, are we still committed to taking the 4000?

 Bowen: Let's not get ahead of ourselves. We're arguing the  case and we believe we're on very strong ground.

 Journalist: But if you do lose, do those 4000 still come?

 Bowen: I'm not going to contemplate losing this case. We  believe we're on very strong ground.

 Journalist: You don't have a legal responsibility to the  4000 people in Malaysia; you do to the unaccompanied  minors here in Australia. Shouldn't that responsibility come  first?

 Bowen: We have a moral responsibility as well, Tom.

 Journalist: Have you ever met any of the unaccompanied  minors that are in your care?

 Bowen: Of course, regularly. Any other questions?

 Journalist: Is there any prospect of Malaysia pulling out of  the deal given there's a clause in there for them to get out if  they want to and their rights record may well be dragged  through the courts?

 Bowen: Malaysia have indicated to me, consistently, how  committed they are. It was only a fortnight ago that we  signed this arrangement.

 Journalist: Have you spoken to them about this?

 Bowen: We've been in communications through the normal  channels.

 Journalist: So they know they won't be receiving anyone  soon?

 Bowen: That's been communicated. We've updated them,  as you would expect.

 Journalist: When do you expect to get the first refugees  from Malaysia?

 Bowen: This week.

 Page 7 of 9 Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court case

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169899.htm

 Journalist: Minister, just one last question. With this  second boat that has been intercepted (inaudible)  Christmas Island, do you know how many minors were on  that second boat?

 Bowen: I'd need to get back to you on that.

 Journalist: Minister, can I just ask, with the…sorry.

 Bowen: That's okay. Mr Coorey?

 Journalist: How many are coming this week from Malaysia  and, not talking about the court case here, but are we duty  bound to take 4000 regardless of whether we send back  800. If we only send back 100, do we only have to take -Bowen: The arrangement makes clear, as I've said, if we  don't get 800 arrivals because we've broken the people  smugglers business model, we will still take 4000 and that  will be a very good outcome.

 Journalist: Are you expecting more boats to arrive during  this period of uncertainty given that people smugglers might  see this as a setback?

 Bowen: I'm not going to comment or speculate about boat  arrivals other than to say, and I repeat my message: people  smugglers and asylum seekers should not doubt our  resolve to ensure that this arrangement is implemented and  implemented in full. I'm going to take two more questions.

 Journalist: Could you answer how many you expect to  arrive this week?

 Bowen: How many from Malaysia?

 Journalist: Yes.

 Bowen: The process has started and there'll be a number  arriving this week, a number of families. We can give you  more details. They will be arriving over the course of the  week and they'll be settled in capital cities across the  nation.

 Journalist: Are you concerned that the people who are  destined to go to Malaysia are on hunger strikes and things  like that?

 Page 8 of 9 Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court case

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169899.htm

 Bowen: Well, obviously I'm always concerned about  anybody who would undertake that sort of protest action. I  understand people's frustrations, I understand people's  disappointment and concern, but I also know that that sort  of protest does not achieve the outcomes people are after.  As I said here, standing before you on May 7th, that we  would have protest resistance and legal challenge. I think  I've been proven right. I also said that nobody should  underestimate our resolve - I'll be proven right on that as  well.

 Journalist: Premier Colin Barnett says that it's absolutely  indefensible for a prosperous country like Australia to send  children by themselves to another country. How do you  justify that?

 Bowen: Abject hypocrisy on behalf of any Liberal that  would make that claim. The official position of the Liberal  Party, let's put aside Nauru, the official position of the  Liberal Party is to tow back boats and to drop them at a  jetty in Indonesia. They have children on them. No  protections negotiated, nothing about education, no right to  stay, no right to work, no access to health - all the things  that this government has negotiated in the Malaysia  arrangement. They would drop off children at a jetty in  Indonesia and say they are not our problem. I'm not going  to accept a lecture from any member of the Liberal Party on  how to treat children asylum when that is their policy.

 Thank you very much.

 See: Index of Speeches

 URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169899.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 09 August 2011 at 09:08 AEST 

 Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 9 of 9 Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court case

 30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169899.htm

