---
title: "UN slams Australia's mandatory detention regime"
date: "2011-01-28"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211348774
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/522382%22
---

 *** MEDIA RELEASE *** Friday, 28 January 2011    

 UN Slams Australia’s Mandatory Detention Regime    

 Australia should heed the advice of the UN Human Rights Council and abolish the  failed policy of mandatory detention, according to the Australian Greens Immigration  Spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.    

 “Mandatory detention has never worked as a deterrent. It has been subject to  mounting criticism both here in Australia and overseas. Mandatory detention for  asylum seekers while they are having their claims accessed, with no legal time-limit 

 or judicial review , magnifies the trauma already suffered by people who have fled  torture and persecution and creates long term mental health issues,” Senator  Hanson-Young said.    

 “There is no need to detain people beyond their health and security checks, while  they are waiting for their claims for protection to be assessed. It’s expensive,  inhumane and impractical.”   

 “For the more than 1000 children currently subject to mandatory detention, their  mental health is quickly deteriorating. It’s clear this policy has too great a human  cost.”    

 “With more than 6000 people currently in immigration detention, most of whom have  been in detention for more than six months (due to the Government’s suspension  policy) it’s clear the policy is no deterrent, rather it simply locks up those vulnerable  people  who come to our shores seeking our protection.”   

 Senator Hanson-Young has introduced a Private Senators Bill to end mandatory  detention (by reversing the presumption of detention as the first resort) and indefinite  detention (through time-limits and judicial review).    

 “The Government is due to respond to the UN Human Right’s Council’s  recommendations on Monday. I hope that the Government uses the opportunity to  break with the failed policies of the past and improve Australia’s tarnished reputation  of dealing with asylum seekers.”    

 “In the meantime, I will continue to push for my bill to be debated when Parliament  resumes,” Senator Hanson-Young concluded.    

 Media comment: Robert Simms - 0427 604 760        

 Robert Simms    Adviser   Community Liaison & Campaigns   Office of Sarah Hanson-Young   Greens Senator for South Australia   Ground Floor, Telstra Building   30 Pirie Street Adelaide SA 5000   Ph: (08) 8231 9911 / Fax: (08) 8211 7533 

  

