---
title: "$2.7 Million for South Australian Settlement Services"
date: "2011-06-16"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211355901
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1005919%22
---

 Senator Kate Lundy  Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister  Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 

 

 $2.7 Million for South Australian Settlement  Services  Thursday, 16 June 2011 

 Joint Media Release with Senator Kate Lundy -  

 Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration  and Multicultural Affairs and Chris Bowen MP - Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Parliamentary  Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today  announced that $2.7 million would be allocated to South Australian agencies under  the Settlement Grants Program (SGP) to help refugees and migrants settle into their  new communities. 

 As part of the grants program funding allocated to South Australia this coming  financial year, the Government will provide $403 000 to the Migrant Resource Centre  of South Australia in Adelaide to help recently arrived refugees and migrants  increase their independence. 

 'Assisting migrants and refugees to become self-reliant and to develop the ability to  access and navigate mainstream services, is a key component of their successful  settlement in Australia,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'This program focuses on assisting clients to achieve these goals through casework,  referrals, information sessions and youth leadership activities. 

 'Targeted activities including women's work experience and mentoring training, and  men's group sessions, not only help individuals to improve their life skills but also  benefit the wider communities they live in.' 

 In the 2011-12 financial year, the Immigration Department's settlement grants  program will provide $2.04 million towards 15 new projects to help new arrivals to  settle in South Australia. Funding is also provided for successful projects continued  from previous financial years. 

 Senator Lundy said the successful applicant organisations included migrant resource  centres, multicultural service agencies and community and welfare organisations. 

 'I commend all organisations for their contribution to the successful settlement of  migrants and refugees in South Australia,' Senator Lundy said. 

 'The many projects supported by the settlement grants program will help migrants  and refugees to settle successfully into their new communities, promoting social  participation and assisting in their cultural transition into Australia.' 

 A complete list of successful applicants in the 2011-12 funding round is available on  the Department of Immigration website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 

 

  

