---
title: "1 million to enhance Tasmanian Settlement Services"
date: "2011-06-16"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211355903
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1005925%22
---

 Senator Kate Lundy  Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister  Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 

 1 Million to Enhance Tasmanian Settlement  Services   Thursday, 16 June 2011 

 Joint media release with Senator Kate Lundy - Parliamentary Secretary to the  Prime Minister and for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs and Chris Bowen  

 MP - Minister for Immigration and Citizenship. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Parliamentary  Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today  announced that $1 million would be allocated to Tasmanian agencies under the  Settlement Grants Program (SGP) to help refugees and migrants settle into their  new communities. 

 As part of the grants program funding allocated to Tasmania this coming financial  year, the government will provide $154 852 to Centacare in Hobart for a project to  work with newly arrived migrant and refugee women in the greater Hobart area  reduce social isolation and increase their life skills. 

 'Assisting migrant and refugee women to become self-reliant, and to develop links  and friendships in the wider community is a very important part of their successful  settlement in Australia,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'Targeted activities will also help people acquire the skills to help them to explore and  access mainstream education and employment services.' 

 During the 2011-12 financial year, the grants program will provide $609 752 million  towards five new projects which will help new arrivals to settle into Tasmania.  Funding is also provided for a number of successful projects continued from previous  financial years. 

 Senator Lundy said the successful applicant organisations included migrant resource  centres, multicultural service agencies and community and welfare organisations. 

 'All of the projects supported by the settlement grants program will help migrants and  refugees to settle successfully into their new communities, promoting social  participation and assisting in their cultural transition into Australia,' Senator Lundy  said. 

 'I commend all organisations for their contribution to the successful settlement of  migrants and refugees in Tasmania.' 

 A complete list of successful applicants in the 2011-12 funding round is available on  the Department of Immigration website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 

 

 

