---
title: "Another boat on the way to join the chaos in detention network"
date: "2011-07-21"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR PRODUCTIVITY & POPULATION, IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211357892
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/941916%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population,  Immigration & Citizenship  Scott Morrison   

 21/07/11    

 Another boat on the way to join the chaos in detention network   

 The arrival of another illegal boat carrying 52 passengers and 2 crew adds  further strain, as the rolling crisis in Australia’s detention network continues,  according to Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population & Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison.   

 “The latest boat carrying 52 passengers brings the total number of asylum  seekers to have arrived since the Prime Minister announced her Malaysian  People swap deal to almost 460 people.   

 “Only days after Minister Bowen was claiming the success of an agreement  with Malaysia he has still yet to finalise after almost three months of delay, the  people smugglers have sent him a clear message with the arrival of a further  boat,” Mr Morrison said today.   

 “Well over half the quota from Labor's people swap deal with Malaysia has  now been used up before the deal has even been completed - almost 460  people are now in policy limbo land on Christmas Island as riots continue.   

 “The latest 52 arrivals will go to Christmas Island where just this week there  have been two more successive riots, continuing the rolling crisis in our  immigration detention network,” he said.   

 “The Minister says they will be sent to another country, but still has nowhere  to send them, neither Malaysia nor PNG, while Nauru waits at the other end of  phone.   

 “On Tuesday, Chris Bowen said regarding the Malaysia deal that “clearly it  has had some impact on whether to make the dangerous journey to Australia  by boat...” 

 

 “The arrival of the ninth boat in eleven weeks since the deal was announced  is a clear indication that the Minister's spin is just that.   

 “Whether the Malaysian solution stops the boats or not, time will tell but  almost 460 people, more than half the 800 provided for under the deal, have  already turned up.   

