---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Smithfield: 10 September 2011: Nauru costs; Malaysia transfer arrangement; High Court; boat arrival; protests; Kevin Rudd"
date: "2011-09-10"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Nauru costs"
  - "Malaysia transfer arrangement"
  - "High Court"
  - "boat arrival"
  - "protests"
  - "Kevin Rudd"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211360057
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1078747%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT* 

 DOORSTOP, SMITHFIELD  

 SATURDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER 2011 

 SUBJECTS: Nauru costs, Malaysia transfer arrangement, High Court,  boat arrival, protests, Kevin Rudd.    

 CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks for coming everybody. Last week the Government  provided senior officials to the leader of the Opposition and the shadow  cabinet to brief them on what’s an effective deterrent for people smugglers.  We wanted the Opposition to have the same advice that the Government has,  and that advice is that an offshore processing centre on Nauru or Papua New  Guinea by itself would not provide the sort of deterrent for people making the  dangerous boat journey to come to Australia that we need.    

 The advice is that to break the people smugglers’ business model is to  remove the opportunity for resettlement in Australia after making that  journey. We know that under the previous Government, Nauru didn’t do that,  with over 90 per cent of refugees who were resettled being resettled in  Australia or New Zealand.    

 We know that the Malaysia agreement did do that; saying to people that if  you take the journey to Australia then you’ll be returned to Malaysia, you’ll be  processed in line with the other 94,000 asylum seekers and refugees in  Malaysia.   

 Today, I’m also releasing my department’s estimates of the cost of a  detention centre being operated in Nauru over the forward estimates, over  the four years. That cost is $980 million. Effectively, very close to $1 billion  over the forward estimates period.    

 Now this is an estimate, there are a number of things not included in this.  This doesn’t include capital cost - we know that the facility at Nauru had not  been used for many years, we know that part of it has been converted into a  school - and we estimate there would be very considerable capital costs as  well. That would need a detailed survey to estimate exactly what they would  be. That doesn’t include, for example, the cost of returning people from  Nauru if they are a failed asylum seeker; that is a separate budget item. But it  is an estimate of the cost of running a significant detention facility of around  1,500 people in Nauru.    

 It’s expensive. It makes sense that it’s expensive because Nauru obviously is  a long way away and the operational costs would be very substantial. So we  know that Nauru is an ineffective option, now we know it’s an expensive one  as well. 

 

 Now the Government has been methodically working through the implications  of the High Court decision. We’ve said that it’s appropriate for the Opposition  to do so as well. We’ve provided high level, senior briefings to the Opposition  so that they have the same advice available to them as we do, as they work  through the issues. Mr Abbott said last week he was prepared to work with  the Government in good faith and leave all options on the table. I certainly  hope that is still the case, I certainly hope that he is prepared to take into  account the expert advice that’s been made available to him as well as the  estimated cost that the Government is releasing today.    

 Happy to take some questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Given what you’ve said about Nauru, is it off the table?   

 BOWEN: Our position remains the same. I said, in the wake of the High  Court decision, that we would go back and that we would examine all options.  Now we’ve been doing that, and as a result, I have made those briefings  available to the Opposition and the released the estimates that we’re  releasing today.   

 Now of course the Government will have more to say in coming days about  our response, but our position remains the same; we want a proper regional  agreement but as a part of that we’ve been looking at all options. But in the  interest of transparency and so the Opposition has the same information  available to them as we do to us, we made the briefing available and we  make these estimates available.   

 JOURNALIST: Will you be reaching now any agreement with the Opposition,  by taking Nauru off the table?   

 BOWEN: Well, our position remains that we think Nauru, by itself, is not an  effective deterrent. That’s the Opposition’s policy, up until now has been, if  you reopen Nauru then that’s an effective deterrent. We don’t believe that  and we’ve seen no evidence to change that position. I’m not going to pre-empt what the Government’s position will be when it’s announced in the  coming period.   

 JOURNALIST: What about -   

 BOWEN: We might give someone else a chance and then come back to you -   

 JOURNALIST: In terms of talking about that cost and saying it’s a fairly  prohibitive price tag, is that really a surprise given that offshore processing at  Nauru has been a policy of previous governments? Surely the $1 billion price  tag is not so much of a revelation?   

 BOWEN: Well it’s not a surprise to me, but Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison  have in the past said it was a cheaper option than Malaysia - that’s clearly 

 not the case, clearly not the case. They’ve said it could be done as a low cost  option, well they might have a different definition of low cost to I.    

 So I think it’s appropriate, given that the Opposition has previously said Nauru  can be up and running quickly, it would be cheaper than the Malaysian  arrangement, which costs under $300 million over the forward estimates, I  think they need to reflect on this new information.   

 JOURNALIST: So you’ve told us that Nauru is expensive and ineffective. Can  you tell us some of your own parties ideas for where you’re going to send  asylum seekers?   

 BOWEN: Well our position has been clear, we’ve negotiated the arrangement  with Malaysia - that was something that has been on the public record for  some time. Now the High Court ruled that invalid a little over a week ago.  We’ve had to reflect on that arrangement and reflect on our response, and  we’re well advanced in doing that, and we’ll be having more to say on that in  coming days.   

 JOURNALIST: But in light of that decision, can you tell us where you’re up  to on your own ideas?   

 BOWEN: Our consideration of the entire matter of the regional framework, of  how to deal with asylum seekers is well advanced and we’ll be saying more in  coming days. But we’ve made it clear that we have all options on the table.  Mr Abbott said he had all options on the table last week. He’s since said that  may or may not be the case; well I hope it is still the case that he is willing to  have all options on the table and is prepared to work with the Government in  good faith.   

 JOURNALIST: Is there a new plan that includes Malaysia that will go to the  Cabinet on Monday?   

 BOWEN: Well I don’t pre-empt what I’ll be recommending to Cabinet. Of  course, the first people to know what I recommend to Cabinet will be the  Cabinet.    

 JOURNALIST: Of course you can’t say what will happen on Monday but  maybe you could tell us who you’ve been consulting with in the lead up to  this?    

 BOWEN: Well of course I’ve been consulting with Cabinet colleagues both in  formal Cabinet meetings and more generally. I’ve consulted with members of  the Caucus, as you’d expect, and I’ve been taking expert advice, as you’d  expect.   

 JOURNALIST: The Attorney General said yesterday that amending the  Migration Act was a real option. Is that something that you will do?   

 BOWEN: Well I said that myself. I think I said that last Sunday on Insiders  that amending the Migration Act is an option, it remains an option.   

 JOURNALIST: Does it worry you that it if you amend the Act, you may to  open to more legal challenges?   

 BOWEN: Well of course governments must always be aware that they can be  challenged in the courts, but of course it’s incumbent on all involved to make  sure that the will of the Parliament is clear in any amending legislation. That’s  what all governments would do in that circumstance.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister do you have an update on the boat that has arrived  in the last 24 hours, any more details? There are reports that all those on  board are men.   

 BOWEN: Oh look there is processing that’s occurring and it’s only just  relatively recently arrived. There is processing that occurs and I’m happy to  provide further updates as and when that information comes to hand.   

 JOURNALIST: There are also reports today that there are hunger strikes at  Port Augusta. Do you know anything about that?   

 BOWEN: We do, not irregularly, have people engaged in protest action and  sometimes that involves hunger strikes. When that occurs we deal with that  appropriately and provide appropriate advice to them and that advice is that  hunger strikes do not change the visa outcome that they are seeking. In  relation to hunger strikes, they do occur from time to time, but obviously we  work to resolve them as quickly as possible.   

 JOURNALIST: Just one last question. Kevin Rudd, the Daily Telegraph is  suggesting today that he is reformed, he’s ready to lead, he’s a new, inclusive  man. Would you like to see him leader of the Labor Party again?   

 BOWEN: Julia Gillard will be leading the Labor Party to the next election,  very clearly.   

 Ends  

 

