---
title: "Nauru begins refugee convention ratification process"
date: "2011-06-17"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211356003
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/861223%22
---

 

 

 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MR SCOTT MORRISON MHR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND CITIZENSHIP 

 

 

 NAURU BEGINS REFUGEE CONVENTION RATIFICATION PROCESS   

 

 The Coalition welcomes the decision by the Nauruan Government to sign today an instrument of  accession to the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol  Relating to the Status of Refugees.   

 Nauru’s signing of the instrument of accession formally begins the process of its ratification of the  United Nations convention on refugees.   

 Compared to Julia Gillard’s Malaysian people swap, reopening the Australian taxpayer funded  processing centre in Nauru is humane, cost effective and proven to work. Malaysia, of course, is  not a signatory to the UN convention.   

 Julia Gillard has finally run out of excuses.  The Prime Minister should pick up the phone to the  President of Nauru, reopen the processing centre on the Island and reintroduce temporary  protection visas.    

 The Prime Minister has previously stated that “we want to deal with the countries that are  signatory to the refugee convention. Nauru is not.” (Doorstop Interview, 29 July 2010)   

 Now that the last of her so-called obstacles has been removed, Julia Gillard should swallow her  political pride and drop her floundering “anywhere but Nauru” policy.   

 

 17 June 2011 

