---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 29 November 2011: independent review into Christmas Island and Villawood unrest; asylum seeker udget; Coronial inquiry"
date: "2011-12-02"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "independent review into Christmas Island and Villawood unrest"
  - "asylum seeker udget"
  - "Coronial inquiry"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211365215
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1267685%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT* 

 DOORSTOP, SYDNEY  

 TUESDAY, 29 NOVEMBER 2011 

 SUBJECTS: Independent review into Christmas Island and Villawood  unrest, asylum seeker budget, Coronial inquiry.   

 CHRIS BOWEN: Well, thanks for coming, everybody. You’ll recall that in March,  during the Christmas Island riots, I announced that I would be appointing an  independent review of the preparedness and response of the Department of  Immigration and Serco. I subsequently announced that review would be  undertaken by two of Australia’s most experienced and respected former public  servants, Dr Allan Hawke AC and Mrs Helen Williams AO. Of course, in April I  announced the terms of reference of that review would be extended to cover the  events at Villawood detention centre over Easter.   

 We’re releasing that report today, together with the Government’s response. The  Hawke-Williams report reminds us that riots and disturbances in detention  centres are not uncommon when you have a high population in immigration  detention. The report reminds us, of course, that we’ve seen these sort of  occurrences as long ago as 1999 and 2000. The report goes on to point out the  distinguishing factor of these disturbances: the very high proportion of people in  immigration detention who had been rejected for their refugee claim, in the  language of the Department of Immigration, ‘on a negative pathway’.    

 The motivating factor for these disturbances was frustration at the decisions  being taken that people were not regarded as refugees. I’ve made this point  myself in the past, this is not necessarily about the time taken for processing,  not about the conditions in detention, but about the number of people in  immigration detention who had been rejected for refugee status.   

 The report makes 48 recommendations. The Government has accepted them all;  all are being implemented. A third either have been implemented or will be  implemented by the end of this year. Of course, at the time of the March  disturbances, there were 6,369 people in the detention network and 2,539 in  detention on Christmas Island. At the moment, we have 4,141 people in  detention facilities and 728 people on Christmas Island. This represents a 35 per  cent reduction in people in immigration detention facilities across the board and  a 60 per cent reduction in people in immigration detention on Christmas Island,  which reflects the activities and the work that the Government has undertaken to 

 reduce our detention population.    

 I’d like to thank Dr Hawke and Mrs Williams for this review. It’s a very thorough  review, an ongoing review which provides a very good basis for Government  management and Department of Immigration management of detention facilities  going forward to ensure that the department and Serco are as prepared in their  response as they possibly can be for any events, any disturbances in immigration  detention.   

 Before we take questions, on behalf of the review Dr Hawke will make a few  remarks and then the three of us will be happy to take your questions.    

 ALLAN HAWKE: Well, thank you, Minister. This is, of course, a very complex  policy environment and for that reason Chapter Two of our report sets out the  background and context of this issue over a series of years, so you can get a  good measure of the recommendations that we’ve made and why they were  important. I think for Helen and my point of view, the fact that the Government  has accepted every one of our recommendations is very pleasing to us and we  applaud the Minister having put in place arrangements to monitor the  implementation of our recommendations.    

 BOWEN: We’re happy to take questions.    

 JOURNALIST: Just on the image of the rooftop protest at Villawood in the  memory. You say here on page 173, the AFP advised against the removals, the  danger, the unacceptable risk to the officers who may have been involved in  that. Did the Australian Federal Police go into any detail about what that risk was  exactly and why other agencies including the military weren’t used in this  emergency situation?   

 HAWKE: No, we didn’t pursue that. As you might recall, the involvement of the  Australian Federal Police was something for the Attorney-General to look at  separately. So while we met with the AFP on a number of occasions and our  recommendations go to the development of a firm Memorandum of  Understanding to make sure that the roles and responsibilities of the different  agencies are set out quite clearly, the AFP aspects really are a matter for the  Attorney-General, rather than for us.    

 BOWEN: And I could just add to that briefly, if I could. You would be aware,  Adam, that the Chief Commissioner has given considerable evidence before  Estimates about his reasoning and the reasoning of his senior officers for that  approach. The safety of Australian Federal Police officers and the safety of the 

 detainees was forefront in their mind and that was the basis for their very strong  advice and position that the course of action that was appropriate was the  course of action that should be taken.  

 

 JOURNALIST: What would happen in accordance with the recommendations  now beyond this point for similar circumstances?    

 BOWEN: Well, each event is different. So in relation to the roof protest at  Villawood, the AFP advice was based on the conditions of that particular building,  the angle of the roof, the level of safety in place. Now, in different detention  facilities and indeed in different parts of the same detention facility, that advice  might be different. So each circumstance is taken on a case by case basis. But of  course, no responsible minister, no responsible politician should ask Australian 

 Federal Police to take unacceptable risks against the advice of the Australian  Federal Police.    

 JOURNALIST: Dr Hawke, to offset that confusion in line with your  recommendation would be that MoU would be a focus?   

 HAWKE: That’s correct and there already is a draft between the various  agencies to clarify that. The only other point I think I would add is that some of  our recommendations do go to the physical security in some of these detention  centres and they already have been or are being put in place.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister, given that we’ve had about five minutes to digest a 200  page -    

 BOWEN: A little bit more than that -    

 JOURNALIST: Ten minutes to digest a 200-page report then given the  opportunity to ask questions about it. Would you mind just taking us through  briefly in perhaps a little bit more detail who or what were the factors that were  responsible for these riots?   

 BOWEN: Well, I’ve covered some of the main points that have been made and  Dr Hawke and Mrs Williams will add to this, but I think the report points out very  clearly that, as I say, we had a combination of factors. We did have a detention  network under stress, we had a high proportion of people in immigration  detention who were on a negative pathway, had been told that they were not  refugees, and who took the approach that this protest might lead to a change in  visa outcomes.   

 Now, as I made repeatedly clear at the time and I repeat it today, this sort of  protest does not change visa outcomes, does not lead to a different result in the  consideration of refugee claims.    

 HAWKE: I think I would point you to the covering letter that Helen and I signed  to the Minister, pages 36 and 37 of the report, the last page of the report for you 

 to get a good feel.    

 JOURNALIST: You might just take me through very briefly.   

 HAWKE: I think you’re better off reading them for yourself there and putting  them in the context of the Minister’s press release.   

 JOURNALIST: I’ve skimmed aspects of it. It seems on of the things, particularly  on Christmas Island, one of the problems was the push by the Government to  load up Christmas Island, it was over populated and that resulted in a reduction  in amenity and a consequential reduction in security and you couldn’t segregate  detainees and so on. Was that a feature of the problem.  

 HAWKE: I wouldn’t put it in the sense that you have.    

 JOURNALIST: I think you have.  

 HAWKE: No I haven’t put it - I don’t think the word ‘push’ was used in our  report. The circumstances were that those arrivals came there, mandatory  offshore processing, this report doesn’t move away from that. Helen, did you  want to add something to that?   

 WILLIAMS: I think I’d just put it in context, which is in the report of course,  that in a matter of about 18 months the number of detainees went from - in the  entire network - went from about a couple of hundreds to 6,000, and that was a  huge increase. And coping with that increase I think stressed a number of the  centres, but particularly Christmas Island, which was working at a distance and 

 had limited resources.   

 JOURNALIST: If those asylum seekers had been housed on the mainland and  the numbers on Christmas Island had been more carefully managed, could the  Christmas Island riot have been averted?  

 WILLIAMS: I think the stress on the detention network overall was  considerable in this period, with those increasing numbers it would impact right  across the board.    

 JOURNALIST: Are the values that you talk about in the report (inaudible). If  they had been reviewed earlier, when that surge first started in 2009, is hat  something that should have happened? It seems the recommendations are  pretty basic. Should it have been reviewed earlier, is it something the  department should have done earlier?  

 WILLIAMS: I think it’s easy in retrospect to look back and say, ‘we knew this  kind of increase was going to come’, but you can’t predict this kind of increase.  

 

 JOURNALIST: Ms Williams surely, though, I mean isn’t the lack of plain  language involved in this instance - we heard the Minister refer to the expression  ‘negative pathways’, I mean, at the end of the day these people are on a hiding  to nowhere aren’t they? And then isn’t then the anger, which has turned out to  be explosive, inevitable? And what’s been within the system to measure the build  up of anxiety and anger? What has your report identified in terms of what can be  done internally to offset what we’ve witnessed?  

 WILLIAMS: I think you’d have to go through the report because there are a  number of issues raised right through the report and I think the values and the  framework were set up in a very different context. It was set up in the context of  far lower numbers, it was set up in the context of a more compliant detention  population, partly because of those lower numbers. The real issue was the very  speedy increase in numbers, which impacted right across the board - it impacted  on the infrastructure, on the actual training of the people who were going to deal  with that. It really impacted across the board and I think that really comes back  to that very very fast increase in numbers.   

 JOURNALIST: Were the Immigration Department and Serco unprepared for  managing the riots when they happened?  

 HAWKE: I wouldn’t say that they were unprepared, I think it’s just that  significant growth in numbers at that time, led to some strains on the system.  But you’ll recall that the Government then went to some considerable lengths to  open other detention centres on the mainland in order to try and alleviate the  stresses on Christmas Island itself. And you can see some of that in our report  about the impact there on the numbers. Because the significant issue here is the  number of people in the system who turn out not to be genuine refugees, and  that’s what’s different to previous waves of migration.  

 JOURNALIST: But were they prepared for Villawood? I mean authorities knew  about this. Authorities knew that the numbers were building, they knew that -  

 HAWKE: - They didn’t know that some many of them were going to turn out not  to be genuine refugees. That’s what’s different from previous waves.  

 JOURNALIST: You talk about chronic overcrowding, infrastructure that couldn’t  cope, compromised standards and accommodation and services. Wasn’t it  irresponsible for the Government to keep putting more people in there?  

 BOWEN: Who’s that question to?   

 JOURNALIST: I’ll direct that to you.  

 BOWEN: Sure. The Government has to manage an array of circumstances, and  as I say, we’ve taken action - very considerable action - to see a 35 per cent  reduction in the number of people in immigration detention since March, which is  not that long a period, and a 60 per cent reduction in the number of people in  immigration detention on Christmas Island, since March.    

 Now we’ve also taken action to open new detention facilities, some of which are  already opened, others of which are coming online in coming weeks and months  - which is an appropriate action to take, but there is considerable lead time in  doing so. You can’t just open a new detention centre today and it be operational  tomorrow, there’s considerable planning and construction that goes into it.    

 They’re the actions that the Government has taken. A suite of actions: the  opening of new detention centres, the better management of people in  immigration detention, faster processing, and of course, a range of responses 

 including community detention - which I announced last October before these  riots - and bridging visas, which I announced a month ago or so.    

 So Government’s use a range of mechanisms available to them at any one time  and that’s exactly what we’ve been doing.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister, how happy are you with Serco’s overall performance  though, just if you can put it on scale or give it a -  

 BOWEN: Well I’m not going to give it a scale, but Serco has a tough job. We do  have issues with Serco, in terms of the contract, from time to time and we take  appropriate action on those issues, as has been recently publicised. There’s no  particular criticism of Serco in this report, I think it’s fair to say that the reviewers  find that Serco carried out their obligations under the contract and that there  was no particular action, or lack of action by Serco which led to these event.   

 JOURNALIST: An immigration centre in western Sydney burns to the ground  and there is no criticism, are you surprised there isn’t any criticism?  

 BOWEN: Well I think the review took an appropriate course of action in terms of  finding how the situation could be improved. If there were particular criticisms of  my department or of Serco, these independent reviewers would have made  them. The reviewers have taken the approach of recommending changes, but  they’ve also taken the approach of holding the people involved to the  appropriate standards, which is compliance with the contract and actions taken  in light of information they had at the time in the best circumstances they could  at the time.    

 JOURNALIST: Just to clarify the point. Does this report make any critical  findings against anybody?  

 HAWKE: I don’t think that was actually the task we were set out. We were there  to examine the circumstances under which this happened and what could be  done to prevent or resolve such issues in the future. And you would have seen  that there have been incidents since then, but they haven’t been of the character  or nature of the ones that occurred on Christmas Island and at Villawood before. 

 

 JOURNALIST: But in seeking to do that, seeking to avoid a repeat of this  situation, you’d have to look at the previous situations and assign blame, or  assign fault, obviously -  

 HAWKE: We you might be into assigning blame and fault, I think we were into  finding solutions and recommending better ways of handling this in the future.  The department’s accepted that -    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Williams, there was an expectation after the Minister’s  comments earlier this year, Mr Williams -   

 BOWEN: This is Dr Hawke. This is Ms Williams.   

 JOURNALIST: Sorry, Dr Hawke. There was a heavy expectation from the public  based on the Minister’s assurances earlier this year, after Villawood in particular,  that responsibility would be somehow identified. As my colleague said isn’t that a  major foundation for moving forward? Identifying responsibility?   

 HAWKE: I think we’ve pointed out where the issues were, when these incidents  happened and what could be done to prevent them, or ameliorate them in the  future. The department has acted on that, the Government’s accepted that, I’m  not sure what more you would require?   

 JOURNALIST: Perhaps if I can ask for the public, isn’t there an expectation  Minister that responsibility - clear responsibility - whether it be shared or  (inaudible) to an individual organisation or individual for that matter -    

 BOWEN: I think the public is -    

 JOURNALIST: Were you disappointed or surprised not to see this report zero in  -  

 

 BOWEN: No -    

 JOURNALIST: - on those -    

 BOWEN: I think the public expects and is entitled to, a thorough independent  report and that’s what this is. Now if these independent reviewers, highly  respected and independent reviewers, felt that there was appropriate criticism to 

 make, then they’ve made it in this report. The approach they’ve taken is to  highlight the events of the time, the challenges and pressures of the time, and to  make recommendations going forward.    

 This is an independent review which strikes, I think, the appropriate balance and  is a useful contribution for governments and departments going forward in terms  of managing the detention network.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, just put that aside, does the Government or the  Immigration Department acknowledge any fault or any responsibility in the lead  up to or the management of these riots?   

 BOWEN: Well, I made clear at the time that as Minister I take responsibility for  everything that happens in the immigration portfolio, good and bad, and I take  responsibility for taking steps to make improvements. That’s exactly what this  report provides and we’ve adopted every single recommendation and a further  lot have either been implemented or will be implemented in coming weeks.   

 JOURNALIST: The Government is not acknowledging that there was fault, the  department is not acknowledging that it or Serco -    

 BOWEN: - Well what we’ve acknowledged is these recommendations of areas  for improvement, we’ve accepted the recommendations for areas for  improvement. Now, I have a responsibility as Minister to take these  recommendations, to consider them, and that’s what we’ve done and we’ve  accepted them.    

 JOURNALIST: Earlier Minister you mentioned ‘the issues’. By issues do you  mean problems? What do you mean by issues?   

 BOWEN: Look, let’s be very plain about this: we had a detention network under  considerable pressure, we had a detention network dealing with a very  significant increase with the number of people arriving in Australia by boat. That  put pressure on the detention network and that led to, combined with the high  proportion of people on a - with an outcome where they had not been regarded  as genuine refugees - and had been told that, that therefore that led to this sort  of pressure and the sort of results we saw in March and April.    

 So that is very clearly our problem, that is very clearly a problem for the  Department of Immigration and Serco to manage. Now this report has reviewed  the preparedness and response, made recommendations going forward as to 

 how these situations can be managed, and as Dr Hawke said, ‘We have seen  some incidents in immigration detention since then, but they’ve been managed in  such a way that they have not elevated to the sort of degree we saw in March  and April.  

 

 JOURNALIST: Minister, how can you be confident that some - based on some  of the recommendations which include a MoU on operational roles of the AFP,  and (inaudible), how can you be confident that that will prevent another repeat  of riots?   

 BOWEN: Well as I say, this is a very thorough report which makes a series of  recommendations which we’ve adopted. Now, will managing immigration  detention miraculously become easier, or will it become perfect? No it won’t,  there will always be challenges and stresses in managing immigration detention,  just as there are in managing, you know, correctional facilities across the country  and managing a whole array of circumstances which involve people being  frustrated or angry and may be thinking that a protest or violent action could  change their situation when it will not.  

 

 But I do believe that these recommendations minimise the chances of these  sorts of events going forward and are a very thorough basis for the management  of our detention network going forward.    

 JOURNALIST: The NSW Police have said publicly a couple of weeks ago at that  hearing in Sydney - they said publicly that they’d done tabletop exercises with  the Immigration Department about how to manage incidents at Villawood, I  think the day before the riot happened. And that they’d been issuing warnings  that there were problems, the MoU, the arrangements for managing incidents  were not clear, powers were not clear.    

 BOWEN: Well we’ve been in discussions with the NSW Police, I’ve asked the  Secretary of the Department -    

 JOURNALIST: Let me finish my question. Doesn’t that suggest that there was a  lack of preparedness?   

 BOWEN: Well, Dr Hawke can go into the lack of preparedness or the allegation  of lack of preparedness that you make -    

 JOURNALIST: That the NSW Police have made -    

 BOWEN: Well, you are making. In relation to the MoU with the police services, I  have asked the Secretary of the Department of Immigration to personally  progress those with each commissioner. They are at varying degrees of progress,  some states are more advanced than others. It is a priority to get those MoU’s  finalised because I think it is very important that we have a very clear  understanding. Now we’ve supplied, for example, to the NSW Police Service our  legal advice in relation to the rights and responsibilities of each law enforcement  agency, which is very important and they had raised some questions about. I 

 believe we have resolved those issues and we’re now in a position to progress  the MoU.   

 In relation to statements by the NSW Police Service, we certainly have the view  that in our discussions with the NSW Police Service, there was no particular  warning or no particular advice from the NSW Police Service which wasn’t taken  on board and that we worked closely - as closely as we are able to - with the  NSW Police Service, as we do with all other law enforcement agencies across our  detention network. So I reject the basis of that allegation.   

 JOURNALIST: Dr Hawke, it says here that before you indicated that protests  could be expected around Easter but was relatively non-specific in terms of detail  on the lack of timing. The information available provided critical lead time for  Serco to develop and devise operational planning in advance of the incident and  activate their emergency management plan. What went wrong and who is  responsible?    

 HAWKE: Well I don’t think that’s at all clear. The warnings were of such a vague  nature and that this had happened in the past, it wasn’t crystal-clear to us at  least what should have been done by anybody other than -    

 JOURNALIST: It says here that contingencies were given the vague nature of  the threat being made. What contingencies were put in place?   

 HAWKE: Other than the normal planning? I don’t think there were any particular  contingencies put in place at that time.    

 JOURNALIST: Should there have been?   

 HAWKE: Well it’s easy to get this right with hindsight -    

 JOURNALIST: Well it’s not hindsight if -    

 HAWKE: It is hindsight -    

 JOURNALIST: - there are warnings reportedly indicating a protest could be  expected -    

 HAWKE: ‘Could be’.    

 JOURNALIST: - around it, that is foresight.    

 HAWKE: Well it could be, not would be.   

 JOURNALIST: They are semantics with all respect -  

 

 HAWKE: Well -    

 JOURNALIST: - you’ve identified it, you’ve printed it -    

 HAWKE: You might say it is semantics -    

 JOURNALIST: Well reporting indicated protest could be around Easter.    

 HAWKE: ‘Could be’, yes.   

 JOURNALIST: It was relatively unspecific in terms of detail like you’ve told me,  but what efforts were made, given the general nature of the threat, to  investigate more specifically? 

 

 HAWKE: I don’t think I can add anything other than what’s in the report.    

 JOURNALIST: So there was no attempt to investigate the specific nature of  that general threat?   

 HAWKE: Not that I’m aware of.    

 BOWEN: I might just add to that. The general reporting that’s referred to in the  report goes to what is an annual pattern of events, of an annual protest outside  Villawood Detention Centre at Easter. So there are refugee advocates who use  Easter for an annual protest outside the Villawood Detention Centre, and of  course there was intelligence indicating that that would again be the case. What  there was no intelligence - I think this report tells us and is certainly my  understanding - no intelligence that that would spread to inside the detention  facility. There was no evidence this would be used as a catalyst to enable  detainees to begin to protest and that was the essential difference.    

 The intelligence led to - went to - primarily, what is an annual event of a protest  outside the Villawood Detention Centre. Of course contingency plans were put in  place for that. The difference here was that it spread to inside the detention  centre.    

 JOURNALIST: The protest organisers had the mobile phone numbers of the  protesters on the roof. That would seem to indicate there’d been some level of  collusion between those inside and outside, and if so why wasn’t that identified  by the staff inside?   

 BOWEN: Well, as I say, it’s now clear that there was contact between the  external protestors and the internal protestors. There was no evidence that I’m  aware of to indicate that that was a likely event that the protests would extend 

 to inside the detention centre.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, it seems that the theme of this report is that the  underlying pressures gave rise to the incident was the rapid increase of boat  arrivals. What caused the rapid increase in boat arrivals?    

 BOWEN: As I’ve said before, Paul, we had a range of factors including the very  obvious circumstances in Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran, Sri Lanka, which led to an  increase in boat arrivals over that period.    

 Of course, I have progressed a regional framework to deal with a regional  solution to that. Now that has been not supported in the Parliament because of  the opposition of the Liberal Party. Any criticism - because I know where this  question is going - any criticism we hear by the Liberal Party of the management  of our detention network or any matter that goes to the management of our  asylum seeker issue are hollow criticisms, because they have the opportunity to  support offshore processing which would provide a very real deterrent to arriving  in Australia by boat. They choose, for their political purposes, to oppose that  legislation.    

 So I will not accept any criticism from Mr Abbott, Mr Morrison or anybody else  when they have legislation in the Parliament that they could support which would  go to a real deterrent to arriving in Australia by boat. They have chosen not to  do that because they’ve made a political calculation that continued boat arrivals  are in their political best interests.    

 JOURNALIST: What’s the point of deterrence if the reasons people are coming  are push-factors, more instability abroad?    

 BOWEN: I’ve traversed this many times with you Paul, and with many others. I  do believe that you can have a proper regional framework, which deals with this  issue in a coherent way, in a holistic way, which means that Australia takes its  responsibilities in resettling refugees and asylum seekers, but does so in way - in  partnership with our colleagues and friends in the region - which dissuades  people taking that dangerous journey by boat.    

 Now, that deals with the push-factors in a proper regional framework. Everything  that this Government has done over the last 12 months has been aimed at  achieving that, and if Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison choose to get out of the way,  that could be delivered.    

 JOURNALIST: That position also acknowledges, though, a relationship between  domestic policy settings and -    

 BOWEN: I freely acknowledge a regional framework with proper offshore 

 processing as part of a regional framework would provide an effective deterrent  to boat arrivals. That is not news Paul, I’ve been saying that for 12 months.    

 JOURNALIST: But the Government doesn’t acknowledge the decision to  dismantle the Howard Era measures -    

 BOWEN: No, because -    

 JOURNALIST: - contributed to the flow. Is that right?    

 BOWEN: Why would you have a detention centre at Nauru, which means that  over 90 per cent of people regarded as genuine refugees were resettled in  Australia and New Zealand? If anybody can explain to me how that is an  effective deterrent to boat arrivals, I’d be happy to hear a logical and coherent  explanation. I’ve yet to hear one.    

 JOURNALIST: Well it appears to have been a deterrent.    

 BOWEN: I would disagree with that for all the reasons that I’ve outlined many  times. A offshore processing regime which simply means another Christmas  Island further away on Nauru where the vast majority of people get resettled  into Australia is not part of a proper regional framework and does not provide a  deterrent.    

 JOURNALIST: But isn’t the issue that in dismantling it, you’ve sent the message  to the region that Australian policy has softened?   

 BOWEN: No, I don’t accept that analysis, I don’t accept that analysis. What I do  accept is that offshore processing as part of a proper regional framework -  properly negotiated - can provide an effective deterrent. That’s what this  Government is working towards, that’s what Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison are  stopping.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, given the public’s intense interest in the economy and  immigration issues, whose idea was it to schedule your press conference with Mr  Swan’s simultaneously today?   

 BOWEN: Well, they’re not quite simultaneous and they are in different cities,  and I note that you’re here in large numbers, and I’m sure that we’ll read about  this in the newspaper tomorrow and we’ll see it on the news tonight.    

 This is a press conference which has been scheduled for several weeks to match  Dr Hawke’s diary, my diary and Ms Williams’ diary. This is not something that  was done on the spur of the moment. We’ve been planning this press conference  for this day for several weeks. Government Ministers in different cities make 

 announcements on the same day all the time and not much should be read into  that.    

 JOURNALIST: Misplaced cynicism?    

 BOWEN: Yes.     

 JOURNALIST: Your Department’s indicated $1.3 billion on asylum seeker  processing. That’s the dollar figure going ahead, what’s the headcount?    

 BOWEN: Well, let’s be clear. We have indicated in MYEFO an increase in  detention management costs. That’s the gross figure. When you take into  account the net figure which is the return to budget of the various off-shore  processing costs, the figure is a lot closer to $200 million over the forward  estimates.  

 

 There are a range of factors which go into determining that: length of time in  detention, the number of people in detention, et cetera. And so, it’s not just a  simple headcount, it’s a range of measures which go into that which are  determined by the Department of Immigration and the Department of Finance  and the Department of the Treasury, together.    

 JOURNALIST: Just a question on Villawood, given that the MOU hasn’t been  finalised between the AFP, Serco and New South Wales Police, if there’s a major  incident in Villawood tomorrow and it overwhelms Serco’s capacity to handle it,  who responds?    

 BOWEN: We would, of course, notify the Australian Federal Police. If the New  South Wales Police felt that they were in a position to assist, we would welcome  their assistance. The Australian Federal Police would also be invited to respond. I  am very keen to see that MOU resolved. I would encourage the New South  Wales Government to take a similar approach to seeing that MOU issue resolved.    

 As I say, I’ve asked the Secretary to personally engage with the Commissioner  and that has been occurring, but of course, it takes two to negotiate. But I must  say, there has been substantial progress made with the New South Wales Police  Service which pleases me, but I do want to see that MOU resolved as soon as  possible. But just as in all other circumstances, the Australian Federal Police  would not hesitate to respond with the appropriate resources, as they have, with  the various incidents and we would certainly be happy to have the cooperation of  the New South Wales Police in responding as well.    

 JOURNALIST: They’re several hours away aren’t they?   

 BOWEN: Well as I say, we’d be happy to have any assistance that the New 

 South Wales Police would like to provide.    

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)   

 BOWEN: Well, that’s a matter for the New South Wales Police. We will -    

 JOURNALIST: No, it’s a matter for you isn’t it?   

 BOWEN: If the New South Wales Police have said publicly they will not respond,  that is a matter for them. We will respond with the resources we have available  to us. That is, Serco resources, Department of Immigration resources, Australian  Federal Police resources, and - if they’re available - New South Wales Police  resources.    

 JOURNALIST: Your Department’s lawyer has indicated in court waiting for the  New South Wales Coroner to hand down her findings or recommendations from  those three suicides which took place at Villawood Detention Centre last year.  Your lawyer, last week, indicated that he didn’t believe that she had the power to  forward findings on to you as the Minister. Will you be taking on board her  recommendations?    

 BOWEN: Regardless of how a Coroner chooses to make her recommendations  or to communicate them, of course I will be taking into account any  recommendations from any respected public officeholder, including the Coroner.  I would take them seriously, I would consider them, and I would act  appropriately.   

 BOWEN: Okay, thank you.   

 Ends 

 

