---
title: "Mandatory detention: an expensive failure"
date: "2011-02-09"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211349125
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/542568%22
---

 Wednesday, 9 February 2011    

 **Media Release**   

 Mandatory Detention - An Expensive Failure    

 The Government should abandon its expensive and ineffective mandatory detention  policy to reduce the ballooning costs of immigration detention, said the Australian  Greens.    

 “The cost of onshore processing is just the tip of the ice-burg. While the Government  has never been upfront about the real costs of off-shore processing, we know that  Christmas Island alone costs more than $1 billion over the forward estimates,” said  the Greens Immigration Spokesperson, Senator Hanson-Young in response to  media reports on immigration detention costs today.    

 “It’s absurd that the Government is spending this kind of money on a policy that isn’t  working and simply serves to compound the trauma of vulnerable people. Not only  are asylum seekers detained as the first resort, they are also in some cases,  detained indefinitely. It’s no wonder the costs are spiralling.   

 “In times when new demands are being made on the federal budget, this is money  that could be better spent else where. We know housing asylum seekers in the  community, is not only less expensive, but it’s also a much more humane  environment.    

 “The Government should  thoroughly investigate community housing for asylum  seekers and cost this measure. Costings will show this to be the more affordable  option.  

 "The Greens remain the only party in the federal Parliament that offer a practical,  long term and humane immigration policy. My Private Senators Bill (currently before  Parliament) would abandon the Government's failed excise territory policy, end  mandatory detention and indefinite detention and require judicial review,” said  Senator Hanson-Young.  

 Media comment: Robert Simms - 0427 604 760  

  

