---
title: "East Timor plan airbrushed"
date: "2011-09-30"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211361165
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2243347%22
---

 East Timor plan airbrushed  30/09/11 

 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship has airbrushed Julia Gillard's failed East  Timor Solution from history in their recent submission to the Parliamentary Inquiry into  Australia's detention network, while revealing a $1.2 billion blow out in costs in just the last  two years, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today. 

 "In their most recent submission to the Inquiry, DIAC provided a chronology [click here for  PDF] of almost 200 key events concerning immigration detention, refugee and asylum seeker  issues back to 1945, including the decision of the Menzies Government to sign the Refugee  Convention in 1954," he said. 

 "While mentioning other failed polices of the Rudd Gillard Government such as the abolition  of the Pacific Solution, abolition of temporary protection visas, Kevin Rudd's asylum freeze  and the Malaysia non solution, the Prime Minister's East Timor plan was clearly too  embarrassing to even make this list. 

 "Labor has trashed the trust of the Australian people in their procession of policy failures on  border protection and asylum issues. No wonder Monash University recently found that only  7.3% of Australians believe they are handling the issue well. 

 "The DIAC submission also confirmed that since October 2009 the Government had  committed $394 million to build more than 6,000 new beds in the detention network,  including at Christmas Island, Curtin, Scherger, Wickham Point, Pontville, Inverbrackie,  Northam and Jandakot. This is despite Labor's election commitment that they were not  expanding the network. 

 "Labor has created more beds in detention centres than they have in public hospitals. Labor  has literally embarked on their own building the detention centre revolution, in every state  and territory, except the ACT, as a result of their failed border protection policies. 

 "These capital costs are in addition to $733 million in additional operational expenses in  2009/10 and 2010/11 across the detention network, previously reported by the Department to  the Inquiry. 

 "This means in just two years the Department has confirmed a detention cost blow out of $1.2  billion, with more to come. 

 "The Department submission also confirmed that as at 9 September 2,195 detainees had  already received one rejection of their claims and were locked in the internal appeal process  and a further 350 were before the courts. Earlier evidence from the department confirmed that  more than half of everyone in our detention system now has had a least one rejection of their  claim. 

 "Evidence provided to the Committee in Darwin this week by Northern Territory Legal Aid  confirmed that their increased case load for asylum seekers in the courts was impacting  negatively on their ability to deal with other cases, in particular family law matters. 

 "It is therefore not surprising that time spent in detention has increased 103 days in 2008/09  to more than 300 days since July this year. 

 "Other key factors identified by the Department for the length of time spent in detention were  Kevin Rudd's asylum freeze and absence of documentation of arrivals. The Department  confirmed that so far in 2011/12 87% of boat arrivals had no documentation on arrival. This  compares to 85% in 10/11, 80% in 09/10 and 82% in 08/09. 

 "While asylum seekers who have their initial claims rejected remain gridlocked in the appeals  process, those whose claims have been twice rejected are also not going anywhere. 

 "In response to a question on notice from the Inquiry, the Department confirmed that only 8  failed asylum seekers had been returned to Afghanistan since October 2008, with no forced  removals, despite the Government claiming to have an agreement in place for this purpose  since January this year. 

 "Labor have demonstrated that they simply can't be trusted on border protection. Their  Malaysian non-solution is already a proven failure and Labor should not be given a blank  cheque for more failed policy," Mr Morrison said. 

 

