---
title: "$1 billion for the Coalition's Nauru plan"
date: "2011-09-10"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211360064
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1078750%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 10 September 2011 

 $1 BILLION FOR THE COALITION’S NAURU PLAN   

 The Opposition’s plan to resurrect offshore processing on Nauru would cost almost $1 billion  in operational costs alone, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, said  today.    

 Mr Bowen said estimates based on current detention standards showed that operational costs  for a processing centre on Nauru would cost $980 million over four years, not including the  inevitable infrastructure spending that would also be required.   

 “The Opposition has already been provided with very clear advice that Nauru is no silver  bullet and that it does not break the people smuggling trade,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “So we know that Nauru won’t work, and now we know it’s expensive as well - despite bold  claims by the Opposition that it would be cheaper than the Government’s Malaysia transfer  arrangement.   

 “Well, they got it very wrong, and it’s not cheaper. These estimates show that the Coalition’s  Nauru plan would cost the taxpayer around $1 billion in operational costs alone.   

 “To break the people smugglers’ business model, you need to have significant disincentives in  place and take away the product they’re trying to sell - a ticket to Australia.    

 “We know Nauru doesn’t do that, with the majority of those genuine refugees resettled last  time ending up in Australia.”   

 The operational estimates for Nauru are over four years for a 1,500 person facility and  include the processing of asylum claims and associated costs.   

 Mr Bowen said despite the Government releasing the Solicitor-General’s legal advice and  providing a special Opposition briefing, Mr Abbott continued to ignore the facts about Nauru.   

 “Mr Abbott ignores the climate scientists, he ignores the economists, now he seems to be  ignoring legal experts and departmental advice on Nauru,” he said.  Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802   

 

