---
title: "Senate Additional Estimates: in case you missed it"
date: "2011-03-01"
creators:
  - "Abetz, Eric"
source: "Office of ABETZ, SEN ERIC"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211350061
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/941949%22
---

 

 

 SENATOR THE HON. ERIC ABETZ  Leader of the Opposition in the Senate  Shadow Minister for Employment & Workplace Relations  Liberal Senator for Tasmania 

 

 1 MARCH, 2011 

 Senate Additional Estimates: In case you missed it 

 The Senate Estimates hearings held last week (February 21 to 24) again proved an effective  avenue for exposing Government waste and maladministration. 

 Coalition Senators generated stories in print and on radio and television across a wide  variety of portfolios. In all, Senate Estimates was mentioned in the media more than 130  times between February 21st and February 25th. 

 Judged on media coverage, the biggest stories of the week included: 

 

 CHIEF SCIENTISTS RESIGNS - Professor Penny Sackett came to the Senate Economics  committee last week to announce her resignation for personal reasons. With Tasmanian  Liberal Senator Richard Colbeck, opening the questions, the Chief Scientists soon revealed  there was a professional reason for her departure as well, which was particularly  embarrassing for the Government. Professor Sacket told the Economics Committee she had  never even met Prime Minister Julia Gillard, and that former Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd had  NOT sought her views in the preparation of Australia’s case for the climate change  conference in Copenhagen. 

 NATIONAL MUSEUM CUTS - The National Museum of Australia is being forced set to shed  staff in a desperate bid to balance the books amidst stringent cuts in Government funding.  Under questioning from Liberal ACT Senator, Gary Humphries,  officials from the National  Museum  confirmed that the Government’s efficiency dividend was really putting the  squeeze on the Museum, and every effort had to be made to cut costs, including inviting  staff to take redundancies. Significantly, it became obvious that the Museum was not alone  with both the National Gallery of Australia and the National Library also feeling the pinch. 

 SOLAR PANELS WASTE - Taxpayers will be spending several hundred thousand dollars  for the installation of solar panels on the roof of Parliament House in a bid to bring the  Parliament’s electricity bill down. The problem is the cost of the panels far outweighs any  potential cost saving.  With Victorian Liberal Senator Helen Kroger leading the questions, 

 Finance conceded that the panels would cost several hundred thousand dollars, whilst the  annual saving on electricity is estimated to be about $9,500. Obviously, it would take many  years to recoup the capital outlay. 

 QUARANTINE SCARE - Malaysian raw prawns carrying a deadly virus that could wipe out  Australia’s $265 million prawn industry were allowed into the country by a quarantine officer  who was tired or distracted. The Agriculture Committee also extracted admissions that the  Australian Quarantine Inspection Service had failed to track down every batch of the  diseased prawns for isolation. There were quite a few heated exchanges as Liberal party  Senators Bill Heffernan and National Senator Ron Boswell expressed their displeasure at  AQIS’s poor performance.  

 DEFENCE INSULT TO VETERANS  - Victorian Liberal Senator Michael Ronaldson pursued  this issue through two committees, severely embarrassing the government for Defence’s  refusal to provide money to transport veterans from the Battle of Long Tan to Canberra for a  unit citation ceremony in August last year. On Monday Senator Ronaldson gained  confirmation from officials at Government House that invitations had gone to ALL members  of the unit, but the ceremony had not proceeded. Later, in the Defence Committee, the  Senator forced the Parliamentary Secretary for Defence into the same admission. 

 From Estimates we also learned: 

  The Australian Electoral Commission is finalising its inquiry into GetUp! - essentially  whether it is a “front” for Labor. Under Questioning from Coalition Senate Leader,  Eric Abetz, the AEC disclosed that it in 2007 it threatened GetUp! with an injunction  over a “misleading and deceptive” vote-generator. 

  The Labor government spent more than $300,000 headhunting nine people for the  National Broadband Network board.   The Gillard Government is preparing to introduce virtual strip-search scanners at  airports despite unresolved privacy issues.   The Australian Government’s $3.1 billion water buyback scheme lacks sufficient 

 science to set realistic and reliable targets for water purchases across the Murray-Darling Basin.   Immigration officials have admitted that not a single country has signed up to Julia  Gillard’s proposal for an East Timor processing centre.   The tax summit Julia Gillard promised the independents she would hold before June 

 30, 2011, appears unlikely to go ahead in that timeframe.   Only one of the 28 indigenous early childhood education centres promised two and a  half years ago by Kevin Rudd has been built.   Three bureaucrats who review federal Government advertising campaigns earn up to 

 $16,000 each for a week’s work.   Immigration confirmed that it cost $320,000 to bring 22 asylum seekers to Sydney for  Christmas Island funerals. 

 

 Here’s a snapshot of the coverage. 

 

 

















 

 

