---
title: "Heiner affair still under wraps"
date: "2011-06-23"
creators:
  - "Joyce, Barnaby"
source: "Office of JOYCE, SEN BARNABY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211356314
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/866021%22
---

 Senator Barnaby Joyce 

 Shadow Minister for Regional Development, Local Government and Water 

 Leader of The Nationals in the Senate 

 LNP Senator for Queensland 

 23 June 2011 

 Heiner affair still under wraps 

 Today, the Senate dealt with a matter of grave seriousness involving an incident  where a girl who was allegedly raped at the John Oxley Youth Detention Centre in  1988 by 2 people.  

 Today, Senator Xenophon proposed a Senate inquiry into this matter which would  have given the victim her opportunity to speak out under the rules of Parliamentary  privilege.  

 It was bitterly disappointing to once more see the process of transparency thwarted  by the absolute hypocrisy of the so-called champions of transparency and  independence, Senator Fielding and the Greens.  

 The issues pertaining to the events surrounding an occurrence at a corrections  centre in Queensland once more have drawn a dark pall over our Chamber as an  unholy amalgam was brought together to preclude a lady from a process that the  Parliament of this nation should have given to her.  

 You can leave this Parliament in dignity or you can leave in disgrace. Senators  should reflect strongly on which alternative they choose.  

 I’d like to refer to a speech I gave on this matter in 2007 when I first attempted to  table the Rofe report:  

 I have crossed the floor on the legal rights of David Hicks. I was part  of the reason the legal rights of the West Papuan refugees were  preserved. But it is only now, when the people in a position of power  are threatened, that there are those who state it is smear and  muckraking. Fiat justitia ruat caelum: though heaven may fall, justice  will be done. This issue has seen the attempt to use the mechanisms  available in Queensland, and they have obfuscated, contrived and  corrupted the process. Public ventilation of these crimes is crucial in  bringing this issue out of its contrived maze and into the light of  conclusion. … A proper investigation may dispel these. I seek leave to  move that the documents in the Rofe report now be tabled. 

 Senate Hansard, 19 September 2007 

 The response was this:  

 Leave not granted.  

