---
title: "Independent report on detention unrest released"
date: "2011-11-29"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211364956
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1260440%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 29 November 2011 

 INDEPENDENT REPORT ON DETENTION UNREST RELEASED   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today released the  independent report into the incidents of unrest at the Christmas Island and Villawood  detention centres earlier this year.   

 Mr Bowen welcomed the review by Dr Allan Hawke AC and Ms Helen Williams AO and said  the Government, which has already made significant reforms to improve the detention  system, had accepted all of the 48 recommendations.   

 “I thank Dr Hawke and Ms Williams for their thorough report and the rigour and dedication  they have brought to this undertaking,” Mr Bowen said.    

 "The incidents at Villawood and Christmas Island were extremely serious. The Government is  committed to ensuring all appropriate steps are taken to prevent such unrest, but where a  critical incident does occur, that the necessary systems are in place to effectively deal with it.   

 “Importantly, we have learned a great deal from these incidents and significant reforms have  already been implemented including improved preventative strategies and response  capabilities, more efficient processes that have reduced numbers in detention, and the  strengthening of character provisions in the Migration Act.”   

 Mr Bowen said the Independent Review of the Incidents at the Christmas Island Immigration  Detention Centre and Villawood Immigration Detention Centre report highlighted the stress  placed on the detention network, particularly between late 2009 and late 2010, which made  for a very challenging management task.   

 “I acknowledge the great commitment and resilience of departmental staff, along with the  detention services provider Serco and health services provider International Health and  Medical Services staff, involved in managing and operating the detention network in an  extraordinary set of circumstances and challenges,” he said.   

 The Hawke-Williams Report also distinguishes these more recent incidents from unrest during  the last peak in boat arrivals in the early 2000s. It notes that this time, there was a much  greater proportion of people in detention on a ‘negative pathway’, who reacted with violence 

 and destructive behaviour at not receiving the desired visa outcome.   

 “Through changes such as the strengthened character test, we are determined to ensure that  people in detention understand that violence and destruction will not be tolerated and that  serious consequences will result from such behaviour,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “I want to assure the Australian community that significant changes have been made to our  detention system, and only last week I announced the placement of boat arrivals in the  community on bridging visas, as part of the new approach to asylum seeker management.   

 “While we have experienced critical incidents subsequently in the detention network, these  have been responded to in a more timely and effective manner, and as a result, were better  contained.” 

 

 Mr Bowen said the report was a reminder of what happened when there was increased  pressure on the detention network due to higher numbers of people in the system.   

 “This report underlines the importance of the Government’s recent announcements for more  sustainable management of mandatory detention.”   

 The report can be found on the DIAC website at  www.immi.gov.au/media/publications/independent-review-incidents.htm   

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 

