---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 23 September 2011: border protection"
date: "2011-09-23"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211360848
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1136053%22
---

 1 

 

 

 

 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH   

 23 September 2011   

 TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW,  MELBOURNE 

 

 Subjects: Border protection.   

 E&OE……………………….……………………………………………………………   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 There’s a very simple issue for the Australian people: who do you trust to stop the boats? Do you trust the  Coalition which did stop the boats or do you trust the Labor Government which has started the boats coming  again?   

 We had a government back in 2008, the Rudd-Gillard Government, which closed down and stopped the  policies that had actually worked and since then we’ve had 243 boats, we’ve had well over 12,000 illegal  arrivals. It’s this Government that created the people smugglers’ business model. It’s this Government which  is responsible for 243 policy failures. It was after all Julia Gillard herself who used to say back in the old  days “another boat, another policy failure”. There is no one who is responsible for this mess on our borders  other than the Government that put the policy in place which has created it.   

 QUESTION:   

 You had a chance to help the Government fix this problem but you rejected that. Now you’re being called  the best friend of people smugglers.   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Our responsibility is to support good policy, not bad policy. The Government could have had its legislation  through the parliament almost immediately if it had been prepared to accept our amendment, an amendment  which provides more certainty and more safety. I say to the Prime Minister that if she wants legislative  change she can have it tomorrow, provided she’s prepared to accept our amendment.   

 QUESTION:   

 And now you’re being called the best friend of people smugglers. What do you make of that claim?   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 2 

 

 I accept that this is a pretty desperate Prime Minister who has lost control of our borders, who has lost  control of our detention centres and now is in danger of losing control of the parliament. Our policy as a  Coalition has been absolutely crystal clear for a decade. John Howard said famously in 2001, “we will  determine who comes to our country and the circumstances under which they come” and from that day to  this we’ve had a clear plan and a clear policy to stop the boats. It’s always involved three elements: Nauru,  temporary protection visas and turning boats around where it’s safe to do so. If the Government is serious  about stopping the boats it would look at the policy that’s worked.   

 Thanks very much.   

 [ends]   

 

