---
title: "Director of Public Prosecutions under resourced to tackle people smuggling"
date: "2011-10-19"
creators:
  - "Humphries, Gary"
source: "Office of HUMPHRIES, SEN GARY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211362098
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1164167%22
---

 SENATOR GARY HUMPHRIES  Liberal Senator for the Australian Capital Territory  Shadow Parliamentary Secretary to the Shadow Attorney-General  Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Defence Materiel 

 

 ***MEDIA RELEASE***   

 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS UNDER  RESOURCED TO TACKLE PEOPLE SMUGGLING   

 The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions has experienced a near doubling  of its indictable trial caseload, with nearly 83 people smuggling trials commencing  this financial year alone.    

 Yet the DPP is so under resourced that it has had to bring forward almost $1 million  each month just to meet operating costs.    “The Government can’t talk tough on people smuggling if it won’t resource the  agency tasked with prosecuting people smugglers,” Senator Humphries said today.   

 “This is another sign of the mounting cost to Australian taxpayers of the  Government’s failed asylum seeker policy.   

 “The Office of the DPP has seen its caseload double without being allocated any more  resources by the Gillard Government.    “Without intervention the DPP will run out of cash by the end of the financial year.   That is an untenable situation.   

 “I call upon the Government to address the DPP’s budget situation urgently,” Senator  Humphries concluded.   

 19 October 2011  Media contact is Paul Boulus on 0423 345 734   

