---
title: "Abbott stunt but still no answers on Nauru"
date: "2011-06-14"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211355784
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2548173%22
---

 

 Abbott stunt but still no answers on Nauru  Tuesday, 14 June 2011 

 Opposition leader Tony Abbott continues to mislead the Australian people by  refusing to answer questions on how much the Coalition's dubious Nauru solution  will cost. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, said Mr Abbott was  happy to take the long and expensive trip to Nauru for a cheap stunt, but continued  to lead Australians on about the costs involved and the suitability of Nauru. 

 'Mr Abbott has not been straight with the Australian people about Nauru,' Mr Bowen  said. 

 'The Federal Government has been upfront about how much the transfer  arrangements with Malaysia will cost, but Mr Abbott refuses to detail the operational  and capital costs required to deliver on his far away Nauru solution. 

 'After months of talking about how Nauru was ready to go and could be operational  within weeks, now Mr Abbott is traversing the globe to just double check? This trip is  exactly what it seems like - a political stunt.' 

 'This is another stunt to go along with the simplistic three-word slogans and the  head-in-the-sand response the Coalition has to complexity of the issues facing our  region.' 

 Mr Bowen said Nauru did not work to stop the people smugglers' business model  under the previous government, and would not work now. 

 'Why does Mr Abbott refuse to acknowledge that Australia cannot go it alone on the  problems of people smuggling and irregular migration?' he said. 

 'The approach by the previous government was to dump people on Nauru and leave  them there for an inordinately long period of time in the hope that it might break their  will to come to Australia. 

 'We know the majority resettled from Nauru ended up in Australia anyway, but at a  great psychological cost. One man was on Nauru for over five years and more than  120 people, including children, were left to rot there three years or longer. 

 'Importantly, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), is  working with the government on our Malaysian transfer arrangements, but did not  support and was not involved in Nauru. 

 'Mr Abbott can hide behind hollow slogans and rhetoric about Nauru, but only this  government can deliver a truly regional and cooperative solution to tackle people  smuggling.' 

 

 

