---
title: "Agreement with Papua New Guinea"
date: "2011-08-12"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/242216903
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1211605%22
---

 Agreement with Papua New Guinea | Prime Minister of Australia

 Agreement with Papua New Guinea

 FRI 12 AUGUST 2011

 Prime Minister

 I welcome the comments made today by the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea confirming agreement  to establish an assessment centre in Papua New Guinea.

 The Australian Government thanks Prime Minister O’Neill and his newly formed Cabinet for giving prompt  consideration to the proposal for an assessment centre on Manus Island and providing its approval for the  proposal to proceed. 

 This announcement follows ongoing discussions between the Australian and Papua New Guinea  Governments.

 Arrangements are being made for a high-level delegation of Australian officials to travel to Papua New  Guinea in the very near future to finalise a Memorandum of Understanding regarding the centre. 

 We are committed to working in partnership with Papua New Guinea to examine how such a centre might  operate, including how it might best complement broader regional activities. Our officials will now work  together to examine those options.

 Like this government, the Government of Papua New Guinea is acutely aware of the need for cooperative  approaches to addressing irregular migration while also providing opportunities for asylum seekers to  have their claims for protection considered in safety and dignity. 

 The Bali Process Ministerial Conference earlier this year demonstrated our region’s resolve to better work  together on the issues of people smuggling, human trafficking and irregular migration.

 The Government is committed to the development of a lasting regional response to irregular migration.  We will continue to work with our international partners to examine further opportunities to enhance the  region’s response to refugees and asylum seekers. 

 Through this arrangement, Australia and Papua New Guinea can make a valuable contribution to regional  efforts to counter people smuggling and address irregular migration more broadly. 

 http://www.pm.gov.au/press-office/agreement-papua-new-guinea [8/11/2011 10:10:35 AM]

