---
title: "Legislation to restore Migration Act powers"
date: "2011-09-12"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211360085
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1115929%22
---

 Search this site   Go  

 Home

 Biographical details

 Media Centre

 Contact details

 Department

 Parliamentary  Secretary

 Links  

 

 Legislation to restore Migration Act  powers Monday, 12 September 2011

 Joint media release with Julia Gillard -  Prime Minister of Australia and Chris Bowen  MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship

 Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship Chris Bowen today announced that the  government will introduce legislation to enable the transfer  of irregular maritime arrivals to third countries for the  processing of their asylum claims.

 The amendments will restore the understanding of the third  country transfer provisions of the Migration Act that existed  prior to the High Court's decision on 31 August 2011.

 They will ensure the government of the day can determine  the border protection policy that it believes is in the best  interests of the nation.

 Legal advice has made it clear that the High Court's  reasoning would also likely preclude transfers to third  countries such as Nauru or Papua New Guinea under the  current legislation.

 The amendments will ensure the executive is able to fulfil  its role of managing an orderly migration program by putting  beyond doubt the meaning of the relevant legislative  provisions.

 The government's amendments will make absolutely clear  Parliament's intention to provide the government of the day  with the ability to control Australia's borders by transferring  asylum seekers arriving at excised offshore places to third  countries.

 Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 1 of 2 Legislation to restore Migration Act powers

 28/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171699.htm

 The amendments will ensure appropriate public  accountability from the minister for any transfer  arrangements that are entered into.

 The Immigration (Guardianship of Children) Act will also be  amended to enable decisions to be made with respect to  minors.

 These amendments will provide for the government to  proceed with transfers under the Arrangement with  Malaysia and the Memorandum of Understanding with 

 Papua New Guinea.

 The government remains fully committed to the Malaysia  Arrangement, which, in combination with the proposed  assessment centre at Manus Island, provides a genuinely  effective plan to remove the product people smugglers are  able to sell.

 The Arrangement with Malaysia, the first under the  Regional Co-operation Framework, provides an opportunity  to improve protection outcomes for refugees in the region at  the same time as reducing people smuggling activity.

 The government also remains committed to increasing the  humanitarian program to 14 750 places per year, should the  amendments pass the Parliament and transfers to Malaysia  proceed.

 The government intends to introduce the amending  legislation into Parliament next week.

 See: Index of Media Releases

 URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171699.htm  Last update: Monday, 12 September 2011 at 14:15 AEST 

 Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 2 of 2 Legislation to restore Migration Act powers

 28/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171699.htm

