---
title: "Protection for people facing torture"
date: "2011-02-24"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211349804
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2546120%22
---

 

 Protection for people facing torture  Thursday, 24 February 2011 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today introduced  legislation to eliminate unnecessary processes for people at risk of torture, inhumane  treatment or likely death to receive a protection visa in accordance with Australia's  existing international obligations. 

 Mr Bowen said the Migration Amendment (Complementary Protection) Bill 2011  allowed claims raising Australia's non refoulement (non-return) obligations under  international human rights treaties to be considered through the same visa process  as claims that raise obligations under the Refugee Convention. 

 'This is about helping vulnerable people - people at risk of the most serious forms of  harm if returned to their home country,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'Our international treaty obligations mean we cannot and do not send these people  home. But, under existing processes, they are only able to get a visa through the  personal intervention of the minister. 

 'This is extremely inefficient, time-consuming and stressful, as applicants must apply,  be rejected, seek review, be rejected again and then seek the personal - and  entirely discretionary - intervention of the minister. 

 'While ministers have historically agreed to grant these visas, this is no way for the  system to operate.' 

 Mr Bowen said the Australian Government was committed to promoting efficient,  transparent and accountable immigration decision making. 

 'Introducing this complementary protection legislation will allow for all claims by visa  applicants to be considered in one efficient, transparent and reviewable process.' 

 The Bill provides for the grant of a protection visa in circumstances that engage  Australia's non-refoulement obligations under human rights treaties other than the  Refugee Convention. 

 These circumstances include cases where, as a foreseeable consequence of  removal from Australia, there is a real risk the applicant will be: 

  arbitrarily deprived of their life   subjected to the death penalty   subjected to torture   subjected to cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment   subjected to degrading treatment or punishment. 

 Mr Bowen said complementary protection would provide greater certainty and faster  outcomes for vulnerable people at risk of violation of their fundamental human rights. 

 'A woman fleeing a so-called 'honour killing' may not be covered by the Refugee  Convention, whereas she will be covered through the inclusion of complementary  protection in Australian law,' he said. 

 'Women facing this kind of harm will have their claims considered more quickly under  the integrated protection visa process. 

 'This will bring Australia into line with many like-minded countries - including New  Zealand and European and North American countries - which have already  incorporated complementary protection into their own processes.' 

 

 

