---
title: "Prime Minister's arrogance over Nauru"
date: "2011-09-08"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211359964
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1070251%22
---

        

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP  Deputy Leader of the Opposition 

 Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs 

 Shadow Minister for Trade 

  

 

 Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600  Ph: 02 6277 2102 Fax: 02 6277 8497 

 8 September 2011 

 Prime Minister's arrogance over Nauru 

 Prime Minister Julia Gillard's stubborn refusal to discuss the offshore processing of asylum seekers  with Nauru President Marcus Stephen reveals an arrogance that is damaging to Australia’s  interests in our region. 

 The High Court has ruled her five-for-one asylum seeker swap deal with Malaysia to be unlawful  and yet the Prime Minister continues to cling to her failed policy. 

 The President of Nauru made an offer to the Government over 12 months ago to discuss the  option of reopening the detention centre on Nauru that operated from 2001 until it was closed by  the Rudd Government in 2007. 

 In yet another appalling diplomatic blunder, Julia Gillard has pointedly ignored the offer, and has  now refused to even talk to President Stephen about Nauru’s offer while seated next to him on a  number of occasions during the Pacific Islands Forum this week.  

 The Coalition has been calling on the Prime Minister for months to hold discussions with Nauru yet  Labor’s response has been to denigrate Nauru, claiming that asylum seekers were mistreated. 

 The Prime Minister’s petulant behaviour led to the rebuke yesterday from President Stephen who  said, “I've been saying since last year that this Nauru bashing which I didn't appreciate and really  the centre wasn't run by us and I hope that people are clear that we don't run the centre.” 

 Fundamental to Julia Gillard's stated concerns was that Nauru was not a signatory to the United  Nations Convention on Refugees. 

 To demonstrate its willingness to assist Australia in this matter, Nauru has now signed the  Convention. 

 Malaysia is not a signatory to the Convention. 

 The only explanation for Julia Gillard's behaviour is that she is too arrogant to admit that she made  a gross error in drafting the policy that led to the weakening of Australia's border protection laws in  the first place, that she was wrong in claiming East Timor would be a solution and finally that her  Malaysia swap deal has failed.  

 A good first step would be for the Prime Minister to admit that all her border protection policies to  date have failed and to hold discussions with Nauru.   

 - Ends - 

 Media contact: Murray Hansen 0417 886 155 

 Media Release 

