---
title: "Remarks [speech] to Liberal Party of Australia's 55th Federal Council, Canberra"
date: "2011-06-25"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "Office of BISHOP, JULIE, MP"
subjects:
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
  - "Carbon tax"
  - "Climate change policy"
  - "Climate change (Anthropogenic)"
  - "Financial crises"
  - "Government debt"
  - "speech"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211356476
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/901831%22
---

 Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade 

 

 Remarks to Liberal Party of Australia's 55th Federal Council 

 Saturday, 25 June 2011  

 E&OE…                                              

 President Alan Stockdale, Vice Presidents, State Premiers and leaders, parliamentary  colleagues, delegates and friends. 

 I salute you all, for by your presence here today you are upholding the immutable and  enduring values of the Liberal Party, that are as relevant today as they were when this party  was first established.  

 Exactly 12 months ago today we gathered here in Canberra, the Liberal Party Federal  Council, merely days after the unprecedented sacking of a Prime Minister in his first term by  his own party. 

 And 12 months later the impact of that sacking is still reverberating around the country and  tearing the Labor Party apart. 

 Kevin Rudd famously dubbed the day that the GST was introduced in 2001 as a day of  ‘fundamental injustice’. Some have dubbed the 24 June 2010 as Kevin’s Day of Fundamental  Injustice. 

 But fundamental injustice is what this Gillard Government is founded on. 

 Fundamental injustice is when a Prime Minister promises not to introduce a carbon tax before  an election and then introduces a carbon tax after an election. 

 Fundamental injustice is when a government wastes billions of dollars of taxpayers’ funds in  dodgy pink batt programs and overpriced school halls. 

 Fundamental injustice is when a government has wasted so much money it cannot fund the  reconstruction of Queensland after a flood without taxing the people who were affected by  the flood. 

 Fundamental injustice is having a policy that puts the people smugglers back into business  and risks the lives of asylum seekers and our border protection personnel. 

 The truth is the Gillard Government is based on betrayal and dishonesty. Julia Gillard would  not be Prime Minister today had she not first betrayed Kevin Rudd after promising not  challenge him, and secondly betraying the Australian people over the carbon tax. 

 Julia Gillard now claims that she didn’t mean to mislead voters. That is not true. Throughout  the election Tony Abbott claimed that as night follows day a Labor government will  introduce a carbon tax, and Julia Gillard responded to that claim. She knew exactly what she  was doing. 

 Julia Gillard should say sorry. Julia Gillard should say sorry to the Australian people over her  deliberate lie on the carbon tax. Julia Gillard must say sorry to the Australian people. 

 And that is why, 12 months on, Labor is still casting around for another leader. Oh yes they  are. Make no mistake the Roosters are on Parade. 

 There is Swanny, out there showing that same level of support he’s showed every Labor  leader - zero. 

 There is Swanny and Smith, both former State Secretaries of the ALP; then there is Simon  Crean and Martin Ferguson and Greg Combet, all former heads of the ACTU; and then there  is Bill Shorten, former head of the AWU - are you getting a pattern here? 

 I would think that this would have to be the shallowest gene pool of any leadership contest in  Australian political history! 

 But Labor is proving that it’s got environmental credentials. Yes, Labor has embraced  recycling. Recycling failed Labor State Premiers, Beattie, Iemma, Keneally, are all  scrambling for a federal seat. 

 And then there is Kevin.  Quietly going about his business, keeping that low profile. 

 You will recall how Julia Gillard once claimed she was more likely to fly to Mars than to  challenge Kevin for the leadership? Well she should be keeping a very close eye on his travel  plans. Already he has clocked up enough Frequent Flyer points to get him to the moon - it  won’t be long now. 

 But it doesn’t really matter who leads the Labor Party because Bob Brown is calling the  shots. 

 I have it on very good authority that Bob Brown is demanding a certain South American  Embassy do something about the volcanic ash cloud. 

 Precisely what? Apparently Bob Brown thinks he can slap the carbon tax on volcanos. 

 Welcome to the parallel universe that will be the Senate come 1 July when the Greens take  control of the balance of power. 

 Now as Julia Gillard sent her warmest greetings this week to her comrades in the hard-left  socialist party in Canada on its 50th anniversary, we were reminded that Labor’s  philosophical base is essentially socialism. 

 For Labor believes in big government, the bigger the better; Labor believes in government  intervention, the more the better; government know best, government runs your life;  government should be at the centre of the economy; government should be at the heart of  society. 

 And it manifests in Labor’s policies. 

 The gigantic anti-competitive government monopoly in the NBN; the monumental waste of  government programs directed from an office in Canberra. 

 As Margaret Thatcher said, the problem with socialism, you eventually run out of other  people’s money. 

 And that is why Australia needs a Liberal Party more than ever before. 

 A party that believes in the value of individual freedom and choice, a party that believes in  less government intervention not more, a party that believes that the private sector should be  at the centre of the economy and that family should be at the heart of society. 

 The Australian people, more than ever before, need an assurance that strong economic  management is the watch word of government in Canberra. But as I pointed out to the  Business Observers yesterday, this government is clueless on managing the economy. 

 There is a developing crisis in the Euro zone that may involve the global economy in a way  that takes the impact of the global financial crisis and accelerates it into a devastating double  dip. 

 There was a vote of confidence this last week in the Greek Government which avoided the  precipitation of a crisis, and while I am hesitant to applaud the survival of a socialist  government, particularly at a Federal Council of the Liberal Party, that support was necessary  to avert a debt crisis across the Euro zone. 

 The Bank of International Settlements, the Central Bankers’ central bank in Switzerland,  spoke this week of the devastation that would occur if there was a loss of investor confidence  in the sovereign debt of a major economy. 

 The US Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke warned that if this debt crisis is not solved  quickly it poses risks to the global financial system, to the European financial system and to  European political unity, for it is questionable as to how long France and Germany will  continue to subsidise the rescue packages. 

 And the Prime Minister and the Treasurer of this country appear utterly clueless as to the  extent of the economic cloud gathering on the global horizon. 

 Having trashed the surplus it has inherited, having run up a massive government debt, now  borrowing over $130 million a day, Australia can no longer claim to be in the robust position  it was prior to the global financial crisis in 2008. 

 This government wants to put our economy at even greater risk with a carbon tax and no  other country in the world has a comprehensive economy-wide carbon tax or emissions 

 trading scheme. And this government wants to slap a mining tax on our more competitive  export industry. 

 Australians know that this government can’t be trusted with the economy. 

 Just recently JWS Research carried out a survey asking the Australian people which is the  best government Australia has had in the last 30 years, which has been the best government?  A full 50 per cent said the Howard Government, a full 96 per cent named any government  other than the Gillard Government. 96 per cent! 

 Mind you I have been thinking about the 4 per cent who think the Gillard Government is the  best in 30 years but then I remembered there are more people in Australia who think that  Elvis is still alive. 

 In contrast to Labor’s inexperience there are 16 Shadow Ministers in Tony Abbott’s team  who were competent Ministers in a competent Howard Government. 

 So the Liberal Party can be trusted to fight for individual freedom and choice. 

 The Liberal Party can be trusted to look out for the interest of small business, the back bone  of our economy, to live within out means, to keep our borders secure, to protect our export  industries, to maintain strong relations with our neighbours and friends and allies based on  mutual respect and always in Australia’s national interest, and the Liberal Party can be  trusted to deliver sound economic management that improves the standard of living for all  Australians. 

 Our leader, Tony Abbott, can be trusted to be true to the Liberal values that provide the most  hope for the most people. 

 Tony Abbott can be trusted to provide strong and competent government for all Australians. 

 Tony Abbott can be trusted to serve in the interests of the Australian people. 

 Delegates, ladies and gentlemen, please welcome our leader Tony Abbott. 

