---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference with Thai Foreign Minister Kasit Piromya: Bangkok: 14 May 2011: East Asia Summit; Burma; Thai-Cambodia border; asylum seekers"
date: "2011-05-14"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "East Asia Summit"
  - "Burma"
  - "Thai-Cambodia border"
  - "asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211352977
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/769981%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP 

 TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH THAI FOREIGN MINISTER  KASIT PIROMYA   

 BANGKOK   

 14 MAY 2011   

 

 

 Subjects: East Asia Summit, Burma, Thai/Cambodia border, asylum seekers   

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 KASIT PIROMYA: First of all, just to thank the Australian Ambassador for hosting this very  succulent lunch where I could have extensive discussion with my colleague, my friend, my  good friend, Australian Foreign Minister.    

 We went through the whole gamut of the bilateral, regional and international issues and I  think the discussions and the progress on the, for the cooperative activities, were based  upon a very profound and long friendship, which would be, I think, attested and  demonstrated by the fact that we will soon be celebrating the 60th anniversary of Thai-Australia diplomatic relations.   

 We do not work together only on the bilateral basis, but also on the regional, political,  security and economic and development area.   

 As well we will be working closely within the UN, United Nations context and so this is, I  think, overall a very positive, very fruitful for  cooperative activities and our discussion at  this luncheon was to, I think, take stock and to move the relationship further.    

 Thank you very much.    

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615      Department: 02 6261 1555  2 

 

 KEVIN RUDD: Thank you very much Foreign Minister and thank you also for spending time  with me today here in Bangkok during our working lunch where we reviewed the bilateral  relationship but also the challenges we face together around the world.    

 As the Foreign Minister just said, for Australia and I think for Thailand this is an important  relationship. From our part of the world, this has been long, enduring and based on real  friendship.    

 At a commercial level, we have a relationship now which supports a $22 billion -  a $20  billion, bilateral trade.    

 Australia, I think, is Thailand’s 6th largest export market and Thailand is Australia’s 9th largest  export market. These are important facts and figures which underpin the economic reality  of this relationship.    

 The Foreign Minister just made reference to the Free Trade Agreement which came into  force, I think, in 2005. Since that time, our bilateral trade has been growing at double digit  levels each year since it has come into being.    

 Good for the people of Thailand - good for the people of Australia - good for jobs in Thailand  - good for jobs in Australia.    

 At a political and diplomatic level, this has been a relationship now which has gone on,  endured and grown and become stronger over 60 years. It’s not just a bilateral relationship,  we’re active together in the region and we’re active together in the councils of the world.   

 In fact, when the Foreign Minister and I met the time before last, it was in Geneva and that  is where Thailand has been exercising a most effective role as the most recent chair of the  deliberations in Geneva, dealing with all the multilateral challenges that we face there.    

 Can I also say that we cooperate closely with Thailand in the forums of APEC and also in the  region in the EAS, the East Asia Summit.    

 On the East Asia Summit, a lot of our discussion today was focussed on that. Why is this  important? It’s important because for the first time, at this year’s Summit in Bali Indonesia,  America and Russia will participate.    

 In the past we have had in the beginning, ASEAN + 3 the countries of north-east Asia. After a  while we had ASEAN +6 including Australia, New Zealand and India.  And now we have  America and Russia joining our numbers.    

 This is an important development. For a number of years now, I’ve advocated the concept  of the Asia Pacific community in our wider region because what we do need is the  development of a wider regional institution which can deal with all the challenges we face  together, political, security, economic, financial, climate change down to disaster  management.    

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615      Department: 02 6261 1555  3 

 

 Now, we have membership wide enough and broad enough to deal with that agenda and  what the Foreign Minister and I have been discussing in particular is how do we develop the  political and security agenda of this new and emerging and important regional institution?   

 In areas such as counter-disaster management and other more complex areas as well.   

 So Foreign Minister, thank you very much for the opportunity to spend the last several  hours with you.    

 Of course we have also reviewed other regional questions as well, the ongoing situation in  Burma, and of course, recent developments on the counter-terrorism front in Indonesia.    

 But having made those opening remarks, I’m happy to take questions.   

 QUESTION: Question to both of you, did you happen to discuss the possibility of  chairmanship of Myanmar for ASEAN in 2014? Was that an issue that was brought up?   

 KASIT PIROMYA: I think I informed the Foreign Minister about some of the results of the  recently held ASEAN Foreign Minister’s Meeting followed by the ASEAN Summit Leader’s  Meeting in Jakarta.    

 I think there is now an official, outstanding invitation from the new Myanmar government  to the ASEAN Chair and maybe the Indonesian Foreign Minister to visit Myanmar as soon as  possible.    

 I think one of the objective of the visit is to see the development inside Myanmar. It would  be, I think, related, to the readiness of Myanmar, or not, to host ASEAN, I think, in the year  2014.  So, it’s an ongoing discussion.   

 KEVIN RUDD:  The reason that the Foreign Minister and I discussed that, in particular, is that  it has implications not just for ASEAN but implications also for the chairing that year of the  East Asia Summit, which involves the other countries who are part of the region’s emerging  architecture.    

 Our view, in Australia, is that we would want to see continued and sustained improvements  in human rights and democracy in Burma.    

 We, in the past, have welcomed the release of Aung San Suu Kyi.  We have deep concerns  about the continued detention of some 2,000 political prisoners and I, myself, will seek to  visit Burma at the earliest opportunity and I’m very glad that our friend and colleague, Dr  Marty Natalegawa, the Foreign Minister of Indonesia will be visiting there soon.    

 QUESTION:  Yes, Minister obviously there has been large attention this week on Australia’s  plans to send asylum seekers to Malaysia.    

 This is an issue that has some relevance to Thailand given that many of those who would be  moved to Australia from Malaysia are in fact Burmese and they come through the Thai  system before they cross into Malaysia. What discussion did you have about that issue?   

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615      Department: 02 6261 1555  4 

 

 KEVIN RUDD:  We discussed the situation in detail on the Thai/Burmese border and the  challenges which our good friends in Bangkok face with a burden which they have  shouldered for many years now.    

 So what we discussed in detail was the ongoing support which our friends in Thailand need  to sustain something in the order of 110,000 people spread across nine camps on the Thai  side of the border.    

 We in Australia over the last decade or so have injected some 10 to 15 million dollars in  direct support for what NGOs and others are doing in supporting the operations of those  camps, but most importantly supporting the basic humanitarian needs of those who have  been there for a long time.    

 Secondly, we also discussed the challenges at a humanitarian level faced by those who are  internally displaced within Burma itself.  There we go into a much larger number, as I’m  advised in the several hundred of thousands on the Burmese side of the border.    

 In our bilateral aid program with Burma, which Australia administers virtually uniquely,  through United Nations multilateral agencies or through international private NGOs, we  have sought to ensure that that funding goes to support those communities to the greatest  extent possible.    

 We are also concerned about those who may be missing out in the middle of that as well. I  have been discussing with the Foreign Minister how we might deal with that particular  challenge in the future where there may be a large number of people who are virtually  existing in some form of no man’s land.    

 So our discussions today focused explicitly on the challenges which are on the border now,  the Thai side, the Burmese side, and those who may be in no man’s land.    

 In terms of wider implications for an engagement with Malaysia, we did not discuss those  matters.   

 QUESTION:  Have you signed a deal with Malaysia on this yet? Is it signed?   

 KEVIN RUDD: The carriage of this matter lies with the Immigration Minister, and my  understanding is that the finalisation of these arrangements is well in hand with the  Minister as he said on a number of occasions publicly in Canberra.    

 QUESTION:  Can I ask Foreign Minister Suthep..    

 KEVIN RUDD:  You’ve now got three questions...   

 QUESTION: Can I just follow up with on the same subject though, that clearly having  Burmese people moving through Thailand is a problem for the Thai government.    

 Would you welcome the element of the Australian plan, which is to move some of those  refugees from Malaysia into Australia, thereby clearing the way for at least some people to  be resettled? 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615      Department: 02 6261 1555  5 

 

 

 KASIT PIROMYA: I think this is part of the result of the discussions within the context of, I  think, the Bali process and I think all of us, Australia and Canada in particular, have been  trying to find a model on how to look at the whole thing in the most systematic manner.   And I think the agreement between Australia and Malaysia on this particular model, based  on I think  5 to 1 ratio is something that the rest of us would be interested to look at to  study and look at the possibility of future cooperation.    

 So I think the Australian/Malaysian likely agreement will provide some sort of certainty and  also model for others I think to study later.    

 I think that will come to be the whole issue to be discussed further by all the other countries  involved.    

 KEVIN RUDD: The Minister also said in our discussions on this matter before, was that  countries like Canada for example as another external country which has a flow of asylum  seekers to it, in the Ministers view.  The Canadians may wish to examine such questions  themselves, but that is a matter for Canada. So that is the context in which that discussion  occurred.    

 A journalist from Thailand, as we are doing two a side.  Is there a Thai journalist who wishes  to ask the Minister a question?    

 QUESTION:  Did you discuss the, about the, Thai/Cambodian clash?   

 KEVIN RUDD:  Minister…   

 KASIT PIRMOYA Well not exactly the Cambodian/ the Thai government in particular but I  think the whole gamut of the Thai / Cambodian relationship and I think the possible role of  Australia as a very close friend to both countries and I think the whole objective is to have  peace and security so whoever could contribute to the whole process of peace and security  would be welcome.   

 KEVIN RUDD: And I’m grateful for the briefing I just received from the Minister.    

 Our position in Australia is that this a matter between the two countries and that as the Thai  Foreign Minister has indicated and I have on earlier occasions welcome the roles that have  been played by our friend and colleague Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa of Indonesia.    

 One final question from Australia.   

 QUESTION:  Is there any minimum requirement that both countries have set for Burma to  be able to host ASEAN. Is it the release of political prisoners?   

 KASIT PIROMYA:  I think it is not related only to the Myanmar becoming the chair of ASEAN  in the year 2014.    

 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615      Department: 02 6261 1555  6 

 

 One has to go back and look at the seven point roadmaps and see the developments  especially since the general elections in Myanmar on the 7th of November last year.  And  second, I think the whole obligation of Myanmar under the ASEAN charter and I think the  community building.    

 All of this has to be looked into in totality and as well as the Myanmar obligation to itself, to  the ASEAN Community, in terms of the reputability, respectability and also the internal  cohesion of the ASEAN community.   

 All of this has to be looked at. Hopefully that there will be further developments, post- 7  November, especially the outstanding issues of I think first, the release of all the remaining  political prisoners.    

 Second, in general, the overall freedom on liberalisation of the whole political process as  well as, I think, the long awaited dialogue between Daw Aung San Suu Kyi on behalf of the  opposition and so on with the newly installed government of Myanmar as part of the whole  thrust of reconciliation and national building which Thailand, as one of the closest  neighbours and ASEAN as a whole, have to play a role in the supporting side of it.   

 KEVIN RUDD: On the question of Burma hosting, hosting or chairing ASEAN, that of course,  is a matter for the ASEAN states of which we are not one.    

 Let me make some broader remarks about the future needed changes in Burma, generally.    

 The Foreign Minister, quite correctly, has pointed to the outstanding incarceration of some  2,000 political prisoners.   

 Secondly, a much freer environment for the conduct of the political discourse of the  Burmese nation needs to occur.    

 And thirdly, attention needs to be given to the outstanding challenges for those individuals  who now find themselves on the Thai-Burmese border, on the Burmese side who are being  denied humanitarian assistance.    

 These are just some questions - I don’t make, this is not a definitive list - just some questions  which the Burmese regime will need to deal with.    

 From our point of view, as the government of Australia, we have an open mind in terms of  the future of sanctions against the Burmese regime.    

 But we will not be making any decision on that matter until we have some confidence that  things are beginning to track in the right direction in Burma itself.   

 And on that, we are very mindful of the stated position of Aung San Suu Kyi and other  democracy activists within Burma in terms of the future of our Australian national sanctions  regime against the Burmese leadership.   

 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615      Department: 02 6261 1555  7 

 

 Thanks ladies and gentlemen for your time, for attending and for your standing out in the  rain.    

 Thank you very much.   

 

 END   

