---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Adelaide: 15 October 2011: opposition fiscal position; immigration; carbon price"
date: "2011-10-15"
creators:
  - "Wong, Penny"
source: "MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND DEREGULATION"
subjects:
  - "opposition fiscal position"
  - "immigration"
  - "carbon price"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211361889
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1159748%22
---

 SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG   

 MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND DEREGULATION   

 TRANSCRIPT 

 

 PW 216/11 15 October 2011

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW - ADELAIDE   

 SUBJECT: OPPOSITION FISCAL POSITION; IMMIGRATION; CARBON  PRICE.   

 E  & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 

 WONG: Thanks very much for coming. I wanted to comment - make some  comment on some of the reports in the papers today in relation to Mr Abbott  and Mr Hockey’s comments yesterday. Mr Abbott yesterday said savings  were a priority, government spending being cut is a priority. But you need to  actually do something if you want to cut government spending - do things like  the Government’s done. $22 billion worth of savings in our last Budget.    

 Under this Leader of the Opposition, he has never got his numbers right. He  went to the election with a range of savings, many of which did not add up.  And he ended up with an $11 billion black hole at the last election. Now we  now know, the Australian people now know, that he has a $70 billion black 

 hole. A $70 billion black hole that’s been confirmed by his shadow finance  minister. What he won’t tell the Australian people is how he is going to fill that  hole. He won’t tell them what he’ll cut. And remember, this is the equivalent of  cutting the age pension for two years. So what sort of cuts is Mr Abbott going  to have to make to meet his $70 billion black hole?    

 Mr Abbott is also continuing his hysterical scare campaign on climate change.  And I think it is important to note today some of the comments in the papers  from the business sector. This sort of hysterical behaviour contributes to  uncertainty in the electricity sector. This leads to higher electricity prices  because generators can’t lock in long term contracts. Mr Abbott’s hysterical  scare campaign leads to uncertainty. That’s bad for investors, bad for  consumers and bad for the Australian economy. Happy to take questions.    

 JOURNALIST: The Sydney Morning Herald reports that not only is the  asylum seeker policy adrift but so is the party. What’s your reaction to that?   

 WONG: Can I say something about asylum seeker policy because what we’ve  seen this week from Tony Abbott is more of the same. There are two  propositions which are true. One is that the advice to Government is that the  best deterrent on the table is the agreement with Malaysia. The second thing 

 is that Mr Abbott is stopping the agreement with Malaysia. Tony Abbott is so  focused, so focused, on being a wrecker that he’s actually trying to wreck one  of the things he says he supports which is offshore processing.    

 JOURNALIST: Did the Immigration Minister Chris Bowen push for Nauru in  the Cabinet meeting?   

 WONG: You know I don’t talk about cabinet meetings but I would say this -  we know that the advice to this Government, to Tony Abbott, from the people  who advise governments is very clearly that Nauru is not an effective  deterrent. The effective deterrent is the Malaysia agreement which Tony  Abbott is preventing.    

 JOURNALIST: Then why did Chris Bowen push for it, and other members of  the Right?   

 WONG: As I said, I don’t comment on Cabinet discussions but it is very clear  that the Immigration Department who advises this Government, who advised  John Howard, has said absolutely that Nauru is not an effective deterrent. And  the effective deterrent is the Malaysia agreement, the very agreement that Mr  Abbott is making sure this country cannot implement.    

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister has predicted that more boats will arrive  now that the Malaysia solution has been scuttled. Will onshore processing  blow the Budget?   

 WONG: We will certainly update our Budget figures in the usual way, in the  mid-year review, which is due before the end of the year, in relation to this  and all other policy areas. But the Prime Minister and the Immigration Minister  have made clear, there is a risk there will be more boats. And the risk of that  is as a result of Tony Abbott refusing to support changes to the legislation.    

 And let’s remember what the changes to the legislation were. They weren’t  asking Tony Abbott to sign up to Malaysia. They weren’t asking Tony Abbott  to do anything other but ensure that executive government could implement  an offshore processing regime.  The amendments would have allowed Mr  Abbott were he ever to become prime minister to put in place Nauru  arrangements. But he still opposed them.    

 JOURNALIST: What assurances can you give the public that the Labor Party  is unified?   

 WONG: We are absolutely focused on doing what is right for the nation. We  are absolutely focused on looking to the future. This week in the Parliament  we saw the passage of the carbon price legislation, the clean energy future.  This is a reform that John Howard wanted. This is a reform that Malcolm 

 Turnbull wanted. This is a reform that Tony Abbott used to want remember -  he used to support a carbon price and he used to support a carbon tax. This  is a reform that economists and scientists have called for, for years. And it is  this Prime Minister who has delivered it in a minority government through the 

 House of Representatives. This is about the jobs of the future. It’s also about  looking after the next generation of Australians.    

 JOURNALIST: Is the Party considering a new leader?   

 WONG: Absolutely not. Prime Minister Gillard will lead us to the next election.    

 JOURNALIST:  Do you think the win of the carbon tax is being overshadowed  by the asylum backdown?   

 WONG: I am very pleased as the former Climate Change Minister that we’ve  got the climate change legislation through the House of Representatives.  We’ve still got the Senate to go and I’m sure that’s going to be an interesting  debate because we’ll have Senator Joyce and Senator Bernardi and all of  those senators who are implacably opposed to any action on climate change  having a go. But we’ll keep focused on getting it through the parliament.    

 JOURNALIST: Is Stephen Smith been given any consideration to lead the  Party?   

 WONG: I’ve made it very clear, we have a Prime Minister, Prime Minister  Gillard and she’ll lead us to the next election.    

 JOURNALIST: Just back to asylum seekers. First Malaysia was forced -  sorry, was found to be illegal. And now we hear that Immigration Minister  Chris Bowen had canvassed Nauru. Should he resign?   

 WONG: Absolutely not. He is doing an extremely good job in very difficult  circumstances. A very good job in very difficult circumstances. And I will say  this, any politician who tells you there is an easy answer when it comes to  immigration is not telling you the truth. Tony Abbott is not telling you the truth 

 if he says there is an easy answer. This is a difficult policy area. It is a policy  area which requires politicians, political leaders to act sensibly, to look for the  solutions. That’s what Minister Bowen has done. What he has faced, what the  Government is facing, is a Leader of the Opposition who is so focused on  wrecking he is destroying offshore processing.    

 JOURNALIST: But how can Chris Bowen keep going in his role if he doesn’t  even have the support of the asylum seeker policy within his own party?   

 WONG: We absolutely support Minister Bowen and what he has done. He’s  done a very good job in very difficult circumstances.    

 JOURNALIST: So are you saying you’re all on the same page with this?   

 WONG: I am saying the Government’s position is clear. And I’d again remind  people - Tony Abbott is arguing for policy that the experts who advised  Government, who advised Mr Howard have said will not work. And he has  said, and he has also opposed amendments in the Parliament which would  give him were he prime minister, the power to put in place Nauru, just as it 

 would allow the Government to put in place its policy. A completely  destructive position against the national interest.    

 JOURNALIST: So is Nauru completely off the table as far as the Government  is concerned?   

 WONG: We have made clear our position and the Prime Minister and the  Immigration Minister have announced that.    

 JOURNALIST: Why is it, why is the Nauru option not accepted?   

 WONG: I think I’ve gone through that a number of times very clearly. The  advice that has been made public is from the experts that advised John  Howard, who advised Minister Ruddock and who are advising us and who 

 have also talked to Tony Abbott as we know, is that Nauru is not an effective  deterrent. There is only one effective deterrent on the table and that is the  agreement with Malaysia. Mr Abbott, Tony Abbott, is stopping the agreement  in Malaysia from being implemented. Those are the two propositions   

 JOURNALIST: Is it the case that the argument for or against Nauru is  different publically from what it is privately?   

 WONG: I’ve made clear the position on Nauru.    

 JOURNALIST: Is it fair to rely on NGOs like the Red Cross to help pick up the  slack that may happen with things like housing?   

 WONG: On the detail of - this is the onshore processing arrangements - on  the detail of that, I would refer you to Chris Bowen’s comments. He did a  number of press interviews yesterday where those issues were canvassed.   

 ENDS   

    

