---
title: "Is offshore policy fair? Just ask the migrants"
date: "2012-07-14"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211428241
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1784361%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 OPINION - WEEKEND AUSTRALIAN   

 14 July 2012 

 

 IS OFFSHORE POLICY FAIR? JUST ASK THE MIGRANTS   

 The recent tragedies at sea that have seen so many people die in their attempt to get to  Australia have led to a quantum shift in Australia's debate on refugee policy.   

 People who have been passionate advocates for onshore processing as the most  compassionate approach have changed their view as they recognise there is nothing  compassionate or humanitarian about a policy which tells people that they should risk their  lives to maximise their chance of a new life in Australia.   

 But there is also another good reason for supporting offshore processing as the most  compassionate approach: fairness.   

 Sitting in my Fairfield electorate office in Sydney’s West, I am constantly reminded of the  inherent unfairness of a situation that leads to these tragedies at sea.  In the most multicultural area of Australia, where many refugees have made their home,  there is very strong support for policies that deter boat journeys and give more places to  people sitting in desperate and prolonged circumstances around the world.    

 The constituents I speak to every day - who came to Australia as refugees and who still  have relatives in the Middle East, Asia and Africa, patiently but desperately waiting for the  chance of a new life in Australia - are to me a pretty good guide as to whether our refugee  policy is operating fairly.   

 And it is from these people that I get the strongest feedback that a policy like the Malaysia  agreement, which removes the incentive to come to Australia by boat but which gives more  people the chance of resettlement in Australia, is a good one.   

 This is not to say that people who come to Australia by boat are doing something  illegitimate, or something that most of us in the same position and with the same means  would not do. They should never be demonised. But all of the hundreds of thousands of  people who applied for permanent migration to Australia last year had legitimate hopes and  aspirations of a better life. The task of governments is to develop a fair system for assessing  these claims.   

 It often occurs to me that people who argue that the only reason for governments to  embrace offshore processing is to appeal to the ‘racist and redneck’ voters of the outer  suburbs and regions should actually come out to the multicultural heart of Australia and see  what people here really think. They could sit with me and do some constituent interviews  and see if they still think support for offshore processing equates with racism.   

 They could meet the people who are trying to get their sister and her family resettled from  Syria, where they fled from Iraq after having a family member kidnapped and receiving 

 regular death threats from local fundamentalists. Barely a day goes by when, as a local  member, I don't hear a story like this, tearfully told by a local resident worried about the  plight of their relatives. 

 

 The more than one million people who fled Iraq to neighbouring countries after the fall of  Saddam Hussein actually worsened their human rights situation and this led to unbearable  persecution.   

 Or they could take a few moments to talk to some of the relatives of the 1.6 million  refugees in and around the Horn of Africa who wonder if there is any chance, after years of  waiting, that they might have the chance of a new life in Australia.   

 Or they could talk to a member of the vibrant Vietnamese community, perhaps our greatest  example of a successful refugee community.  It's easy to forget now that only around 2,000  Vietnamese refugees came to Australia by boat in the years immediately after the war. More  than 100,000 Indochinese were resettled out of camps. Many attempted a boat journey but  perished. The majority of Australians of Vietnamese heritage I speak to clearly say we need  offshore processing policies and strong regional resettlement programs.   

 The majority of boat arrivals to Australia come from Iran, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka.  Some  will be refugees and others will not.  But it is legitimate to ask, if we were designing a  refugee intake with a blank canvas, would we have a program dominated by these three  countries?  We would not. Rather, our humanitarian intake would more closely reflect  UNHCR’s priorities, including populations of concern in Africa and elsewhere.   

 Some would argue that we should break the link between our offshore resettlement  program and onshore arrivals. That is, they argue that the rules should be changed so that  every boat arrival does not mean one less person from a camp. But this is not the answer.  Australia is almost unique in providing significant chances at resettlement (with the third  highest resettlement program in the world) and also having not insignificant irregular  arrivals. We have what the United Nations has recognised as the best settlement services in  the world, which means our refugee intake comes at a large, but justified cost.    

 Removing the link between offshore and onshore arrivals would put unsustainable pressure  on our settlement support and mean that either the Federal Government would have no  control over its asylum budget or our comprehensive assistance to help new refugees settle  in Australia would need to be massively pared back. Neither of these outcomes is  acceptable.   

 There are no moral absolutes in this debate. There are plenty of people who argue for  onshore processing because they see it as a more compassionate approach. I respect that.  But there are plenty of other people who have argued for offshore processing because we  have come to see it as the fairest, most compassionate approach that gives the most people  the fairest shot at a new life in our society. That's why I successfully argued at last year's  ALP National Conference that Australia can and should take more refugees, but that we  should explicitly embrace offshore processing as the fairest and safest way of dealing with  boat arrivals.    

 This debate must be tackled with a hard head and a soft heart.    

 That's something that the many thousands of refugees and migrants in Western Sydney and  elsewhere understand intuitively based on their real-world, lived experiences. 

 

 ENDS 

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

