---
title: "Australia should inform Chinese in Darwin of their right to seek asylum: Greens"
date: "2012-04-10"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211371102
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1556385%22
---

 fTuesday, 10 April 2012   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Australia should inform Chinese in Darwin of their  right to seek asylum: Greens  Australian immigration authorities should inform Chinese nationals in Darwin harbour of  their right to seek asylum here, the Australian Greens said today.   

 "Officials should use the time remaining on the Chinese's temporary visas to give them  every opportunity to seek protection in Australia," Greens' immigration spokesperson, Sen.  Sarah Hanson-Young, said.   

 "Australia also has a role to play in helping the Afghan and Iranian asylum seekers who were  rescued off Indonesia at the weekend. At least one asylum seeker has said he was a former  interpreter for Coalition forces in Afghanistan and risks being targeted by the Taliban.   

 "Australia could do more to help the UNHCR, especially as there are only two UNHCR  officials in Indonesia who assess asylum seekers' claims.   

 "Australia should raise the number of people it directly settles from Indonesia and Malaysia.    

 "The Greens are concerned for the welfare and safety of these asylum seekers, especially  given the long waiting times and threats to their lives they face in Indonesia and Malaysia.   

 "Australia can and should lift its overall humanitarian intake to 20,000-25,000 people and  take more people directly from Indonesia and Malaysia to stop the need for them to risk  boarding unseaworthy boats.   

 MEDIA CONTACT: PARIS LORD 0427 604 760   

