---
title: "Serco manual is proof our government's running detention centres as prisons"
date: "2012-03-14"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211369815
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1499387%22
---

 Wednesday, 14 March 2012  MEDIA RELEASE 

 Serco manual is proof our government’s running detention  centres as prisons: Greens   

 The Greens say Serco has been instructing its guards with a manual used to train prison officers  running a jail, instead of dealing with the reality of fragile people languishing in immigration  detention centres.   

 “As Serco was never contracted by the Immigration Department to run prisons, I urge Minister  Bowen to explain what his department’s going to do about the manual and how guards are  trained,” Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Sen. Sarah Hanson-Young, said.   

 “80 percent of the manual is dedicated to teaching guards how to use force, including hitting  and kicking asylum seekers, with virtually no training on dealing with specific needs of refugees,  including children, who have fled war and torture.   

 “I spoke in parliament today about how these prison guard training manuals and media access  rules based on Guantanamo Bay show just how far this government has gone to replicate the  bad old days of demonising vulnerable refugees to score political points.   

 “Serco turned over a global profit of $415.4 million in 2011 and its CEO said the phenomenal  growth in Asia and Australia had rescued the company's performance.    

 “I question how seriously Serco takes its $1 billion contract when it could not even be bothered  putting together an original manual which goes to the heart of the needs of asylum seekers.   

 “It is a cobbled-together document—they have not even replaced all the words properly and  they put it down to a 'technical fault'.   

 “Instead, we find language such as ‘offenders’ or ‘accused’ and ‘serve on his sentence’ which  clearly proves this document has simply been copied from a prison guard’s training manual.   

 “It reveals a lazy and shoddy approach which leaves both detainees and individual officers in a  dangerous predicament when they are not trained for their environment.   

 “There is nothing in this manual teaching how to handle people who have post traumatic stress  disorder and have mental illnesses such that some are harming themselves or attempting  suicide.   

 “As we have regularly heard in parliament’s immigration detention centre network inquiry,  Serco officers have put on the record they lack the skills to deal with detainees’ escalating  mental health issues such as self-harm.    

 “The company and immigration department continue to brush those concerns aside, but this  training manual proves those concerns are absolutely valid.”  MEDIA CONTACT:  Paris Lord 0427 604 760 

