---
title: "High Court challenge to ASIO Act needed to restore justice; new Greens' bill makes the necessary reforms for a fair-go"
date: "2012-05-24"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211373749
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1657126%22
---

 The Greens   

 Thursday, 24 May 2012   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 High Court challenge to ASIO Act needed to restore justice; new Greens' bill  makes the necessary reforms for a fair-go   

 The Australian Greens have backed a High Court challenge to the indefinite  detention of refugees who have been issued with adverse security assessments by  ASIO, a move the party says supports the Greens announcement this week to  amend the ASIO act to allow for appeal rights and review mechanisms for refugees  and asylum seekers.    

 "This challenge matters because it is simply not fair that a person can be detained,  possibly for the rest of their life, and never be able to contest a claim ASIO has made  against them," Greens' immigration and human rights spokesperson, Sen. Sarah  Hanson-Young, said.   

 “The cloud of secrecy over the current system means men, women and children are  caught in a legal-black hole, incarcerated without charge or trial and given no idea of  the reasons why.  We don’t accept this for Australian citizens who under the ASIO  Act are able to appeal an assessment made against them and it is just as  unacceptable for vulnerable refugees.    

 “All we are asking for is a fair, just and due process that allows those detained  indefinitely by the Immigration Minister as a result of ASIO's assessment to be able  to put their case and have a fair right of reply, just like is done in New Zealand,  Canada and the UK.   

 "It is shameful that currently 57 refugees including 6 children are locked in detention  possibly for the rest of their lives with no right of appeal or even an explanation as to  why. The current policy is tearing families apart and putting children at serious risk.   A number of the children have never been outside of a detention facility - this is not  the fair-go Australia we ought to be.    

 "The legal challenge puts the government on notice that it must fix the laws that stop  a person from being able to know ASIO's statement of reasons against them. This  was one of the main recommendations from the recent Parliamentary Inquiry into the  Immigration Network.   

 "The government can make these changes through the Greens' bill announced this  week which will amend the ASIO Act. It gives refugees a statement of reasons for an  ASIO decision, create periodic six-month reviews of ASIO assessments, allow the  Administrative Appeals Tribunal to hold merits reviews and creates a Special  Advocate for sensitive national security matters.    

 "The Opposition may argue there is no need to change the ASIO Act, but Australian  citizens can challenge an adverse security assessment. It is fair and proper that this  be extended to non-citizens Australia has deemed are refugees who need our  protection." 

 

 MEDIA CONTACT: PARIS LORD 0427 604 760   

