---
title: "Another record month of illegal boat arrivals send budget to brink"
date: "2012-06-20"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375251
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736705%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ANOTHER RECORD MONTH OF ILLEGAL  BOAT ARRIVALS SENDS BUDGET TO BRINK  June 20, 2012

 Labor has set a new all time monthly record with 17 illegal boats turning up in June, as well as 1,000 people on board yet again, and a six week old asylum budget under pressure, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “The arrival of two more boats makes June the highest month on record with 17 boats arriving illegally and there are still ten days to go,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Once again more than 1,000 people have turned up in a single month and more than 1,800 people have turned up in the six weeks since the budget,” he said.

 “With more than 300 people turning up every week since the budget and the government budgeting on just 450 arrivals per month, Labor’s asylum budget is set for yet another blow out.

 “To date, the asylum budget has blown out by $4.7 billion in the past three years. With arrivals running at almost three times the rate projected in the budget, and a new border policy failure front opening up at Cocos (Keeling) Island requiring new facilities, more charter flights and extra staff, taxpayers are going to get a fresh bill.  

 “As  Labor  continues  to  defend  the  farce  over  Australia’s  first  known  Sail-In  Fly-Out  (SIFO)  alleged  people  smuggler  in   Captain  Emad,  the  record  rate  of  arrivals  that  continues  only  confirms  that  Labor  is  the  problem,  not  just  their  failed policies,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “The arrival of the 60th and 61st boats for 2012, carrying over 120 passengers, once again highlights the systemic failures of Labor’s border protection regime.

 “As June continues to be a record breaking month for boat arrivals, the people smugglers are making the most of their prime business conditions under Labor’s soft border protection policies.

 “Australia’s borders are currently being run by alleged criminal syndicates from within our own detention network and our own community.

 “Our  borders  are  easily  penetrated  and  our  reputation  for  being  tough  on  people  smuggling  has  been  critically compromised.

 “Until the Government comes to its senses and restores the Coalition’s proven border protection policies, we will continue  to be inundated with boat arrivals,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 ANOTHER RECORD MONTH OF ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS SENDS BUDGE...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

