---
title: "Another boat after Abbott votes against offshore processing"
date: "2012-06-05"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374363
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2273178%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Another boat after Abbott votes against offshore  processing  Tuesday, 05 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Jason Clare MP - Minister for Home Affairs, Minister for  Justice and Minister for Defence Materiel. 

 Another asylum seeker boat was intercepted today as a direct consequence of Tony  Abbott's decision to vote against offshore processing, the Minister for Immigration  and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Home Affairs, Jason Clare MP,  said today. 

 Last week Tony Abbott voted against legislation to implement offshore processing. 

 The boat is the 44th since Tony Abbott rejected the government's offer to work  together to implement offshore processing. 

 Mr Bowen said the difference in boat numbers from May last year and May this year  highlighted the positive effect of the Malaysia arrangement on reducing asylum  seeker arrivals in Australia. 

 'In May 2011, after the Malaysia arrangement was announced, we had a total of we  had a total of six boat arrivals with 304 asylum seekers, as people knew there was  no guarantee of resettlement in Australia,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'In contrast, in May this year we had 14 boats with 1176 asylum seekers arrive. This  shows that the Coalition's wrongheadedness on this issue is encouraging boats to  come to our shores.' 

 Mr Clare said it was time Tony Abbott stopped voting 'no' and allowed offshore  processing in Malaysia and Nauru. 

 'Let's remember what this is all about - 200 people died off the coast of Indonesia  and another 11 died off the coast of Malaysia,' Mr Clare said. 

 'We can help stop people dying at sea. It requires legislation. That means it requires  us to work together.' 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb187307.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 05 June 2012 at 15:22 AEST  

