---
title: "Mutual obligation for bridging visa holders"
date: "2012-11-23"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211385807
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2062920%22
---

 

 

 1 

 

 

 

 JOINT PRESS RELEASE 

 THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MR SCOTT MORRISON MHR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION   AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MUTUAL OBLIGATION FOR BRIDGING VISA HOLDERS    

 If elected, the Coalition will ensure that access to benefits for holders of bridging visas granted by the  Gillard Government will be subject to individuals satisfying mandatory mutual obligation requirements.    

 Under the Gillard Government’s latest policy change, thousands of the people coming to Australia illegally  by boat will be put on bridging visas with access to welfare and no work rights.     

 If young Australians have to work for the dole, so should those on bridging visas.     

 This plan is consistent with the Coalition’s 2010 election policy that extended mutual obligation to the  holders of temporary protection visas.    

 The Gillard Labor Government policies have led to more than 6,000 asylum seekers being placed on  bridging visas and released into the community with work rights. Most however are receiving welfare  payments.    

 Further changes to their bridging visa policy announced this week will mean that many more thousands of  asylum seekers will be released into the community without work rights and on permanent welfare.    

 Given the current rate of arrivals there are likely to be tens of thousands of asylum seekers in the community  on one of two types of bridging visas within the next 12 months. This is a recipe for disaster.    

 This two-tier arrangement is complicated and likely to create deep social and economic divisions between  the two cohorts who have arrived in identical circumstances.    

 If illegal arrivals are going to be released from detention into the community they must contribute.     

 The Coalition will address this policy mess by ensuring that every person granted a bridging visa by the  Gillard Government will be subject to mandatory mutual obligation provisions in order to receive benefits,  and in particular income support, as a new condition of their visa.    

 Bridging visa holders who are not participating in this scheme will be taken back into detention.      

 Existing work for the dole pathways for asylum seekers will have to be modified or additional streams  created to ensure that language and skills needs are addressed.      

 Further details of the programme will be announced closer to the next election.   

 

 23 November 2012 

