---
title: "Labor making excuses on Nauru as another boat arrives"
date: "2012-08-22"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211380578
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2733095%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for Stirling LABOR MAKING EXCUSES ON NAURU AS  ANOTHER BOAT ARRIVES August 20, 2012

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat, with 21 people on board, comes as the government is already making excuses for not getting on  with the job of reopening the Nauru processing centre, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow  Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Labor are already starting to make excuses on getting the Nauru processing centre up and running, with the Minister casting doubt  over the costs and timetable for reopening the centre,” Mr Morrison said.

 “In  2001  John  Howard  had  temporary  accommodation  established  for  offshore  processing  on  Nauru  in  just  19  days  from  the   announcement, with little or no existing infrastructure in place when this was achieved. Nauru is in a vastly improved position since  that time and the Government is still making excuses.  

 “It  is  not  surprising  that  the  Government  will  seek  to  cast  doubt  over  a  policy  they  do  not  believe  in  and  have  been  forced  to   implement against their will on Nauru.

 “In January Minister Bowen said reopening Nauru would cost more than $400,000 per place to build the facilities. The Houston Panel  reported last  week  it  could be  done  for  less  than  half  this  cost,  at  approximately  $200,000  per  place,  and  provide  twice  as  many  places. These figures are still well above the $104,000 per place it cost to build the detention facilities at Curtin.  

 “Minister Bowen’s costings in January, when he claimed $316m in capital costs for a 750 place facility on Nauru, have been exposed  by the Houston Panel’s advice that reveals we can have a facility with 1,500 places, twice the size, for $300 million, exposing Mr  Bowen’s earlier attempt as nothing more than an attempt to trash Nauru as a viable option. 

 “Minister  Bowen  should  stop  seeking  to  pre-empt  the  Government’s  chronic  inability  to  implement  policies,  especially  those  they  don’t believe in, by making excuses in advance.  

 “The Coalition stands by our costings for Nauru which were developed by project management company Delta FM who, as part of  the  Compass  Group,  were  directly  involved  in  establishing  and  operating  the  previous  processing  centre  with  the  IOM  on  Nauru.   These costings provide for accommodation for up to 1,350 people and 200 staff at a total capital cost of $95m, less than a third of  the Government’s original $316m estimate.

 Mr Keenan said: “We have now had 10 boat arrivals, carrying over 500 people, since the Government agreed to reopen offshore  processing  on  Nauru  - an  indication  that  the  Government  must  return  to  the  full  suite  of  the  Coalition’s  proven  border  protection  policies if we are to stop the boats from coming.

 “Over 23,000 people on 396 boats have arrived illegally in Australia under Labor - a truly shameful record that has made a mockery  out of this Government’s ability to protect our borders.

 “It  is  vital  that  the  Government  immediately  reinforce  offshore  processing  on  Nauru  and  Manus  island,  so  that  people  smugglers   receive the message loud and clear that Australia no longer has an open border policy.

 “By simply stating that they currently ‘run the risk’ of being processed offshore will only continue to open the flood gates to illegal  boat arrivals until this ‘warning’ becomes action,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 LABOR MAKING EXCUSES ON NAURU AS ANOTHER BOAT ARRIVES > Mic...

 18/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

