---
title: "MYEFO 2912-13: More debt, more taxes, more money shuffles and continues Labor dishonesty"
date: "2012-10-22"
creators:
  - "Hockey, Joe"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211383898
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2693110%22
---

 Joint Media Release - Joe Hockey and  Andrew Robb - Labor Crashes Through  Previous Debt Limit Topping Quarter of a  Trillion Do 

 Friday, 12 October 2012 

 THE HON. JOE HOCKEY MP 

 Shadow Treasurer 

 THE HON. ANDREW ROBB AO MP 

 Shadow Minister for Finance, Deregulation and Debt Reduction 

 M E D I A R E L E A S E 

 Friday, 12 October 2012 

 LABOR CRASHES THROUGH PREVIOUS DEBT  

 LIMIT TOPPING QUARTER OF A TRILLION DOLLARS 

 The Gillard Government has driven up Australia’s credit card to a record $256.4  billion according to latest Australian Office of Financial Management (AOFM) figures. 

 The previous debt ceiling of $250 billion was raised by Labor to $300 billion in the  May budget further confirming its inability to curb its debt addiction. 

 According to PIMCO, the world’s largest bond investor, Australia’s second largest  export in 2011-12 was not coal, but Australian Commonwealth Government Bonds -  Labor’s record debt. 

 You never hear this shameful statistic from Wayne Swan or Penny Wong because  it’s at complete odds with their nonsense about belt tightening and returning the  budget to surplus. 

 Funding Labor’s record debt is “a capital tidal wave” according to PIMCO and has  contributed to the persistently high Australian dollar. 

 Wayne Swan previously said of increasing the debt ceiling to $300 billion, “very  simply, this is no big deal”. (ABC Radio National 9 May 2012) 

 Mr Swan’s attitude and ignorance are breathtaking considering interest payments  alone on Labor’s gross debt is $12 billion this year - the cost of 12 world class  hospitals. 

 Given its track record there is no doubt debt will continue to rise while the Gillard  government remains in office with its $120 billion budget black hole of unfunded  promises.  

 

