---
title: "Joint Press Release - Mutual obligation for bridging visa holders"
date: "2012-11-23"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211385921
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2155268%22
---

 Joint Press Release - Mutual obligation for bridging visa  holders November 23, 2012

 If elected, the Coalition will ensure that access to benefits for holders of bridging visas granted by the Gillard Government will be 

 subject to individuals satisfying mandatory mutual obligation requirements.

 Under the Gillard Government’s latest policy change, thousands of the people coming to Australia illegally by boat will be put on 

 bridging visas with access to welfare and no work rights.

 If young Australians have to work for the dole, so should those on bridging visas.

 This plan is consistent with the Coalition’s 2010 election policy that extended mutual obligation to the holders of temporary  protection visas.

 The Gillard Labor Government policies have led to more than 6,000 asylum seekers being placed on bridging visas and released 

 into the community with work rights. Most however are receiving welfare payments.

 Further changes to their bridging visa policy announced this week will mean that many more thousands of asylum seekers will be  released into the community without work rights and on permanent welfare.

 Given the current rate of arrivals there are likely to be tens of thousands of asylum seekers in the community on one of two types 

 of bridging visas within the next 12 months. This is a recipe for disaster.

 This two-tier arrangement is complicated and likely to create deep social and economic divisions between the two cohorts who  have arrived in identical circumstances.

 If illegal arrivals are going to be released from detention into the community they must contribute.

 The Coalition will address this policy mess by ensuring that every person granted a bridging visa by the Gillard Government will 

 be subject to mandatory mutual obligation provisions in order to receive benefits, and in particular income support, as a new  condition of their visa.

 Bridging visa holders who are not participating in this scheme will be taken back into detention. 

 Existing work for the dole pathways for asylum seekers will have to be modified or additional streams created to ensure that 

 language and skills needs are addressed. 

 Further details of the programme will be announced closer to the next election.

 23 November 2012

 © Tony Abbott MHR 2010 | Authorised by Tony Abbott MHR, Level 2, 17 Sydney Rd, Manly NSW 2095

 www.tonyabbott.com.au

 Tony Abbott Federal Member for Warringah | Leader of the Opposition

 Page 1 of 1 Joint Press Release - Mutual obligation for bridging visa holders > Tony Abbott

 9/01/2013 http://www.tonyabbott.com.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Prin...

