---
title: "Government implements Expert Panel's family reunion recommendation"
date: "2012-09-24"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382510
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2260283%22
---

 

 GOVERNMENT IMPLEMENTS EXPERT  PANEL’S FAMILY REUNION  RECOMMENDATION  September 24, 2012  

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today announced changes  to the Special Humanitarian Program (SHP), removing family reunion concessions for  boat arrivals to further discourage people from risking their lives at sea. 

 Mr Bowen said the Government had accepted in principle the recommendations of the  Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers, which included barring people arriving by boat after 13  August 2012 from proposing family members under the humanitarian program. 

 “These changes will remove the incentive for people to travel to Australia by boat with  the intention of bringing out their families on humanitarian visas,” Mr Bowen said. 

 “We don’t want people risking their lives at sea on dangerous boat journeys and together  with the implementation of the other panel recommendations this measure provides  clear evidence of the Government’s determination to break the people smugglers’  business model.” 

 For those who arrived by boat before 13 August 2012, the changes mean applicants  proposed by refugees in Australia will now need to meet all the criteria to be granted an  SHP visa. 

 “Until now, the offshore spouse, dependent children and, in some cases, parents of  refugees in Australia could be granted an SHP visa solely on the basis of that  relationship, regardless of whether they were in humanitarian need themselves,” Mr  Bowen said. 

 “This created a situation where, for example, the head of a family would arrive in  Australia alone, apply for asylum and then seek to bring out several members of his  family as humanitarian migrants. 

 “Decisions on the applications made by family of adult boat arrivals who arrived prior to  13 August 2012 will now take into account any discrimination or persecution they face in  their home country, as well as their connection to Australia, their protection options  elsewhere, and Australia’s capacity to help. Their applications will also be given lowest  processing priority. 

 “These changes will ensure highest priority is given to the applications of family of  people who were granted refugee and humanitarian visas overseas and migrated to  Australia in a safer and orderly manner.” 

 In accordance with the Expert Panel’s recommendation, applicants proposed by  unaccompanied minor refugees who arrived before 13 August 2012 will still be eligible  for SHP visas on the strength of their family relationship alone. 

 Mr Bowen said people affected by changes to the SHP would be able to sponsor their  family through the regular family stream of Australia’s Migration Program. 

 “To accommodate the resulting increase in demand for visas in the family migration  stream, and in accordance with the Expert Panel report, the Government will increase  the number of places by 4,000 per year,” he said. 

 “Applicants sponsored by people who arrive by boat will need to meet the same  requirements as everyone else applying for migration through the family stream,  including the relevant visa application charges.” 

 Subject to the Governor-General’s agreement to the necessary regulations the policy  changes announced today will be effective in coming weeks. 

 

