---
title: "Australia to support UN relief works for Palestinian refugees"
date: "2012-05-28"
creators:
  - "Carr, Bob"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211373928
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1665965%22
---

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  Senator the Hon. Bob Carr    

 May 28, 2012 

 

 

 AUSTRALIA TO SUPPORT UN RELIEF WORKS FOR PALESTINIAN  REFUGEES    

 

 Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  Senator  Bob  Carr  today  announced  Australia  would   support additional teachers and doctors for Palestinian refugees in the Middle East,  with a $90 million funding agreement to be signed with the United Nations Relief and  Works Agency (UNRWA) in Canberra this afternoon.    

 The agreement would provide the $90m in overseas aid to be distributed by UNRWA  over  five  years,  supporting  education  and  medical  care  for  Palestinian  refugees  in   Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.     

 The  agreement  would  be  signed  by  Senator  Carr  and  UNRWA  Commissioner   General Mr Filippo Grandi in Canberra today.    

 "More  than  1.4  million  Palestinians  live  in  recognised  refugee  camps  in  the  Middle   East, including those fleeing ongoing violence in Syria," Senator Carr said.    

 "The total number of Palestinian refugees in the region could exceed five million.    

 "Today's funding agreement means more Palestinian children will go to school, and  more  doctors  will  be  supported  to  work  in  refugee  camps  and  Palestinian   communities.    

 "That's  good  news  on  humanitarian  grounds,  and  good  news  for  Middle  Eastern   regional stability."    

 Senator  Carr  said  while  Australia's  first  priority  was  always  its  own  citizens,  there   was room for wealthy countries to also do their part in fighting poverty overseas.    

 Since 2007, Australian aid has: 

 • helped  more  than  470,000  Palestinian  refugees  attend  school  in  the  West   Bank, Gaza, Lebanon, Syria and Jordan, including more than 200,000 girls; and 

 • supported  4200  health  workers  to  provide  basic  and  emergency  care  to   Palestinian refugees. 

 

 UNRWA  is  a  United  Nations  agency  established  by  the  UN  General  Assembly  in   1949 to provide assistance and protection to registered Palestine refugees. Australia 

 has provided over $119 million to UNRWA since 2000, to deliver education, health,  housing and infrastructure services to Palestinian refugees.    

 

 Minister's Office: 02 6277 7500    

 

