---
title: "New services to help migrants and refugees in the West"
date: "2012-06-20"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375237
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2264705%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 New services to help migrants and refugees in  the West  Wednesday, 20 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Senator Kate Lundy - Minister for Sport, Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today announced 10 new projects will be  funded in 2012-13 under the Settlement Grants Program (SGP) to assist newly  arrived migrants and refugees settle in metropolitan and regional Western Australia. 

 From 1 July 2012, Western Australian settlement agencies will receive a total of $1.3  million in additional funding to deliver new services that will help new arrivals  become self-reliant and build a new life in Western Australia. 

 As part of the funding allocated to Western Australia this coming financial year,  Centrecare Inc will receive a grant to deliver youth-specific service as well as a  range of general settlement services to help new migrants make the cultural  transition. 

 'Helping newly arrived migrant youth to prepare for the employment market and  become independent is just one example of the important work carried out by  agencies in the state funded under the Settlement Grants Program,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'Centrecare Inc has identified a need for migrant youth to be better prepared for the  employment market and to better understand how to manage health and family  relationships. These programs will provide critical knowledge to empower these  young people so they can fully participate in society. 

 'Being able to live independently is a fundamental desire for any individual and it is  important we provide our newly arrived refugees and migrants with the tools and the  support necessary to help them successful settle in the community.' 

 Announcing the Western Australian grants, Senator Lundy said the Australian  Government reaffirmed its commitment to helping refugees and migrants settle into  their new communities through the Settlement Grants Program. 

 'These grants help people to make the transition into Australian life by building on  their existing skills and, at the same time, help them to learn valuable new ones,'  Senator Lundy said. 

 'These services provide practical support which assists the settlement process,  building confidence and support networks. Whether it is improving people's ability to  gain access to mainstream services, housing assistance or the community legal  education support, these services are all activities that empower new arrivals by  helping them connect with local communities, develop greater independence and  improve their life skills. 

 'The community sector plays a vital role in supporting newly arrived refugees and I  commend all organisations in Western Australia for their contribution to the  successful settlement of migrants and humanitarian entrants.' 

 The Australian Government will spend $39 million in 2012-13 to deliver services to  humanitarian entrants and new migrants to acquire skills and knowledge to fully  participate in the community as soon as possible after arrival. 

 A list of successful applicants in the 2012-13 funding round is available on the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 2012-13 Grant Recipients 

