---
title: "Labor border failures continues as government policy vacuum rolls on"
date: "2012-07-01"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375955
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736693%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LABOR BORDER FAILURES CONTINUE AS  GOVERNMENT POLICY VACUUM ROLLS ON July 01, 2012

 Labor has taken up where they left off last month with yet another illegal boat arrival, with 53 people on board, Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection,  Michael Keenan said today. 

 "A new month and new financial year has started the same way the last one ended. The Government still has no asylum  seeker policy, Julia Gillard is still blaming Tony Abbott for her Government's failures and the boats keep on coming," Mr  Morrison said. 

 "In the past week we have had a boat per day and 565 arrivals. 

 "Last month Labor set a new all time record for both the number of people to arri ve on illegal boats in a month with 1,781  arrivals and in a financial year with 8,311 arrivals on 112 boats. 

 "This latest arrival on the same day as Labor's carbon tax came into effect is a reminder to all Australians of two of Labor's  greatest failures in office, their deceit on the carbon tax and their incompetence on our borders. 

 "Labor's failure on our borders is the consequence of never having had any serious commitment to these issues. As Tony  Abbott said, Labor's heart is just not in it, when it comes to border protection. 

 "Instead of coming up with their own policies, Labor has always been over reliant on advisers and committees rather than  simply taking decisions and showing resolve. 

 "We learned today that the same department the Government uses to justify their refusal to restore the policies of the  Howard Government, are the same advisers Senator Evans has admitted never warned the Government that abolishing  the Coalition's proven policies would lead to a resurgence in illegal boat arrivals. 

 "Labor cannot blame anyone other than themselves for the chaos, cost and tragedies that have resulted from their weak  policies. Yet they still seek to contract out their responsibilities. 

 "Now Julia Gillard wants more committees. By contrast, the Coalition has a set of policies and clear track record of resolve  and conviction on this issue. That is why, if elected to Government we will set about implementing these policies, which  can be achieved with the same laws the current Government has to work with," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "In the last four days over 293 people have been smuggled across Australia’s borders, putting further  pressure on a system that is under immense strain. 

 "Our men and women of Border Protection Command have had a week from hell with all that has been thrown their way.  They deserve our utmost praise and admiration. 

 "More than 5,300 people on 71 boats have risked their lives on the dangerous journey to reach Australia in 2012 alone -more will continue to arrive while Australia's border protection policy remains in limbo. 

 "The Labor Government missed an opportunity this week to put an end to this evil trade in human misery, however instead  allowed their pride to get in the way of having a real solution to this problem of their own making," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 LABOR BORDER FAILURES CONTINUE AS GOVERNMENT POLICY VACUU...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

