---
title: "More boats arrive due to Abbott's negativity"
date: "2012-05-21"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211373492
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2275341%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 More boats arrive due to Abbott's negativity  Monday, 21 May 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Jason Clare MP - Minister for Home Affairs, Minister for  Justice and Minister for Defence Materiel. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Home Affairs, Jason Clare MP, today called on Tony Abbott to stop standing in the  way of real action on people smuggling. 

 Another two asylum seeker boats have arrived, being the 36th and 37th since Tony  Abbott again chose relentless negativity over the national interest and rejected the  government's offer to implement offshore processing. 

 'The Coalition's hypocrisy on this issue is boundless. They criticise the government  for boat arrivals on one hand but with the other Tony Abbott's negativity prevents the  implementation of offshore processing,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'Mr Abbott continues to stand in the way of this genuine deterrent. The government  even offered a processing centre on Nauru - but he said no; no to his own policy.' 

 Mr Clare said the boats would keep coming and people would continue to risk their  lives at sea while Mr Abbott said no to offshore processing. 

 'Remember what this is all about - 200 people died off the coast of Indonesia last  year. Another 11 died off the coast of Malaysia,' Mr Clare said. 

 'We can stop people risking their lives. The legislation is in the Parliament. It  shouldn't take another 200 people to die before Mr Abbott agrees to pass it.' 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb186763.htm  Last update: Monday, 21 May 2012 at 13:53 AEST  

