---
title: "Queensland celebrates Refugee Week 2012"
date: "2012-06-16"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375012
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2134804%22
---

 

 

 Queensland celebrates Refugee Week 2012  June 16, 2012  

 People inQueenslandwill celebrateAustralia’s generous humanitarian tradition and the  valuable contributions of refugees to the community during Refugee Week 2012, Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship Chris Bowen, and Minister for Multicultural Affairs Senator  Kate Lundy, said today. 

 Refugee Week is being celebrated from 17-23 June, with World Refugee Day on Wednesday,  20 June. As part of the celebrations, there will be more than 100 events across the nation in  recognition of the plight of refugees and the new lives they have established in Australia. 

 “Australia welcomes people from many lands and has a generous humanitarian tradition,” Mr  Bowen said. 

 “Australians can be rightly proud of the fact that Australia resettles more refugees per capita  than any other nation and provides much needed protection to people who have suffered  persecution.” 

 Senator Lundy said Australia’s settlement support services are among the best in the world,  helping refugees to rebuild their lives here. 

 “Resettlement in Australia provides a chance for refugees to enjoy all the freedom and  opportunities this nation has to offer,” Senator Lundy said. 

 “Refugees in Australia have overcome hardship to live, study and work here, and Refugee  Week is a time to reflect on the contribution they have made to our community, economy and  culture.” 

 At 1pm on 23 June, thousands of people across Australia, including Brisbane, will walk in  unity to celebrate different paths people have taken to become Australian, as part of the Walk  Together initiative. Each walk will finish with a festival celebrating cultural diversity. 

 In Brisbane, a special citizenship ceremony will be staged at the Multicultural Development  Association’s multicultural festival in South Brisbane on 24 June. Nearly 60 people from  countries including Sudan, Iraq, Eritrea, China, Sierra Leone, Kenya, Thailand and Pakistan  will make the pledge to become Australian citizens at 3pm. The free festival will be a vibrant,  family-friendly event celebrating new and emerging refugee communities across South East  Queensland. 

  The ‘Through their eyes’ art exhibition will be staged at Wesley House in Brisbane city until  17 June. The exhibition is a celebration and representation of the many benefits people from a  refugee background give to the city, including artistic talent. 

 Australia’s contribution to international protection and humanitarian efforts continues this  year, with 13,750 places offered under the humanitarian program in 2012-13. 

 Australia has resettled around 775,000 refugees and other people in humanitarian need since  the end of World War II. 

 

