---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Fairfield NSW: 18 August 2012: reconnaissance teams; boat arrivals; Houston Panel Report; Nauru; Papua New Guinea"
date: "2012-08-18"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "reconnaissance teams"
  - "boat arrivals"
  - "Houston Panel Report"
  - "Nauru"
  - "Papua New Guinea"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211380403
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1861114%22
---

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 *TRANSCRIPT*   

 DOORSTOP, FAIRFIELD NSW   

 SATURDAY, 18 AUGUST 2012 

 

 SUBJECTS: Reconnaissance teams, boat arrivals, Houston Panel Report,  Nauru, Papua New Guinea.   

 CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks for coming everybody. I thought I’d cover a few matters this  afternoon. Firstly, obviously, our reconnaissance teams have arrived and are working in  both Manus Island and Nauru. They have begun the considerable task of establishing  the work that needs to be done for the detention facilities to be completed in both sites.    

 They have received, of course, very considerable assistance from the Governments of  Papua New Guinea - the National Government of Papua New Guinea, the Provincial  Government of Manus Island and the Government of Nauru, and I’d like to thank them  for it.   

 Now of course you’ve seen the footage; there is a considerable amount of work to be  done here, as we’ve said all along. Those who argued that there was a detention facility  at Nauru, for example, ready to go, that could be rebuilt at no or minimal cost, are  incorrect. We’ve previously released, of course, cost estimates for both and we will  update those as the reconnaissance teams continue their work. We expect the  reconnaissance teams to return to Australia early to mid-next week and then of course  I’ve provide further updates as to the work; I’ll provide further updates at that time. But  there is considerable work occurring.   

 Now this morning, of course, I saw Mr Morrison questioning the Government’s resolve to  implement these policies and questioning the effect of these policies. I just want to say  a couple of things: nobody should estimate the Government’s resolve here; the  Government’s resolve to implement the 22 recommendations of the Houston Panel 

 Report; the Government’s resolve to use those recommendations to break the people  smugglers’ business model.    

 I’ve made it repeatedly clear since Monday, as to what people can expect if they arrive  in Australia by boat after that date. But if you want to talk about resolve, let’s talk about  resolve to implement the recommendations, not to wish on people smugglers or to hope  that somehow that the Nauru or Manus Island detention facilities won’t work.    

 The Government is resolved to implement all the recommendations of the Houston Panel  - that’s what we intend to get on and do. Of course, there is a considerable amount of  detailed work occurring as we speak on all of those recommendations and I’ll provide  updates as and when appropriate.    

 Happy to take some questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Were you shocked by the state of Manus Island?   

 BOWEN: No. Of course, we were developing the Manus Island centre before the High  Court ruling of last year, so I knew, the Government was acutely aware of how much  work needs to be done at both Manus Island and Nauru. And in fact we pointed that out  repeatedly to those like Tony Abbott, who said that these detention facilities are both  ready to go and could be up and running at no or minimal cost.    

 JOURNALIST: So when you say you’re going to have to revisit those costings, does  that mean they’re going to go up?   

 BOWEN: Well I’m going to provide updates to the costings. I’m not going to speculate  as to what they are until the reconnaissance teams give me further and more detailed  updates.    

 JOURNALIST: What about concerns for the capacity at both Nauru and Manus Island  will be full? I mean we’ve had over 550 asylum seekers arrive just in the last week.   

 BOWEN: Well I have made the point repeatedly there are capacity issues at both -  there is capacity of 1500 at Nauru and 600 at Manus Island - that is accurate. The point  is, to those who have said there is a cap in the Malaysian Arrangement, that there is of  course a capacity at both centres.    

 Now of course you are going to find people smugglers and asylum seekers, firstly, trying  it on, secondly, having already paid a people smuggler and saying, ‘We have nothing to  lose by coming to Australia’. Others will make a different choice. Now people will try it  on but we will continue our resolve and we will implement this policy and we will  implement it effectively and clearly.    

 JOURNALIST: Does it show though that even before the Pacific solution is brought in  you need to look at another solution?   

 BOWEN: We need to look at all the 22 recommendations of the Panel Report and  implement all 22 that have been recommended to us.   

 JOURNALIST: Craig Emerson has likened the rush of boats in the last week to a  closing down sale. Is that really appropriate language to be using given it’s a massive  humanitarian crisis?   

 BOWEN: I don’t have a problem with Craig’s language at all. People smugglers are  trying to make money out of this; they are trying to maximise their profits before this  new policy is fully implemented and they are trying to mislead asylum seekers about  what awaits them in Australia. And that is what is completely inappropriate: the  activities of people smugglers to make money out of the plight of asylum seekers and  they have no regard for the welfare of asylum seekers, they only have regard to their  own profits.   

 JOURNALIST: But using language like that though doesn’t sound like the Federal  Government has any regard for the…   

 BOWEN: I don’t except your suggestion there. Of course, we are being driven here by  saving lives. I don’t accept the conclusion you are reaching there about Craig’s  comments.   

 JOURNALIST: It must be a touchy topic given you have had to bring in police  protection today?   

 BOWEN: Well, Federal Ministers do have protection from time to time; I don’t comment  on those and I don’t comment on the particularities of those.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you expecting Nauru to be on line sooner than Manus? Do you have  a timeline?   

 BOWEN: I am going to provide updates as we go; I’m not going to provide a running  commentary until I receive the further report from the reconnaissance teams.   

 JOURNALIST: So no rough estimates of maybe a month or…?   

 BOWEN: I have already outlined the timeline that we’re looking at. I will provide further  and better details as and when that occurs.   

 Ends. 

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 

 

