---
title: "2012 scorecard - people smugglers 271 / Labor Nil"
date: "2012-12-31"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211387585
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2723315%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling 2012 scorecard - People smugglers 271 /  Labor Nil December 31, 2012

 2012 was the year for record breaking numbers of boat arrivals under Labor, with 271 boats, carrying over 17,000 people,  smuggled across our borders in just 12 months, Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection Michael  Keenan said.

 “More illegal boats arrived on our shores this year than in the entire 12 years of the Howard Government,” Mr Keenan  said.

 “Despite Labor’s half hearted attempts at reopening offshore processing on Nauru there was on average more than 2000  people arriving illegally each month this financial year -the equivalent to the QE2 docking at Christmas Island every  month for the last six months.

 “It was Prime Minister Julia Gillard who said ‘another boat, another policy failure’. There have now been 543 such policy  failures under Labor, of which nearly 75% have occurred on her watch.

 “Every time Labor has reached another shameful milestone in their border protection crisis they have chosen the path of  least resistance rather than implementing the full suite of Coalition policies that would stop the boats from coming.

 “The Coalition has offered time and time again to support the Government in reintroducing temporary protection visas and  turning the boats back around when it is safe to do so but at every opportunity Labor refused.

 “Until there is a change of Government we can expect Labor to deliver thousands more boat arrivals and billions of wasted  tax payer money in 2013,”Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 2012 scorecard - People smugglers 271 / Labor Nil > Michael Keenan MP

 13/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

