---
title: "More than fifty years of boat arrivals in one record month"
date: "2012-09-30"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382843
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2732994%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling MORE THAN FIFTY YEARS OF BOAT  ARRIVALS IN ONE RECORD MONTH September 30, 2012

 The 35th boat to illegally arrive in Australia this month carrying 149 people, has created a new record for the number of  boats as well as the number of people to arrive, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and  Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Under John Howard's successful polices there was an average of just 45 people turning up every year, over six years. On  this standard, we have had more than fifty years of boat arrivals in just one month,” Mr Morrison said.

 “In September, 2,355 people have turned up on 35 boats in the last 30 days. This compares with 34 boats and 1,969  people in August and 31 boats and 1,828 people in July.

 “Boat arrivals are on the increase from already record levels under Labor's failed border policies and half hearted  approach. Yet Labor still refuse to acknowledge that their policies do not go far enough.

 “The record level of boat arrivals will have a clear impact on this year’s budget. At the end of the first quarter, more than  6,100 people have turned up in a year where they estimated just 5,400 arrivals over the full year.

 “On a calendar year basis, 11,409 people have turned up on 170 boats in 2012, in the first nine months of the year. At the  average rate of arrivals under the Howard Government’s full suite of policies, it would take more than 250 years to reach  this same result,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “442 boats and over 26,000 people have been allowed to arrive illegally by boat under the soft border  protection policies of this Labor Government.

 “This is the fifth boat to arrive in the last two days - with these types of shameful figures there is no excuse for this  Government not to introduce the tough border protection policies required to squash the people smuggling syndicates.

 “The people smugglers have clearly been emboldened by the half hearted approach that this Government has taken to  implementing offshore processing, as 56 boats have now been intercepted since Labor back-flipped and returned to  offshore processing on Nauru.

 “Surely the Government must recognise that offshore processing on Nauru is not going to be enough to stop the boats  from coming - they must reinstate the full suite of tough Coalition policies in order to restore control to Australia’s borders,”  Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 MORE THAN FIFTY YEARS OF BOAT ARRIVALS IN ONE RECORD MONTH ...

 18/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

