---
title: "June starts as May ended -more boats and more Labor excuses"
date: "2012-06-03"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374298
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1688920%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  

 Scott Morrison 

 June starts as May ended -more boats and more Labor excuses  

 03/06/12  

 The arrival of the third illegal boat in as many days, this time with 150 people on  board, means June has started as May ended with more boats and more excuses  from Labor, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and  Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said  today.  

 “This latest arrival shows that there are two trends under this Government, record  illegal boat arrivals and record excuses for those arrivals,” Mr Morrison said.  

 “Rather than act by either supporting the Coalition's proven policies or insisting on  the Greens support for their own policies, they continue to choose to make excuses  and do nothing,” he said.  

 “Labor is using their Malaysian people swap as a political shield against their own  accountability and responsibility as a Government.  

 “In just three days this month 244 people have arrived, over half the 450 the  government budgeted would arrive every month.  

 “More blow outs and more boats are on their way under Labor because this  government greets every boat not with proven Coalition policies to stop the boats  which can be implemented today but with excuses which bring nothing but more  failure,” Mr Morrison said.  

 Mr Keenan said: “We have had three boats in three days as June gears up to be  another record breaking month for boat arrivals under the Gillard Government.  

 “Sadly the Australian taxpayer will be paying off Labor’s boat debt for generations  and with no signs of the influx easing, the bill continues to grow.  

 “The sooner we have an election, the sooner the Coalition can reinstate our proven  border protection policies and put an end to this catastrophe,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

