---
title: "Labor runs away from Sylvania Waters guns inquiry"
date: "2012-03-20"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211370151
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1517481%22
---

 

 

 Labor runs away from Sylvania Waters guns inquiry 

 Posted on Tuesday, 20 March, 2012 

 

 Labor resorted to grubby tricks in parliament today to avoid setting up an independent inquiry  into  their  border  protection  failures,  which  saw  up  to  220  guns  allegedly  smuggled  into   Sydney for criminal gangs through the Sylvania Waters post office in the electorate of Cook,  Federal  Member  for  Cook  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott   Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan  said today. 

 NSW  Police  Commissioner  Andrew  Scipione  called  this  alleged  smuggling  operation   ‘perhaps the biggest illegal syndicate doing this type of illegal gun trafficking that Australia  has seen’, yet today the Labor Government wouldn’t even countenance talk about it. 

 

 Despite  being  defeated  twice  in  the  parliament  today,  Labor  used  grubby  stalling  tactics  to   run down the clock and prevent an inquiry even being considered.  

 

 All the Government has sought to do since this gaping hole in our borders was discovered by  NSW Police has been to congratulate themselves. 

 Despite  their  false  claims,  the  Government  have  refused  to  refer  this  incident  to  a  specific   inquiry into Customs or Australia Post. Instead they have tried to spin this issue away with  excuses,  denials  and  delaying  tactics  to  avoid  any  accountability  for  what  has  occurred  on   their watch.  

 

 They are refusing to ask themselves the hard questions about the resourcing and processes of  their own agencies, that have been undermined by the Government's budget cuts. 

 The  Australian  people,  particularly  residents  in  western  Sydney  who  are  exposed  to  gun   crime and our police officers who are on the front line of the battle against organised crime,  deserve better than the spin and denial that is reminiscent of the failed Carr Government in  NSW. 

 

 This episode demonstrates once again that Bob Carr has come to Canberra in more ways than  the obvious.  

 Just as they're in denial on illegal boat arrivals, Labor has failed to control our borders and  won’t admit they even have a problem. 

 Customs did not know they were ‘on fire’ on this issue until the NSW Police ‘turned up with  a hose’. Any government that was serious about border protection would want to know why  and  how  our  border  protection  system  failed  and  what  must  be  done  to  ensure  this  doesn’t   happen again. 

 

 It  is  disgraceful  that  this  Labor  Government  has  voted  against  the  motion  to  have  an   independent inquiry into the severe gaps in Australia’s border protection regime. 

 

 How can the Minister for Home Affairs Jason Clare continually deny that the $58.1 million in  funding  that  Labor  stripped  from  air  and  sea  cargo  screening  has  not  contributed  to  illegal   weapons being smuggled across our border and into our communities? 

 

 Air  cargo  inspections  have  dropped  from  60%  under  the  former  Howard  Government  to  a   dismal  8.3%  under  this  Labor  Government.  With  these  kinds  of  drastic  cuts  to  cargo   screening, illicit drugs and weapons are flowing through with ease onto our streets and into  the hands of organised criminal syndicates. 

 

 The Government should do the right thing by the Australian people and urgently call for an independent inquiry and reinstate the cuts to Customs cargo screening immediately 

  

