---
title: "TPVs must be restored to policy toolkit"
date: "2012-11-26"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211386191
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731232%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling TPVs MUST BE RESTORED TO POLICY  TOOLKIT November 26, 2012

 Labor can this week vote  to  restore  Temporary Protection Visas to  the toolkit in  the fight against people smugglers, as another illegal boat arrives with 79 people on board, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said.

 “Five years ago Australia had a full suite of strong border protection policies that stopped the boats. Just four people were in detention who had arrived by boat. Today there are around 12,000,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Julia  Gillard  will  have  the  opportunity  this  week  to  reintroduce  one  of  the  key  Howard  Government  measures  by supporting a Coalition bill to restore Temporary Protection Visas to the policy toolkit for the fight against people smugglers.

 “Not many of the myriad policy failures by this government rival those in the area of border protection. Their decision to release thousands of asylum seekers into the community on bridging visas as a one way bridge to permanent residence was just the latest example.

 “Temporary Protection Visas must be put back in the toolbox for any government that is serious about denying permanent residence and a product for people smugglers to sell and that’s why we will introduce our legislation this week.

 “Five  years  ago  the  boats  had  been  stopped.  Now  more  than  2,000  people  are  arriving  on  illegal  boats  every  month. Labor  should  take  the  opportunity  to  restore  Temporary  Protection  Visas  in  the  fight  against  people  smugglers,”  Mr  Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “Another boat arrives as once again Labor indicates that it will stand in the way of finding a solution by opposing a vital part of the Coalition’s proven border protection policies that stopped the boats from coming.

 “Temporary  protection  visas  undermine  the  people  smuggling  business  model  by  taking  away  their  key  selling  point; permanent residency in Australia.

 “Since Labor came to office, the people smugglers have sold more than 30,000 tickets to Australia with a multibillion dollar price tag at the expense of the Australia taxpayer.

 “The Government must restore these proven border protection policies as daily boat arrivals continue to be intercepted. 

 “Labor has neither the will nor the resolve to stop the boats from coming - as long as they remain in power the people  smugglers will remain in control of Australia’s borders,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 TPVs MUST BE RESTORED TO POLICY TOOLKIT > Michael Keenan MP

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

