---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 15 August 2012: expert panel report; offshore processing legislation; Parliament; the opposition"
date: "2012-08-15"
creators:
  - "Albanese, Anthony"
source: "MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE AND TRANSPORT"
subjects:
  - "expert panel report"
  - "offshore processing legislation"
  - "Parliament"
  - "the opposition"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211380240
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1849794%22
---

 FEDERAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND  TRANSPORT MINISTER   

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP  SENATE COURTYARD, PARLIAMENT HOUSE    

 15 AUGUST 2012 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Issues:     Expert panel report, offshore processing legislation, Parliament,  the Opposition   

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:       On Monday the Government received the report of  eminent persons chaired by Mr Houston who we  asked to come together to produce a report to try  and break the parliamentary deadlock. 

 

 It's quite clear that that report has been successful  in breaking the parliamentary deadlock after the  Government made the decision to adopt in-principle the recommendations put forward in the  report, and after the Opposition indicated they  would also vote for the amendments that have  been worked out in a cooperative manner between  the Government and the Opposition.   

 In spite of that, yesterday we saw the rather bizarre  suggestion that 90 minutes of the Parliament's time  should be taken up by a debate on a matter of  public importance on asylum-seeker issues which  would have led to the deferral of the debate on the  actual asylum-seeker legislation.   

 The House of Representatives of course  determined not to do that and to get on with the  debate.  

 

 Up to now we've had 30 Opposition speakers on  this legislation and there remains 32 Opposition  members to speak on the legislation, in spite of the  fact that the Opposition said it would not delay.    

 What we're seeing is the Opposition being  determined, in spite of the fact that we have a  breakthrough, in spite of the fact that they've  recognised the important work of the expert panel,  to engage in debate essentially with themselves,  given there are no speakers other than Opposition  speakers remaining on the list today. They are  engaging in politics, in abuse, in personal character  attacks and in vilification. 

 

 It's time the Opposition recognised that what  people want, what the Australian people want, and  what the expert panel provided a path forward on,  is to move on, deal with this issue in the House of  Representatives this morning, prior to Question  Time as the Opposition have committed, and deal  with it in the Senate this week. 

 

 QUESTION:                              Coalition MPs say that they've got a right to talk 

 about this, given their strong views, want to put it  on the record about their views on asylum-seekers.  Don't they have a right to do that? 

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:       They're not talking about the substance of the  issues. What I've seen of the debate is just more  abuse, more negativity, more politics from an  Opposition that very rarely talk about any  substance or anything other than, ‘why they were  robbed of being on the Government benches after  the election’ and the ongoing dummy spit about the  fact that they sit on the Opposition benches. 

 

 QUESTION:                              Have you met with your opposite number, 

 Christopher Pyne, this morning? Did he give any  indication that the Coalition would shorten the  debate? 

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:       I had a number of discussions with Mr Pyne  yesterday. Yesterday, the Opposition said that they  would shorten their speeches. They said they  would do that. That did not occur. More and more  people have been added to the speaking lists. The  lists haven't been shortened. For people looking at  the lists, it's pretty obvious what's going on here.  

 

 The Opposition had said that this legislation will be  finalised prior to Question Time today, well in  advance. So people can now see what's going on.  There's an opportunity for the Opposition to do  what they said they would do. 

 

 QUESTION:                              Boats have arrived since the legislation entered  the Parliament. Are the Opposition playing politics  with people's lives? 

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:       What the Opposition are doing is what they do with  every issue, which is just to be all about the politics,  never about the substance and it's time they moved  on.  

 

 The best characterisation was yesterday where  they sought to have a Matter of Public Importance  (MPI) debate about legislation that was before the  Parliament and sought to delay the actual  legislation. I thought that was pretty embarrassing,  frankly, for the Opposition. It exposed the fact that  they're determined to just play politics as usual.   

 QUESTION:                              The Opposition says this is parliamentary 

 process though and that they're entitled to do this.  Are you saying that they're not? 

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:       What you're not entitled to do is to say that we  should have a delay on legislation debate so that  we can talk about a Matter of Public Importance  about why the legislation should be brought on. 

 

 I think that, frankly, speaks for itself which is why  not a single cross-bench member supported the  Opposition on that vote yesterday and why I first  made a private entreaty to the Opposition on  Monday night, again on Tuesday morning and then  in the Parliament, suggesting that we get on with  the debate. 

 

 QUESTION:                              [indistinct]. 

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:       That's the point here. There are processes of the  Parliament which for example, in terms of the  speaking to consideration in detail amendments,  there's opportunities for unlimited numbers of 

 members to rise an unlimited number of times. So  there isn't a restriction on the time for debate at that  period. 

 

 Now, what we've seen in the past and it's the usual  same suspects who are rolled out - Paul Fletcher,  Jamie Briggs - people stand up, they jump for five  minutes, they sit down, they stand up, they jump,  they rotate it round. On a number of occasions  we've seen that this year. 

 

 I hope that doesn't occur. The Opposition have said  they'll deal with this legislation and that it will be  finalised prior to Question Time. I think that is what  people expect. I'm suggesting they should do  nothing more and nothing less than do what they  said they would do.  And the Government made it very clear yesterday,  very clear, that we wouldn't seek to gag the  legislation last night. In return the Opposition  suggested that they would cut down the time in  which people would speak.    

 If people want to make a contribution on substance,  of course there's a legitimate point for them to do  that but to just engage in politics and personal  vilification is not in the spirit of what the  Government has done in establishing the expert  panel and what the three gentlemen have done in  terms of Mr Houston, Mr L'Estrange and Mr  Aristotle, in really trying to move the nation beyond  the deadlock that I think people were very  disappointed with. 

 

 QUESTION:                              Do you think you might guillotine the debate 

 today or gag the debate? 

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:       What I'm suggesting is that the Opposition have  said that they will conclude the debate by two  o'clock. I'm suggesting that that should actually  occur, that they should stick with that. I think it's  always far preferable to not guillotine the debate.  It's important that we get onto the amendments. Mr  Morrison and others should have a right to speak to  those amendments but let's have a little bit of 

 commonsense and let's have a little less politics  from this Opposition.    

 Thanks very much.   

 [ENDS] 

 

