---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Ulverstone: 6 July 2012: carbon price; asylum seekers; Wikileaks; super-trawler; Tasmanian health reform"
date: "2012-07-06"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "carbon price"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Wikileaks"
  - "super-trawler"
  - "Tasmanian health reform"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211376328
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2645289%22
---

 

 

 

 

 Transcript of doorstop interview,  Ulverstone  FRI 06 JULY 2012 

 Prime Minister 

 Subject(s): Carbon price; Asylum seekers; Wikileaks; Super-trawler; Tasmanian health  reform 

 PM: I’m here in Tasmania today. I’m with Sid Sidebottom, our Member for Braddon. It’s a  picture perfect Tassie day - typical - and it is fantastic to be here. We’re here today  specifically at Ulverstone High School. 

 We've had the opportunity of touring around, including having a look at the science centre  that is just over there, built through the Building the Education Revolution program at a cost  of almost $2 million, but helping teach the kids in this school about the world we live in and  the science of our planet. 

 And we've had the opportunity to meet with student leaders, not only from this school but  from a number of schools locally. They are really giving us an insight into the future - into  the world that they will be the adults of. 

 They are very focussed on the environment and doing what we need to as a nation, as  individuals, indeed as a whole planet, to address the challenge of climate change. 

 They were coming up with their own very practical ideas and they're going to take those  ideas back to their own schools. They are seeking to achieve through their efforts what we are  trying to achieve nationally through putting a price on carbon. 

 I want these students to live in an Australia that has an environment we can be proud of, that  has cut carbon pollution and that has a strong economy that can offer them the benefits of  lifetime opportunities. I want to see that for their future. 

 And putting a price on carbon is an important step to realising that future. It means we’ll cut  carbon pollution, our economy will grow strongly, there will be more jobs and opportunities. 

 So it’s been a great delight to share their sense of excitement about acting on climate change.  It’s what we’re seeking to do as a nation. So it’s been great to be here with Sid and his  connections with this school are very strong indeed. His own children went here. 

 SIDEBOTTOM: They did, yes. 

 PM: And good achievements when they were here. 

 SIDEBOTTOM: Indeed. I think. 

 PM: Okay, we’re happy to take questions. 

 JOURNALIST: If anyone was going to give a positive response to the carbon tax, you’d  think it was Tasmania with Hydro Tasmania, but there’s a lot of fear about freight costs and  things like that. Do you think the message is getting through? 

 PM: I think there’s been a lot of fear deliberately generated with a lot of false claims about  what carbon pricing will mean. 

 You know, a lot of claims have been made about electricity prices and we know that here in  Tasmania electricity prices for individuals will go up 5.6 per cent. 

 Nationally they’ll go up around 10 per cent. 

 It means the assistance that we’re providing here through pensions and tax cuts and family  payment increases is going to go further. And for this state, this wonderful clean state with its  hydro and its clean sources of energy, this is a net benefit for Tasmania. 

 So, a lot of fear been around but over the course of the last week we've seen a number of the  myths generated being absolutely busted. 

 You know, you were told Whyalla would be wiped off the map. That hasn’t happened. You  were told the coal industry would shut down. That hasn’t happened. You were told that there  would be astronomical increases at the local shops. That hasn’t happened, and so the list goes  on. 

 JOURNALIST: Have you been surprised, I guess, the build up to 1 July was so massive, have  you been surprised at how quickly the discussion seems to have tapered off, even over the  last 24 hours? 

 PM: In some ways I’m not surprised, because you've just had, run by the Opposition, the  most ridiculous scare campaign. And it was very apparent that come 1 July, none of these  doom and gloom prophecies were going to come true. 

 So the image had been created by the Opposition’s fear campaign that on 1 July our nation  would enter a permanent depression. There would be a wrecking ball through the economy.  The Sunday roast would cost you $100. And so the list went on. 

 And of course people went about their ordinary Sunday and they’re gone about their ordinary  working week, but we as a nation are achieving a cleaner future because the price on carbon  means we’ll be cutting carbon pollution. 

 So this week is the start of people’s opportunity to judge for themselves what all those  reckless claims have been about. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on asylum seekers, do you need the Opposition to join your  policy group for it to be effective? 

 PM: Thank you for that question. I am very disappointed that to date the Opposition has not  nominated members to participate in the reference group. I want us as a nation to take  effective action to deter people from risking their lives at sea and getting on leaky boats. 

 I want us to be able to have an offshore processing solution. Every step of the way we've  been prepared to compromise to get this done for our nation. 

 I think it’s incredibly disappointing that Mr Abbott and the Coalition he leads have not taken  the opportunity of working together in the nation’s interest for a compromise that we can all  endorse and get on with putting in place. 

 JOURNALIST: The Liberals have made some sort of contribution to that today with former  foreign minister Alexander Downer saying that if people smugglers were no longer able to  guarantee that asylum seekers would be able to get to live in Australia, they might start  heading elsewhere. Do you have a reaction to that? 

 PM: Well I do have a reaction. Those words are a ringing endorsement of the Government’s  arrangement with Malaysia. Unfortunately Mr Abbott is so negative he won’t endorse that  arrangement. 

 Our arrangement with Malaysia would enable us to take people who are striving to reach  Australia and to transfer them to Malaysia. We would be able to do that to send a powerful  message of deterrence to people smugglers. 

 But every step of the way we’ve been met with negativity. Today the former Chief of the  Defence Force, Chris Barrie, has come out and said effectively that Tony Abbott’s plans for  towing back boats will put naval personnel at risk; that they won’t work. 

 So, one element of Mr Abbott’s plan keeps running into the wisdom from senior Defence  Force personnel who say it will put the lives of Australians at risk. So given this, it’s clear Mr  Abbott needs to think again. 

 We are wanting to see the Opposition work for a compromise in the national interest and  that’s why it’s so disappointing that they haven’t as yet taken up their positions on the group  that will be working in this debate to try and get the nation a solution. 

 JOURNALIST: In the past the Indonesian Government has expressed concerns about the  Opposition’s plan to tow back boats or to turn them away. Did they express that in Darwin  when you met with the Indonesian President 

 PM: I’m not going to go to private discussions, but every time the Indonesian Government  has been asked about this question they've said the same thing: that they will not accept  towed back boats. 

 Mr Abbott had the opportunity publicly in front of President Yudhoyono to raise this if he’d  chosen to do so, and he did not. So he goes around the nation thumping his chest about  towbacks, but when he’s in public in front of the President of Indonesia, he says not one  word. 

 And that’s because he knows that Indonesia is not going to agree with this, and he must  accept the force of the words of people like Chris Barrie, former Chief of the Defence Force,  that this would put Australian lives at risk. 

 This is an area not for sloganeering. It’s for getting effective action done. We’re prepared to  work and compromise to get effective action. We’re calling on Mr Abbott still to act in the  national interest rather than play the negative politics. 

 JOURNALIST: Do you think the Coalition is deliberately snubbing this panel? 

 PM: Well you’d have to put that question to Mr Abbott. What I know to date is every step of  the way, we as a Government have been prepared to compromise to get an outcome for our  nation. Every step of the way to date, Mr Abbott has said no and played politics. 

 He’s got a new opportunity now to show that he’s capable of acting in the nation’s interest,  and I’d urge him to seize it. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think some good might come from the Wikileaks  release of two million emails from Syrian political figures, including Syria’s relationships  with some of its allies, particularly a story’s come out about Italy providing communications  support to the regime? 

 PM: Look, I’m not going to comment on documents by definition I haven’t seen. I have made  my concerns about Wikileaks known in the past. 

 JOURNALIST: Do you support Seafish Tasmania’s plans to bring a super-trawler and  operate it out of Devonport? 

 PM: Look, on this question of the super-trawler, there’s been some media speculation about  this but it continues to be the case that no application has been received by our fisheries  authority for the super-trawler, no application’s been received. 

 And if one were ever received, then it would be dealt with by our fisheries authority on the  basis that they would consider all of the questions about sustainability of the catch and the  environment, and only issue a permit if they were satisfied and with the relevant conditions. 

 So what drives them isn’t the size of the boat - the boat isn’t the relevant consideration -  what drives them is what’s in the best interests of sustainability for our fisheries. 

 We’ll just take the last two and then we’ll go. 

 JOURNALIST: Tasmania’s set to lose $80 million under the new health reform, which  comes in in 2014- 

 PM: That’s not the case. Tasmania is hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of millions of  dollars better off as a result of our health reform arrangements, and on top of that we have  committed a new $325 million of expenditure. This health reform deal is particularly good  for Tasmania. Tasmania is an area with growing health costs. 

 The Federal Government is stepping up to being an equal partner in funding that growth, and  on top of all of that, we have committed to an extra $325 million. 

 JOURNALIST: But the Independent Pricing Authority says that we will lose 16 per cent of  Tasmania’s budgets. 

 PM: There’s no version of life that has Tasmania anything other than hundreds and hundreds  and hundreds of millions of dollars better off. This is a multi-billion dollar deal in Tasmania’s  interests. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on a much lighter note, your rise through Parliament has  been very inspiring to women right across the nation. In regard to Lady Gaga and Katy Perry,  in an artist’s war, who would you pick as the favourite? 

 PM: Look, I’ll leave that to Sid! He’s the artist in the group! 

 Okay, thank you very much. 

 SIDEBOTTOM: Great, thank you. 

 

