---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Darwin, Northern Territory: 6 July 2012: Multi-party reference group, Coalition's 'turning back the boats' policy"
date: "2012-07-06"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Multi-party reference group"
  - "Coalition's 'turning back the boats' policy"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211376334
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2292450%22
---

 Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP 

 Minister for Immigration and    

 Multi-party reference group, Coalition's 'turning back the boats' policy 

 Friday, 06 July 2012 

 Doorstop interview, Darwin, Northern Territory 

 Chris Bowen: Thank you for coming everybody. This morning the Prime Minister  has announced the membership of the multi-party working committee - a reference  group for the expert panel. The Prime Minister has announced the Deputy Prime  Minister and I will represent the government, along with Stephen Jones, the  Member for Throsby. 

 Also, we're pleased to have received nominations from the Greens, from Senator  Milne and Senator Hanson-Young, and also I'd like to thank Tony Windsor, the  Member for New England, and Senator John Madigan for agreeing to serve on the  cross-party reference group for the expert panel dealing with the asylum seeker  issue. 

 Obviously, we remain open to receiving nominations from Mr Abbott. I encourage  Mr Abbott to participate in this group. If Mr Abbott chooses not to participate on  behalf of the Liberal Party, we'd be happy to receive self-nominations from  individual members of the Liberal Party - Liberal members of Parliament - and  Coalition members of Parliament for that matter. 

 Now I call on Mr Abbott to agree to serve on this committee and to nominate  somebody to serve on behalf of the Coalition. It's important that the Parliament  come together as one, as one, to resolve this issue. The time has passed for  political point-scoring, the time has passed for politicians working against each  other, the time has come for politicians to work with each other. 

 Now if Mr Abbott chooses not to participate in this committee, I think the Australian  people can make two conclusions: one, that he is determined, still, still, to working  against this issue being resolved, and secondly, that unlike the government - which  has nothing to hide and nothing to fear from scrutiny of its policies - he does not  want his policies scrutinised through a thorough process. He wants to be able to  stick to his sound-grabs and not to have his policies worked through, in a holistic  way, with public transparency going forward. 

 Now of course, the government remains committed to our policies. We believe they  will work based on all the expert advice. But we are also more than happy, as we've  done, to appoint a group of very eminent Australians to work through all the issues,  to examine all the policies and to have those policies examined and to receive  recommendations from that group of very eminent Australians and to treat those  recommendations very, very seriously indeed. 

 The second thing I want to comment on this morning is Mr Abbott's repetition  yesterday of his policy of turning back boats and the statements this morning by  former Chief of the Defence Force, Admiral Chris Barrie. Chris Barrie was, of 

 course, head of the Defence Force under the Howard Government. He is another  eminent and respected Australian with vast operational experience. 

 It's time for Mr Abbott to take his head out of the sand and to recognise that  Indonesia will not cooperate and participate in turning back boats, that the Defence  Force has the very strong view that that will not work - will not work and will put the  lives of asylum seekers and Australian Defence Force personnel at risk. It is time  for Mr Abbott to recognise the facts - to put aside the sound-grabs and to work with  the government to see this issue resolved. 

 The final point I want to make is this: Mr Abbott has indicated that the turning back  the boats policy remains, and Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison have both indicated that  recent boats would've been turned around. We saw last week some Liberal Party  members of Parliament say that they could not and would not support a policy  which would see children taken to a non-signatory country without supervision and  protection. 

 Under the Malaysia agreement we have negotiated protections and support for all  people who would be returned. There were a substantial number of children on  yesterday's boat; some people claiming to be minors and some very young children  who are very clearly minors. Yet the Liberal Party policy is to turn these boats  around and return them to Indonesia: not a signatory country, and with no  protections - no protections - no guarantees, no support. 

 So I call on those members of the Liberal Party who do not support the removal of  children to countries which are not signatories to the Refugee Convention to call on  Mr Abbott today to drop this policy, to walk away from this policy, to face the facts  that this policy cannot and will not work; and also that it is highly hypocritical - highly  hypocritical - for Mr Abbott to continue to support towing back boats to Indonesia  while refusing to support returns to Malaysia under a negotiated agreement with the  assistance and co-operation of the UNHCR, and with protections and guarantees in  place. 

 Happy to take some questions. 

 Journalist: Minister, why the need for this parliamentary working group when you  already have an expert panel set up? 

 Bowen: Well the idea behind the parliamentary working group is to bring all the key  political players in the one room to hear the advice of the expert panel and also to  provide feedback to the expert panel as one; in a process that would see all those  views in one room at one time. Now obviously the expert panel will be getting a  range of advice across the board, including from political parties. But the idea  behind the reference panel was to bring the political parties, which have had  different views up until now, together and to work together with the expert panel. 

 Now if Mr Abbott refuses to participate, I think that would be very disappointing  indeed. The door is open for him to participate and for him to nominate Liberals to  join it. 

 Journalist: How optimistic are you that some Liberals will self-nominate? 

 Bowen: Look, I really hope that they do if Mr Abbott refuses to provide nominees,  but that is really a matter for them. A number of Liberals have shown - Dr Washer 

 and others - have shown that they are prepared to work in good faith with the  government, to see the government-of-the-day have the tools they need in their  toolbox to implement policies. Now if any of them choose to join the reference  panel, that is a matter for them. I'd be disappointed if there's no representative at all  from the conservative side of politics. 

 Journalist: And how much pressure do you think that Liberals are under not to  become involved with this? 

 Bowen: Well, I'd certainly hope that's not the case. I certainly hope in a  parliamentary democracy that the Leader of the Opposition would certainly not try  to pressure any individual MP from serving. That is, of course, the matter for those  individual MP's and Mr Abbott to sort through, but I certainly would be very  disappointed if there's any pressure at all applied for people not to participate. 

 Journalist: Do you really think the reference group is going to make any  difference? I mean, it's more talking, there may not even be Liberal's involved in it. 

 Bowen: The time for talking at each other and yelling at each other has passed.  We can disagree about which policies would work and which policies would not,  hence the government's offer to say, 'Well we don't think Nauru would work, but we  are prepared in good faith to open a detention centre on Nauru - pass the  legislation and we will open a detention centre on Nauru and implement the  Malaysia agreement'. 

 Nobody - nobody has argued, publicly or privately, that opening a detention centre  on Nauru and implementing the agreement with Malaysia would not work. Nobody  has been able to argue that because it would provide a very significant deterrent to  boat travel to Australia. So the idea behind the reference group is to work with the  expert panel, to hear their advice and to get - give feedback to the expert panel as a  Parliament, as one. 

 As I say, if Mr Abbott chooses not to participate that would be disappointing. 

 Journalist: You mentioned turning back the boats; the Indonesian President was  here having chats with Julia Gillard this week. Did that feature turning back the  boats - did that feature in any conversations between the Prime Minister and the  President? 

 Bowen: Well the views expressed by the Indonesian Government have been clear  and consistent. Obviously I don't go to what was said in confidential meetings, but  the views expressed by the Indonesian Government publicly have also been their  views consistently in all discussions. 

 Journalist: The Coalition has said that it wants to see the terms of reference for the  working group before making a decision about whether to participate. What will the  terms of reference be and when will we see those? 

 Bowen: Well we've already released the terms of reference for the expert panel,  that's already been made public. In terms of the reference group, the reference  group is designed to work with the expert panel with the same terms of reference  that have already been publicly released, so I'm really not sure what Mr Abbott is  talking about there. 

 Any other issues? No? Thanks for coming this morning. Cheers. 

