---
title: "Abbott still in denial on tow-backs"
date: "2012-03-16"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211369945
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1508732%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 16 March 2012 

 

 ABBOTT STILL IN DENIAL ON TOW-BACKS   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, said Tony Abbott seemed  unable to accept his ‘turn back the boats’ was unworkable, following the Opposition  leader’s embarrassing comments on the Today show this morning.   

 Mr Bowen said Tony Abbott was in denial, refusing to recognise that Indonesia would  not agree to his dangerous and widely-rejected policy.   

 “Yesterday the Indonesian Foreign Minister said in no uncertain terms that the  Coalition’s policy was ‘impossible’ and ‘not advisable’,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “And yet this morning Mr Abbott embarrassingly remained in denial.”   

 “What more does Tony Abbott need to hear to know Indonesia will have nothing to do  with towing back boats? He needs to accept reality.”   

 Appearing on Today this morning, Mr Abbott said: “Well, I think you’re rather  overstating the Indonesian Foreign Minister’s words. But, Karl, we have turned the boats  around before, we can turn them around again. Let’s not forget these are Indonesian  flagged, Indonesian crewed, Indonesian home-ported vessels that are coming from  Indonesia. Of course they can go back to Indonesia. They have done it before, they can  do it again.”   

 "Tony Abbott is good at saying ‘no', but appears not to know the meaning of the word  when it comes from a neighbour and partner like Indonesia," Mr Bowen said.   

 “The reality is that without Indonesian support and a formal agreement, it is impossible  to implement this policy. Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa’s comments were just the  latest of a long line of Indonesian officials criticising this reckless policy.   

 “Mr Abbott’s claim that he will have a ‘Jakarta focussed’ foreign policy is questionable,  since he has already ridden roughshod over the clear message from Indonesia that they  would not agree to tow-backs.   

 “If this is what he thinks a working relationship looks like, Mr Abbott’s understanding of  foreign affairs is about as poor as his record with economics. Through his ill-thought out  policy, Mr Abbott is risking one our most important bilateral relationships and our  ongoing cooperation on people smuggling matters.” 

 

 Mr Bowen said the Coalition’s tow-back policy was in tatters.   

 “Indonesia don’t want a bar of it, the Navy and Border Protection say it risks Australian  lives, the UNHCR believe it breaches the Refugee Convention, and all other experts say  it’s a dud,” he said.   

 “It's time for Mr Abbott to face the facts, dump this policy and vote with the  Government to implement offshore processing.”   

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 (Bowen) / Laura Stevens 0432 833  769   

