---
title: "16th boat in the face of Abbott's negativity"
date: "2012-04-06"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211371054
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1556244%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 JASON CLARE MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE  MINISTER FOR DEFENCE MATERIEL 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 6 April 2012 

 

 16th Boat In The Face Of Abbott’s Negativity   

 An asylum seeker boat carrying 49 passengers was intercepted overnight - the 16th boat  arrival since Tony Abbott rejected offshore processing and a real opportunity to stop people  risking their lives at sea.   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Home  Affairs, Jason Clare MP, said without a genuine deterrent such as the Malaysia Arrangement,  the boats would continue to arrive.   

 “The boats will keep coming and people will continue to risk their lives as long as Mr Abbott  says no to offshore processing,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “The Australian public are sick and tired of Tony Abbott’s negativity. They rightly expect our  political leaders to work together in the national interest.   

 “Australians have no choice but to conclude that Mr Abbott prefers to see more boats arrive  because he believes it’s in his political interest.”   

 Mr Clare said if Mr Abbott is serious about stopping the boats he must stop saying no and  pass legislation to allow asylum seekers to be processed offshore.   

 “Remember what this is all about - 200 people died when their boat sank before Christmas  and more people died off the coast of Malaysia earlier this year,” Mr Clare said.   

 “By working together we can help to stop this happening. But it requires Tony Abbott to  stop saying no.”   

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 (Bowen) / Korena Flanagan 0418 251  316 (Clare)   

