---
title: "Australia to resettle an additional 1,000 refugees from Syria"
date: "2012-09-13"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382007
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1912418%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 SENATOR BOB CARR  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 13 September 2012 

 

 AUSTRALIA TO RESETTLE AN ADDITIONAL 1,000  REFUGEES FROM SYRIA   

 An additional 1,000 refugees caught up in the conflict in Syria will be resettled in  Australia as part of the Government’s expanded Humanitarian Program for 2012-13, the  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and the Minister for Foreign  Affairs, Senator Bob Carr, announced today.   

 “This special targeted intake will form part of the recently announced increase to 20,000  places and will be predominantly made up of refugees originally from Iraq,” Mr Bowen  said.   

 “It will build on Australia’s existing commitment to the resettlement of Iraqi minorities  and other vulnerable groups in the Middle East that have been referred for resettlement  by United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).    

 “Our increased humanitarian program further entrenches Australia’s position as the top  resettlement country in the world per capita and enables us to be more responsive to  emerging crises such as the one in Syria.”   

 According to recent figures from the UNHCR, 253,106 people have already fled Syria  and are now registered with UNHCR in neighbouring countries Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon  and Iraq.    

 Senator Carr said Australia had taken a lead in supporting those who had fled the Syrian  crisis, with food, shelter and emergency medical care for those in camps in those  countries.   

 “Today’s decision builds on our $20.5 million in humanitarian aid - including food,  medicines and emergency care for the thousands of families and children that have fled  across Syria’s borders since fighting began,” Senator Carr said.   

 “And it supports the work of our team on the ground, providing engineering, logistics  and child protection services in the refugee camps on Syria’s borders. 

 

 “It’s what Australians do - helping those in desperate need with food, medical aid and  now resettlement away from the conflict zone.”   

 Mr Bowen said many of those to be resettled will have family and other community links  in Australia.   

 “I have received many representations from communities in Australia who are gravely  concerned about family members who are in Syria and have been caught up in the  violence,” he said.    

 “The additional 1,000 refugees will include people still inside Syria as well as some who  have fled Syria to neighbouring countries.   

 “We will continue to work with UNHCR and other international partners to facilitate the  processing of vulnerable refugees throughout the Middle East.”   

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

