---
title: "Canberra celebrates Refugee Week 2012"
date: "2012-06-16"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375034
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2134853%22
---

 

 

 Canberra celebrates Refugee Week 2012  June 16, 2012  

 People in the Australian Capital Territorywill celebrate the valuable contribution of refugees  to the community during Refugee Week 2012, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, said today. 

 Refugee Week is being celebrated from 17-23 June, with World Refugee Day on Wednesday,  20 June. As part of the celebrations, there will be more than 100 events across the nation in  recognition of the plight of refugees and the new lives they have established in Australia. 

 “Australia welcomes people from many lands and has a generous humanitarian tradition,” Mr  Bowen said. 

 “Australians can be rightly proud of the fact that Australia resettles more refugees per capita  than any other nation and provides much needed protection to people who have suffered  persecution.” 

 Senator Lundy said Australia’s settlement support services are among the best in the world,  helping refugees to rebuild their lives here. 

 “Resettlement in Australia provides a chance for refugees to enjoy all the freedom and  opportunities this nation has to offer,” Senator Lundy said. 

 “Refugees in Australia have overcome hardship to live, study and work here, and Refugee  Week is a time to reflect on the contribution they have made to our community, economy and  culture.” 

 At 1pm on June 23, thousands of people across Australia, including Canberra, will walk in  unity to celebrate different paths people have taken to become Australian, as part of the Walk  Together initiative. Each walk will finish with a festival celebrating cultural diversity. 

 On Tuesday, 19 June the presentation ceremony for the annual Canberra Refugee Support  scholarship program for students with a refugee background will be hosted at the Theo  Nataras Multicultural Centre. The scholarships are funded from donations from the  community and organisations, including Department of Immigration and Citizenship, to  recognise meritorious performance and support outstanding refugee students in the pursuit of  their personal goals. 

 To kick off the celebrations the World Refugee Day annual soccer tournament will take place  today (16 June) at Cook Oval. Teams from the Liberian,South SudanandSierra Leone, Karen  and Mon (Burma) communities will compete in a friendly soccer match. The Capital Football  Team will warm up with players before the match and a barbecue and family activities will  be provided in the Cook Hub’s Hall. 

 Australia’s contribution to international protection and humanitarian efforts continues this  year, with 13,750 places offered under the humanitarian program in 2012-13. 

 Australia has resettled around 775,000 refugees and other people in humanitarian need since  the end of World War II. 

 

