---
title: "Senate must resolve asylum seeker policy deadlock"
date: "2012-06-29"
creators:
  - "Oakeshott, Rob"
source: "Office of OAKESHOTT, ROB, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375858
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1751694%22
---

    

  

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 29 June 2012 

 SENATE MUST RESOLVE ASYLUM SEEKER POLICY DEADLOCK 

 INDEPENDENT Lyne MP Rob Oakeshott says a solution to the asylum seeker policy impasse  is now in the hands of the Senate, which last night stopped any chance of a breakthrough  before the winter recess. 

 A frustrated Mr Oakeshott said his Bill had offered a compromise that would have enabled a  Labor or Coalition government to assess asylum seekers in any country of their choosing,  providing that country was a signatory to the Bali Process. 

 “The Prime Minister’s expert panel, to be led by former defence chief Angus Houston, has a  role to play now but this is a matter requiring a legislative solution. The House of  Representatives did its job this week. It is now an issue for the Senate, which must break  the deadlock,” Mr Oakeshott said. 

 “I would have been happy to have my Bill amended in the Senate if it meant we achieved an  outcome. Something is better than nothing, but as it stands now, we go home for two  months without legislation to support anything. 

 “There are backbenchers who want this resolved, but unless the Senate does its job as the  house of review rather than a house of party politics then there is no point repeating this  week’s exercise in the House of Representatives. 

 “The time for political stunts, such as the attempt to reintroduce the Coalition’s amendment  at 3.30am this morning, with no notice and no legislation, is over. 

 “We can either deal with this in good faith, and allow people to have a good look at what's  been put before the House, or we're pulling stunts on uni-cycles, juggling balls and spinning  hats.” 

 Mr Oakeshott said he had been to the Table Office and asked for a “Morrison” or “Abbott”  bill on asylum policy, refugees, people smuggling or people trafficking. 

 “It does not exist,” he said. 

 “There is no such Bill, and therefore the events of 3.30 this morning, as suspected, were  irrelevant to breaking the deadlock.” 

    

   "To sum up the week, the colours of the two parliamentary chambers could not be more  appropriate today. The House of Representatives gave the green light to doing something to  ‘stop the deaths’, but the Senate gave it the red light.   

 "As is now very clear for all to see, the deadlock and stalemate is in the Senate. Angus  Houston and the Prime Minister have a lot of urgent work to do to get Senators to respect  the majority will of the House of Representatives.   

 "As one MP, I will continue to assist where I can, for the sole reason of getting a result." 

 Mr Oakeshott added The Greens were wrong to claim today that he had made a mistake by  introducing his Bali Process Bill on Wednesday. 

 “I introduced the Bill in February. It was the government which brought it up for debate on  Wednesday, not me. 

 “The Greens are also wrong to refer to the Bill as the Malaysian Bill. The Bill makes no  mention of Malaysia.” 

 

 ENDS 

 Media Contact: Sharon Fuller - 0429 787320 

 

