---
title: "Another illegal boat as Coalition inspect Nauru processing centre"
date: "2012-12-05"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211386736
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731229%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ANOTHER ILLEGAL BOAT AS COALITION  INSPECTS NAURU PROCESSING CENTRE December 05, 2012

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat, with 43 people on board, comes as the Coalition inspects the Nauru processing centre established by the government, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “My visit this week has allowed me to get a first hand look at how the Labor Government is running the Nauru processing centre,” Mr Morrison said.

 “It’s clear that a permanent facility must be built as quickly as possible, both to increase the number of people who can be sent there and ensure the centre can run more effectively. The government has indicated that 300 to 400 permanent beds will be built by late January/early February.

 “The government must also ensure that a single agency is given responsibility for the running of the centre. Currently a number of different agencies are working well collaboratively but there is no clear central leadership. Someone needs to be in control.

 “While there has been some protest action from a number of asylum seekers, it is crucial the government not reward or be swayed  by  these  actions  as  they  have  done  in  the  past,  particularly  with  granting  rioters  in  immigration  detention permanent visas.

 “There are many asylum seekers trying to do the right thing on Nauru who are being impacted on by a minority of trouble makers.

 “The  continued  arrival  of  Sri  Lankans  by  boat  comes  as  the  government  is  hit  by  an  injunction  of  its  own  making  on deportations through its failure to work with the Sri Lankan Government to stop boat arrivals at the source.

 “Labor has refused to enter into a formal agreement with the Sri Lankan Government to prevent boats from leaving, nor have they been intercepting boats bound for Australia at sea before they enter our territorial waters.

 “Now Labor has once again tied itself up in knots in the courts which will frustrate the return of economic refugees from Sri Lanka  and  fail  to  send  a  strong  message  of  deterrence  at  the  most  dangerous  time  of  the  year  to  get  on  a  boat  to Australia,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “Three boats have arrived in the first three days of December yet still not a single slab has been laid at the Nauru detention centre.

 “It is clear that offshore processing on Nauru and Manus is not going to be a strong enough deterrent on their own - Labor  needs to introduce the full suite of Howard Government border protection policies if they are serious about stopping the boats.

 “We need a return to temporary protection visas and turning the boats back around when it is safe to do so in order to send the strongest possible message to the people smugglers that Australia’s borders are no longer open for business.

 “The  Government  have  proved  time  and  time  again  that  they  do  not  have  the  resolve  or  the  will  to  stop  the  people

 Page 1 of 2 ANOTHER ILLEGAL BOAT AS COALITION INSPECTS NAURU PROCESSING...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

 smuggling trade - it will take a Coalition Government to restore control of Australia’s borders to the Commonwealth,” Mr  Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 2 of 2 ANOTHER ILLEGAL BOAT AS COALITION INSPECTS NAURU PROCESSING...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

