---
title: "Does Minister Bowen have any idea what's going on"
date: "2012-11-09"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384967
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731250%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling DOES MINISTER BOWEN HAVE ANY IDEA  WHAT’S GOING ON November 09, 2012

 839 people on 16 boats have arrived in the first 9 days of November, yet the Minister for Immigration, Chris Bowen, is  boasting that the boats are now slowing under Labor, Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection,  Michael Keenan said.

 “Last Friday, the Minister for Immigration claimed that the overall number of asylum seekers from most countries, including  Iraq, Iran and Afghanistan, had either reduced or 'stabilised' since the Government announced the restoration of offshore  processing in mid-August,” Mr Keenan said.

 “In the last week since Minister Bowen made his claims, 9 boats carrying a total of 535 people, have been intercepted in  and around Christmas Island or Ashmore Reef - traditionally not the destination of Sri Lankan asylum seeker vessels.

 “When over two-thirds of the people who arrived by boat in the last week are most likely not Sri Lankan asylum seekers  but in fact from countries such as Iraq, Iran and Afghanistan, it again shows that Minister Bowen and the Labor Party are  just making it up as they go along.

 “This is one area of policy that Labor cannot hide from - the figures show the unrelenting rate of boat arrivals at Australia’s  borders.

 “Every grim milestone, failed policy and wasted tax payer dollar, is a testament to this Government’s inability to control  who comes to our country and their failure to put an end to people smuggling.

 “Under Labor we have a once prosperous border protection regime in tatters and a tax payer funded bill into the billions.

 “The Gillard Government are there own worst enemy - whilst they are in power the people smugglers will never take  Australia seriously and will continue to send boats to our shores, from all different destinations in the region,” Mr Keenan  said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 DOES MINISTER BOWEN HAVE ANY IDEA WHAT’S GOING ON > Michael Ke...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

