---
title: "50 Abbott boats"
date: "2012-06-13"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374813
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2273123%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 50 Abbott boats  Monday, 11 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Jason Clare MP - Minister for Home Affairs, Minister for  Justice and Minister for Defence Materiel. 

 Tony Abbott will still vote no to legislation which would allow offshore processing  despite 50 boats arriving since the coalition refused to work with the government to  implement offshore processing in Malaysia and Nauru. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Home Affairs, Jason Clare MP, said Mr Abbott's continued negativity had real  consequences for boat arrivals. 

 'All we hear from Mr Abbott is 'no' - 'no' to breaking the people smugglers' business  model and 'no' to legislation enabling offshore processing in Nauru and Malaysia,' Mr  Bowen said. 

 'This destructive negativity must stop before we lose more lives at sea as a result of  dangerous boat journeys.' 

 'We have a solution. It is called offshore processing. Tony Abbott is stopping it being  implemented,' Mr Clare said. 

 'If Tony Abbott is really concerned about people smugglers give us the power to put  them out of business.' No one will pay them $10 000 to be sent back to Malaysia. 

 'Tony Abbott knows this - he wants more boats to come because he thinks it will  mean more votes for him.' That is why he is stopping the Government from passing  laws to put people smugglers out of business. 

 'We can stop this now. Tony Abbott just has to stop opposing laws that will put the  people smugglers out of business.' 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb187423.htm 

 

