---
title: "299th Boat arrives as Labor consumed by scandal"
date: "2012-04-26"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372026
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1591563%22
---

 Scott Morrison 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population, Immigration & Citizenship 

 299th Boat Arrives as Labor Consumed by Scandal 

 26/04/12  

 The arrival of another illegal boat, with 52 people on board, is the 299th to arrive on  Labor’s watch, leaving a distracted Labor Government consumed by scandal on the  cusp of yet another milestone of failure on border protection, Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice,  Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said. 

 “While Labor remains consumed and distracted by scandal and incompetence,  people smugglers continue to send illegal boats at will. Over 2,000 people have  arrived this year alone, almost double the number that arrived this time last year and  the 300th boat arrival under Labor will only be a matter of time,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “People smugglers are continuing to react aggressively to Labor’s decision to  capitulate to the Greens and announce their let them in, let them out policy on boat  arrivals of community release. 

 “This month alone ten boats have arrived with over 700 people on board, double the  number of people who arrived last April. 

 “With yet another milestone of failure upon them, the government’s only policy is to  blame the Coalition. This is not a real policy but a pathetic attempt to deflect  attention from their failures and hide from accountability. 

 “Only the Coalition is serious about border protection and will implement the proven  border protection policies needed to stop the boats,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “Once again the Labor Party’s soft policies on border protection  have opened the flood gates to our borders, with the interception of another illegal  vessel carrying 50 passengers and 2 crew. 

 “In the same way that criminal gangs continue to smuggle illegal guns through our  porous borders, the people smugglers continue to decide who comes into our  country by monopolising Labor’s failure on border protection. 

 “How bad does the situation have to get before Labor concedes that this border  protection crisis of their own making, which has so far cost the Australian taxpayer  almost $4billion, can only be fixed by reinstating offshore processing on Nauru,  Temporary Protection Visas and turning the boats around when it is safe to do so. 

 “Until the Gillard Government restores the Coalition’s proven policies, the boats will  continue to come and the people smugglers will continue to profit from this evil trade  that places people’s lives at risk,” Mr Keenan said. 

