---
title: "Tarkine trashed in cynical pre-Christmas dump"
date: "2012-12-18"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211387293
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2115187%22
---

 Tarkine trashed in cynical pre-Christmas dump 

 18 December 2012   

 In take-out-the-trash week, Environment Minister, Tony Burke, has today announced the first step in  the trashing of the world renowned Tarkine wilderness.   

 “We can now expect Minister Burke to approve several more mines, and excise their footprint from  any Heritage listing, once again putting short term profits ahead of the long-term interests of the  Tarkine and the communities who depend on it,” Australian Greens Leader, Senator Christine Milne,  said.   

 “Mining the Tarkine will create profits for a company outside Tasmania, employ only a few dozen  people for a short time, and do terrible damage to the livelihoods of all those who depend on the  Tarkine’s beauty and the state’s clean, green image for their business.    

 “National Heritage listing for the Tarkine, recommended by the Heritage Council, has been kicked  from one Environment Minister to the next for the last decade and still Tony Burke has not moved to  protect it, but, in a cynical pre-Christmas, bury the bad decisions move, has approved the Shree  Minerals mine anyway.   

 “It was clear when Tony Burke allowed the Emergency Heritage listing of the Tarkine to lapse  without consultation with the Heritage Council that he intended to prefer short-term mining over  long-term conservation outcomes and that is precisely what he is doing.   

 “There are six threatened species on this site, including the wedge-tailed eagle, the spotted quoll  and the Tasmanian devil, and there are 16 threatened species within a 5 km radius of the site.   

 “It’s laughable to claim that conditions including ‘raising environmental awareness’ amongst mine  employees is going to save these threatened species when the open cut iron ore mine, which will be  1km long and 225m deep, is dug out.   

 “Under the EPBC draft guidelines, it was recommended that the company study the hydrological  implications of its mine proposal on threatened vegetation, particularly orchids. It refused to do so,  and the Minister has approved the mine anyway.   

 “With this decision following last night’s announcement of cutting foreign aid to pay for cruel  treatment of refugees, you have to wonder what tomorrow holds.”   

 Australian Greens Senator for Tasmania, Peter Whish-Wilson, said “It doesn’t matter how many  ‘conditions’ you place on this, it’s still going to destroy the region’s wilderness values and threatens  the potential for other more long-term economic activity such as tourism.”   

 

 

 

 Tim Hollo  Director of Communications  Senator Christine Milne | Australian Greens Leader  Suite SG-111 Parliament House, Canberra ACT  P: 02 6277 3588  M: 0438 376 082  T: @timhollo  http://www.christinemilne.org.au/| www.GreensMPs.org.au 

