---
title: "Statements on the facts on community detention"
date: "2012-02-17"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211369778
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1427385%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP 

 17 February 2012 

 STATEMENT ON THE FACTS ON COMMUNITY  DETENTION 

 

 The Opposition’s politicising of the provision of basic household items in houses used for  community processing of families, children and unaccompanied minors is disappointing.   

 When this Government announcement the expansion of the community detention program in  October 2010, the Shadow Minister for Immigration Scott Morrison was quick to claim the  program as the Coalition’s, pointing out that the program was first introduced by the Howard  Government.   

 Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison’s comments today indicate that the Coalition seeks to  abandon the community detention program, which is specifically for women and children and  other vulnerable people.   

 So Mr Abbott needs to tell us what the alternative is. Is he seriously suggesting that asylum  seeker families and children should be put back into detention?   

 The Gillard Government is proud of the expansion of the community detention program,  which has been done in a cost-effective away in conjunction with community organisations  such as the Australian Red Cross and the Salvation Army.   

 If the Coalition was truly concerned about the cost of housing asylum seekers, it would stop  playing negative politics and work with the Government to re-establish offshore processing  and provide a real deterrent to dangerous boat journeys.   

 The Australian Government has a duty of care to provide basic items such as cleaning  supplies, furniture and bedding, and baby items such as prams for vulnerable asylum seekers  in community detention.    

 People do not get to keep these goods, they remain in a house when a family moves out and  are used by the next people who move in.   

 These people are not allowed to work. Is Mr Abbott suggesting we shouldn't be providing  basic essentials, baby blankets and food?   

 The Facts   

 On 18 October 2010, Prime Minister Julia Gillard and I announced the expansion of the  community detention program.   

 At that time there were around 700 children in detention and we committed to get a majority  of children and vulnerable families into community arrangements by 30 June 2011 - which  I’m happy to say we did meet, despite an increase in boat arrivals.   

 Since then we have continued to move children and vulnerable people into the community  and as at 15 February 2011, more than 3,200 people have been granted community  detention, 1,582 of whom are currently in the community.     

 There are more than 660 children in and transitioning into community detention - 64 per cent 

 of all asylum seeker children. Of these, 212 are unaccompanied minors (UAMs) - that’s 57  per cent of all unaccompanied minors.   

 All eligible UAMs who arrived in Australia prior to 20 November 2011 have been moved into  community arrangements.   

 All eligible accompanied children who arrived in Australia prior to 30 October 2011 have been  moved into community arrangements.   

 The small numbers of children who arrived prior to these dates and who remain in detention  are not eligible for community detention due to security, behaviour or risk requirements.   

 People who are approved for community detention are the most vulnerable in the detention  network because they are children, families with children, or because they have serious  mental health issues or have suffered torture and trauma.     

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

