---
title: "Yet another boat as October starts the way September ended"
date: "2012-10-03"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382973
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1958089%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Yet another boat as October starts the way September  ended 

 03/10/12 

 October has started the way September, the biggest month for illegal boat arrivals on record,  finished - with yet another boat arriving, this time with 39 people on board, Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border  Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “The boats are continuing to come at record pace under Labor’s half hearted policies on border  protection. People smugglers know that Labor’s heart is just not in it when it comes to protecting  our borders,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “Less than 5% of people turning up since Labor was dragged kicking and screaming to reopen Nauru  have been sent there. 

 “Only 30% of the promised capacity by the end of September has been delivered and within weeks  they have had outbreaks of violence and rioters running amok. 

 “Just as they trashed Nauru for years while refusing to restore offshore processing there, Labor are  now trashing Nauru in its implementation. When it comes to border protection, Labor just can't get  anything right, including Nauru,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “For the last six consecutive months Labor has continued to allow more boats and  more people across Australia’s borders illegally, with September being the largest month ever for  both boat arrivals and passengers arriving. 

 “Over 26,000 people have been successfully smuggled across Australia’s borders since Labor  destroyed the robust border protection system that they inherited from the Coalition, yet they still  stand there and argue that their policies are the right ones to stop the boats from coming. 

 “Meanwhile Australia’s Border Protection Command officers are under enormous pressure because  of this constant influx of arrivals, a job further hindered by the severe cuts this Government has  continually made to both their funding and staff levels. 

 “Only a return to the full suite of Howard Government policies will give Howard Government  results,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

