---
title: "Online tool helps new settlers in the job market"
date: "2012-07-14"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR SPORT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211428240
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2134783%22
---

 

 

 Online tool helps new settlers in the job market 

 July 14, 2012  

 The Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today launched an innovative  online tool to help migrants and refugee jobseekers participate more easily in Australian  society and the workplace. 

 Launching the ‘i.settle.with.IT’ online resource at the Auburn Centre for Community, Senator  Lundy said the new tool provided simple, step-by-step training in English and basic computer  skills to new settlers to help them find their feet in their new community. 

 “The resource was designed to provide the IT skills, knowledge and confidence for new  settlers to undertake further education and employment essential to social inclusion,” Senator  Lundy said. 

 “It will also provide skills training, access to technology and community-based projects to  assist people with pathways to employment. 

 “Users of this tool will be able to acquire new skills at their own pace, in their own homes or  at community venues when they are not able to attend face-to-face training programs.” 

 This tool is the final part of a program that included accredited community training, train-the-trainer courses and an intensive IT training program. 

 “This resource is open-source and will be made available to community organisations. I am  delighted that community organisations will be able to customise ‘i.settle.with.IT’ for their  own websites,” Senator Lundy said. 

 ‘i.settle.with.IT’ was developed by social enterprise WorkVentures Limited with funding and  technical assistance from Microsoft Australia. 

 “I congratulate WorkVentures and Microsoft for bringing the benefits of technology to bear  in solving very personal problems - helping migrants and refugees across Australia to make  better choices about their lives.” 

 Key community partners included the Fairfield Migrant Resource Centre who participated in  the first “i.settle.with.IT” Train-The-Trainer program and Fairfield High School which  assisted in the program’s development. 

 

