---
title: "Labor's 'spare room' asylum policy desperate and reckless"
date: "2012-05-03"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR PRODUCTIVITY & POPULATION, IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372408
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1607978%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population, Immigration & Citizenship  Scott Morrison 

 Labor's 'spare room' asylum policy desperate and reckless  

 03/05/12  

 Labor’s latest decision to house single adult male asylum seekers released on  bridging visas in the spare rooms of Australian families under the Homestay program  is a desperate and reckless policy from a government that has lost control of our  borders, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today. 

 “The fact that Australian families are now being asked to house asylum seekers who  have arrived illegally by boat, including those whose claims have been rejected,  shows just how desperate Labor have become over their failed border protection  policies, which have seen almost 17,000 people now arrive on 302 boats,” Mr  Morrison said. 

 “Homestay was designed to provide accommodation to international students who  arrive legally with valid visas and study arrangements. It was not designed for single  males who arrive on illegal boats, without documentation and are working their way  through the taxpayer funded appeals process after having their asylum claims  rejected. 

 “We have already seen in the detention network, including on the suburban streets of  Melbourne in community detention, what can happen when asylum seekers do not  get the answer they are looking for. Riots, protests, self harm, destruction of  property, escapes, sexual assault and assault have all occurred, with charges being  laid in some circumstances. 

 “To place asylum seekers in suburban homes and communities, where there is no  consultation with neighbours or the police and just a hotline to call if something goes  wrong has all the ingredients of another Labor asylum disaster in the making. 

 “The sheer scale of Labor's border protection failures has forced them to now  effectively deputise suburban householders as Serco officers. 

 “At the last election Julia Gillard wanted to send asylum seekers to East Timor and  then to Malaysia. Now she wants to send them to your granny flat out the back. 

 “When Australians expressed concern about rising costs of living, this was not an  invitation for Julia Gillard to supplement household incomes by offering to pay the  rent on your spare room or granny flat for asylum seekers. 

 “Rather than implement the Coalition’s proven border protection policies to stop the  boats, Labor has done the opposite, announcing a 'let them in, let them out' policy for  illegal boat arrivals that is only providing another reason for people to get on boats. 

 “They are now asking Australians to take Labor's border protection failures into their  homes. Labor’s failure on our borders has become worse with every decision they  have taken,” Mr Morrison said. 

  

