---
title: "New services to help migrants and refugees in Victoria"
date: "2012-06-20"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375233
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2264699%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 New services to help migrants and refugees in  Victoria  Wednesday, 20 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Senator Kate Lundy - Minister for Sport, Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today announced 23 new projects will be  funded in 2012-13 under the Settlement Grants Program (SGP) to assist newly  arrived migrants and refugees settle in Victoria. 

 From 1 July 2012, Victorian settlement agencies will receive a total of $4.3 million in  additional funding to deliver new services that will help new arrivals become self-reliant and connect with the community. 

 As part of the funding allocated to Victoria this coming financial year, the Migrant  Information Centre in East Melbourne will receive a grant to encourage migrant and  refugee families get involved in sport. 

 'This innovative project will help new migrants in Melbourne's eastern shires and the  Yarra Ranges Shire connect with their community through a shared passion for  sport,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'Sport is a great platform for inclusion and will help many new migrants in Melbourne  make the transition to Australian life by opening their social networks.' 

 'Projects like these help new migrants develop their skills so they can become self-reliant and contribute to the community. Services supported by the Settlement  Grants Program promote social participation and assist in the cultural adjustment to  a new life in Australia.' 

 Announcing the Victorian grants, Senator Lundy said the Australian Government  reaffirmed its commitment to helping refugees and migrants settle into their new  communities through the Settlement Grants Program. 

 'These grants help people to make the transition into Australian life by building on  their existing skills and, at the same time, help them to learn valuable new ones,'  Senator Lundy said. 

 'These services provide practical support which assists the settlement process,  building confidence and support networks. Whether it is improving people's ability to  gain access to mainstream services, housing assistance or the community legal 

 education support, these services are all activities that empower new arrivals by  helping them connect with local communities, develop greater independence and  improve their life skills.' 

 'The community sector plays a vital role in supporting newly arrived refugees and I  commend all organisations in Victoria for their contribution to the successful  settlement of migrants and humanitarian entrants.' 

 The Australian Government will spend $39 million in 2012-13 to deliver services to  humanitarian entrants and new migrants to acquire skills and knowledge to fully  participate in the community as soon as possible after arrival. 

 A list of successful applicants in the 2012-13 funding round is available on the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 2012-13 Grant Recipients 

