---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: 27 June 2012: Parliament, Canberra: border protection"
date: "2012-06-27"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "border protection"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375692
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1742687%22
---

 

 

 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH   

 27 June 2012    

 TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH MR SCOTT MORRISON MHR,  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA    

 Subjects: Border protection    

 EO&E.............................................................................................................................................................. 

 

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 A half hour or so back, the House of Representatives voted not for a solution, but for a stalemate and I  deeply regret the fact that the legislation that passed through the House of Representatives earlier this  evening is doomed to fail in the Senate and it should fail in the Senate because it is not good legislation. As  the Coalition has made clear time and time again, we will never support bad policy. We will never engage in  supporting something which we think will have bad outcomes for the Australian nation and this will have 

 bad outcomes for the Australian nation. It compromises our standards and it will not stop the boats.    

 What, in fact, it will mean is that the people smugglers will load up the boats with women and children  because the Government has already indicated that women and children are most unlikely to be sent back to  Malaysia.   

 We did try hard today to reach what we thought was a principled compromise with the crossbench and I  want to make it crystal clear that the same principled compromise will be on offer again in the Senate  tomorrow and I hope that our principled compromise might be supported by the Senate and come back to the  House. And if it does come back to the House I hope the Prime Minister and Labor members of Parliament  might have a change of heart.    

 Certainly the offer of a significant increase in the number of refugee and humanitarian entrants is  compromise. It is serious compromise on the part of the Coalition and it sends a clear message that at least  for people who are prepared to come in the right way, rather than the wrong way, there will be more  opportunity to do so.   

 What I think the Prime Minister has chosen today is a short-lived victory in the House over a lasting  solution. Quite contrary to what the Prime Minister has said in her press conference this evening, by this  time tomorrow the Government is going to be back to square one. So the Government has passed up the 

 opportunity to make real progress in favour of something which preserves the Prime Minister’s pride but  doesn’t actually advance our nation.   

 QUESTION: 

 1 

 

 2 

 

 

 Mr Abbott, what’s it say to people out there when we all had dreadful fright [inaudible]. Five to six hours  later, we’re back to where we started. We’ve got nothing.   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Well it shows, if I may say so, a failure of magnanimity on the part of the Prime Minister who must have  known that there is no way that the Senate would support the legislation that has gone through the House  this evening. We’ve said ever since the Malaysia people swap was first announced that it was a dud deal for  Australia and a cruel deal for boat people. Now, you can get what you can through the Parliament or you can  obstinately persist, stubbornly persist in something that you have dreamt up yourself, but this Prime Minister  had demonstrated yet again today that she’s not prepared to work with the reality of the Parliament to bring  about a legislative improvement that will enable a stronger response to the unfolding disaster in the waters to  our north.   

 QUESTION:   

 Mr Abbott if the Senate doesn’t pass this legislation tomorrow, if there is another boat tragedy, don’t you  think that the Labor Party will use that to blame the Opposition for stifling the policy?   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Well I think that the public are sick of a Government that blames the Opposition for its problems. I think  that what we saw today was not a failure by the Parliament, but a failure by the Government. It’s not the  Opposition’s policy which has failed in this area, but the Government’s policy that’s failed in this area. We  went into the Parliament today prepared to compromise with the crossbench in order to bring about a  workable bit of legislation that could pass through the Parliament. Now we were fair dinkum about trying to  ensure that some progress came out of the Parliament today. Unfortunately the Prime Minister has  guaranteed that we are no further advanced tonight than we were last night and the problem is that this time  tomorrow night  we’ll be back at square one after the Senate rejects a bill that it was always going to reject.   

 SCOTT MORRISON:   

 I’ll just add thing to that Tony and that is this. The Prime Minister today decided to drive her Government  into a cul-de-sac on this issue. Tomorrow she has the opportunity to do a u-turn on that in the Senate and  take us back on the road to progress and we would encourage her to do that. That’s the opportunity she has  tomorrow, because the offer made in good faith by the Coalition stands on the table in the Senate tomorrow.   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Ok, thanks.   

 [ends] 

 

