---
title: "Multi--Party Reference Group"
date: "2012-07-06"
creators:
  - "Clare, Jason"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211376349
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1760481%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP 

 MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS 

 

 

 Multi-Party reference group 

 

 The Government today announced the membership of the Multi-Party Reference  Group which will support the work of the independent expert panel in examining  ways to stop people risking their lives on dangerous journeys by boat.     

 The Reference Group will provide an important mechanism through which the  independent expert panel can canvass the views of the Parliament in conducting  its work.   

 The Government sent letters to the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the  Greens, and all crossbenchers, inviting them to participate in the Group. The  Opposition were offered three spots - the same number as the Government -  while the independents and Greens were offered two places each.    

 The Government has received responses from all groups except the Opposition.  As a result, the membership of the Multi-Party Reference Group will be:   

 - Mr Wayne Swan MP  - Mr Chris Bowen MP  - Mr Stephen Jones MP  - Senator Christine Milne  - Senator Sarah Hanson-Young  - Senator John Madigan  - Mr Tony Windsor MP   

 The Government remains willing to accept Mr Abbott’s nominations.   

 If Mr Abbott chooses not to participate, we are willing to accept nominations from  Opposition members, given the clear importance that many parliamentarians  across all sides of politics attach to resolving this issue.   

 The task of the expert panel is to address asylum seeker and refugee issues,  including the need to prevent people from risking their lives on dangerous boat  journeys at sea. The expert panel will be led by former Chief of the Defence  Force, Angus Houston, and will include Mr Paris Aristotle and Mr Michael  L’Estrange.   

 The independent expert panel will examine all of the policy options available to  respond to this complex challenge, including those canvassed in the Parliament. 

 It will have access to all materials available to the Government and will be able to  take any steps it believes necessary to ensure that its findings are based on all  available information.   

 

 MELBOURNE  6 JULY 2012   

 PRESS OFFICE: (02) 6277 7744  MINISTER BOWEN’S OFFICE: 0400 510 802  MINISTER CLARE’S OFFICE: 0428 040 522   

