---
title: "No time for Labor's less than half measures as three more boats arrive"
date: "2012-08-17"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211380378
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1861152%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population, Immigration & Citizenship 

 Scott Morrison 

 No time for Labor's less than half measures as three more boats arrive 

 17/08/12  

 The arrival of three more boats demonstrates that this is no time for less than half  measures from Labor who still refuse to adopt the full suite of the Howard  Government policies to stop the boats, Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border  Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “In the days and weeks ahead the people smugglers will test this Government like  never before. This is not a time for Labor’s less than half measures and proven weak  resolve,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “After Labor have been dragged kicking and screaming to reintroduce offshore  processing on Nauru, there are already doubts about the Government’s resolve  when they are forced to implement policies they abolished and don’t believe in.  

 “However the decision by Labor to introduce less than half of the proven measures  of the Howard Government and reject turning the boats back where it is safe to do so  and reintroduce temporary protection visas, continues to leave our borders exposed. 

 “Only the Coalition can be trusted to deliver the policies and resolve needed on our  borders to send the only message people smugglers will understand,” Mr Morrison  said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “5 boats in 24 hours, carrying over 250 people, as the people  smugglers are set to challenge the Government’s latest border protection policy. 

 “In the past few days we have seen boats arriving undetected on Australian territory  shores and acts of potential piracy at sea, as the people smugglers look set to test  the resolve of this Government - a test they have always failed in the past. 

 “Once again this is further proof that Labor must implement all three planks of the  Coalition’s proven border protection policies if they are serious about stopping the  boats from coming and putting an end to this criminal trade - they had an opportunity  this week to do exactly this and as predicted they instead chose the path of least  resistance. 

 “I would call on the Government to immediately return to the full suite of Howard  Government policies and show the people smugglers and the region that Australia is  no longer a soft touch on border protection,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

