---
title: "Gillard delivers budget surplus for people smugglers"
date: "2012-04-29"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR PRODUCTIVITY & POPULATION, IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372153
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1601352%22
---

 Scott Morrison 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population, Immigration & Citizenship 

 Gillard delivers budget surplus for people smugglers  

 29/04/12  

 The illegal arrival of the largest boat in more than two years, carrying 170 people, will  yield more than $1.6 million for people smugglers highlighting that their trade is  roaring under Labor's soft border policies, Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border  Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “The only budget surplus the Gillard Government has delivered has been for the  people smugglers, with illegal boat arrivals continuing to surge in 2012,” Mr Morrison  said. 

 “More than 940 people have turned up on 12 illegal boats so far this month, with the  latest carrying 170 people, the largest in more than two years. More people have  turned up by boat since Anzac Day than in the last six years of the Howard  Government,” he said. 

 “Labor has simply given up on border protection and given in to the Greens,  continuing to soften policy. 

 “Labor's 'let them in, let them out' policy has supercharged the people smugglers’  product, with more than 3,300 people turning up on 42 boats since the introduction of  Labor's community release plan for single male asylum seekers on bridging visas. 

 “Labor's only answer is to offer lame excuses and to seek to blame others for their  own hopeless policy failures. After more than 300 illegal boat arrivals Labor still  cannot accept responsibility,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “With the arrival of the second boat in as many days it is clear that  the people smugglers have well and truly cemented their control over Australia's  borders. 

 “The hard working men and women of our Border Protection Command continue to  face an uphill battle with no support from Labor. 

 “When our country is facing a complete crisis at our borders, it seems the only  response Labor can offer is an excuse. 

 “The Gillard Government can no longer afford to ignore one of the principle roles of  the Commonwealth - protecting our borders,” Mr Keenan said. 

  

