---
title: "27 boats but Tony Abbott is still saying 'no'"
date: "2012-05-06"
creators:
  - "Clare, Jason"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372565
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1619850%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 JASON CLARE MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE  MINISTER FOR DEFENCE MATERIEL 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 27 BOATS BUT TONY ABBOTT IS STILL SAYING ‘NO’    

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Home  Affairs, Jason Clare MP, said the two asylum seeker boats intercepted today are the 26th  and 27th since Tony Abbott said ‘no’ to offshore processing.    

 Mr Bowen said that as the Government had repeatedly warned, more boats continue to  arrive without a real deterrent in place.   

 “Mr Abbott continues to say ‘no’ to the national interest - he’s only concerned with  negativity, cheap slogans and his personal interest,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “Australians have no choice but to conclude that Mr Abbott prefers to see more boats arrive  to gain cheap political points.   

 “As all the expert advice to Government says, we need a genuine deterrent to stop people  from taking these dangerous boat journeys - but the Coalition continues to stand in the way  of offshore processing.   

 “Remember what this is all about - 200 people died last year off the coast of Indonesia.  Another 11 people died off the coast of Malaysia in February," Mr Clare said.    

 “We can stop this - but it requires legislation. That means it requires both sides to work  together.   

 “It’s time Tony Abbott stopped saying no and voted to allow offshore processing in Malaysia  and Nauru.”   

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769 (Bowen)  Korena Flanagan 0418 251 316 (Clare)   

