---
title: "Talks with Indonesia leave dangerous incentive in place to get on boats"
date: "2012-09-05"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211381474
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2733093%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling TALKS WITH INDONESIA LEAVE  DANGEROUS INCENTIVE IN PLACE TO GET  ON BOATS September 05, 2012

 The Coalition welcomes the fact that the Government has responded to our call for talks with Indonesia on search and  rescue issues and welcomes the many practical measures so far agreed, however we remain concerned at the  Government's failure to remove the incentive that exists for people rescued believing they will be taken to Australia by our  Navy operating as a water taxi service.

 More than two months ago the Coalition called for talks between Indonesia and Australia to discuss search and rescue  protocols and any additional assistance and support, following the tragedy that occurred in June. In an opinion article on  June 25 we stated:

 "This latest incident indicates that urgent bilateral discussions with Indonesia are required to clarify expectations of our  respective responses to incidents within Indonesia's search-and-rescue zone and whether protocols need to be  refreshed ... Such protocols should include when assets should and will be deployed for interception or assistance and  where people would be taken. These discussions could also canvass whether additional resources are required by the  Indonesian authorities to support these arrangements."

 Clarifying where rescued asylum seekers are taken is critical to removing the expectation that anyone rescued will be  brought to Australia by water taxi. Failure to clarify these issues leaves a dangerous incentive in place for people to get on  boats and is putting them at risk.

 While we welcome the positive and practical measures agreed in the talks, the failure so far to address the issue of where  people rescued are taken is a major concern. It appears that the issue was not even on the table.

 Under international law, the primary responsibility for receiving people rescued at sea rests with the country in whose  search and rescue zone people were picked up. The vast majority of these incidents occur in the Indonesian search and  rescue zone.

 These principles are not overridden by whether people claim to be seeking asylum or not. They are supposed to be taken  to the nearest place of practicable safety, a place that can be determined by the master of the vessel, not the receiving  country, where that country has signed the relevant conventions.

 So long as the Australian Government continues to allow asylum seekers seeking to come to Australia on illegal boats to  expect that if they get into distress or issue a distress call in the Indonesian search and rescue zone they will be taken to  Australia by our Navy operating a water taxi service, they leave a dangerous incentive in place for people to get on boats.

 While there are many positive measures in the package agreed with Indonesia, the failure to apparently address this  critical issue of where people are taken if rescued is very disappointing.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 TALKS WITH INDONESIA LEAVE DANGEROUS INCENTIVE IN PLACE TO G...

 18/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

