---
title: "Group of boat arrivals returned to Sri Lanka"
date: "2012-09-22"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382476
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1935992%22
---

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 22 September 2012 

 

 GROUP OF BOAT ARRIVALS RETURNED TO SRI LANKA   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today announced that a  group of 16 Sri Lankan men - part of the post-13 August caseload affected by new regional  processing arrangements - are returning home voluntarily.   

 Two other Sri Lankan men in immigration detention who arrived before 13 August are also  being returned.   

 The total of 18 men were removed on a charter flight from Christmas Island to Colombo  today that departed at 8.15am local time.   

 “These individuals chose not to pursue asylum claims and face transfer to a regional  processing centre in Nauru or Papua New Guinea and instead chose to return home  voluntarily,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “We have completed more transfers of boat arrivals to Nauru this week and they will  continue to occur in the coming days and weeks.   

 “Both the Nauru transfers and this group of adult Sri Lankan men choosing to return home  provide further evidence that the people smugglers are selling lies and misleading asylum  seekers about the situation they will face if they reach Australia by boat.    

 “People who pay smugglers to risk their lives on a dangerous sea journey are throwing their  money away, as demonstrated by the speedy return of this group.   

 “Transfers off Christmas Island will continue. People arriving by boat will be sent to Nauru  and Papua New Guinea. This Government is determined to break the people smuggling  trade and stop people getting on those dangerous boats,” Mr Bowen said.   

 People in immigration detention can request their removal from Australia at any point in  time. Those who choose to depart voluntarily can be provided with individual reintegration  support to assist with their sustainable return, through the International Organization for  Migration.    

 Mr Bowen said the Government was committed to implementing the Expert Panel on Asylum  Seekers’ key principle related to a strategic, comprehensive and integrated policy approach  that provides no advantage to people choosing to travel to Australia by boat.   

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 

 

