---
title: "Another boat as chaos grows inside detention centres"
date: "2012-11-15"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211385286
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731241%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ANOTHER BOAT AS CHAOS GROWS INSIDE  DETENTION CENTRES November 15, 2012

 Another illegal boat arrival, this time with 86 people on board, will add yet more people into an already bulging detention system, and will contribute to rising tensions and skyrocketing costs as Labor’s half hearted policies and resolve continue  to fail on our borders, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Another day, another boat arrival and once again more people are being shoved into our overcrowded detention centres. Every day under Minister Bowen’s failed policies is ‘Groundhog Day’,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Having ignored the lessons of his failure which led to the riots and chaos in detention centres last year, it seems Minister Bowen is eager to repeat his same mistakes.

 “Boats continue to come in record numbers, people are back on detention centre roofs and in tents at Christmas Island.

 “We are just half way through November and already 23 boats have arrived with more than 1,250 people on board. Over 9,600  people  have  arrived  so  far  this  financial  year  including  over  7,000  since  Labor  announced  Nauru  would  be reopened.

 “The only difference Minister Bowen has made on our borders is to make his failure worse and he’s rung up record bills for  taxpayers as the biggest spending Immigration Minister in our nation’s history in the process,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr  Keenan  said:  “86  boats  carrying  over  1,200  people  have  arrived  in  the  last  two  weeks  under  Labor  as  our  patrol vessels are continually used by the people smugglers as their own daily water taxi service.

 “The Minister for Immigration, Chris Bowen, put out a release today announcing that his Government had returned 32 Sri Lankan  arrivals  back  home,  however  in  the  last  24  hours  there  have  been  over  170  arrivals  at  Cocos  Islands  - the   traditional destination of Sri Lankan asylum seekers.

 “This constant influx of boat arrivals clearly shows that Labor’s message is not working. The boats are still arriving faster  than  people  can  be  flown  home  - this  is  further  indication  that  Labor  should  reintroduce  the  Coalition’s  proven  border  protection policy of turning the boats back around when it is safe to do so.

 “The  Government  needs  to  start  turning  the  boats  back  around  if  they  want  to  send  a  clear  message  to  the  people smugglers that Australia’s borders are closed for business,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 ANOTHER BOAT AS CHAOS GROWS INSIDE DETENTION CENTRES > Micha...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

