---
title: "10,000 boat arrivals since budget"
date: "2012-10-17"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211383676
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731316%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling 10,000 BOAT ARRIVALS SINCE BUDGET October 17, 2012

 The arrival of two illegal boats yesterday, with a total of 145 people on board, means over 10,000 people have arrived on illegal boats since the budget and new massive blow outs are coming taxpayers’ way under Labor’s half hearted border  protection  policies,  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Over  10,000  arrivals  on  boats  since  the  budget  will  bring  more  blow  outs  under  Labor’s  half  hearted  policies  on  our  borders, as arrivals continue to trend at an average of more than a boat a day,” Mr Morrison said.

 “This makes a mockery of Wayne Swan’s budget which was based on just 450 people arriving a month. Since the budget an average of almost 450 people have arrived every single week.

 “With government officials this week admitting at Senate Estimates that the budget was blown a long time ago and a fresh $225 million blow out revealed in the Department of Immigration’s 11/12 Annual Report, it is past time for Labor to come  clean with the Australian people and tell them just how much more they will be forced to pay.

 “While  Labor  continues  to  be  in  denial  about  the  full  suite  of  Howard  Government  measures  to  stop  the  boats,  this government will continue to clock up more boat arrivals and more budget blow outs, which have already reached over $5 billion in just four years.

 “Rather than cursing the Coalition and criticizing our proven policies on border protection, Julia Gillard should be copying them in full. 

 “The Prime Minister's juvenile response to the recent meetings of the Coalition in Jakarta, just demonstrates again why Labor cannot be trusted on this issue,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr  Keenan  said:  “These  latest  boats  carrying  a  total  of  145  people  come  at  a  time  when  Customs  is  being  severely mismanaged by the Gillard Labor Government.

 “This Labor Government has sanctioned $634,014 to be spent on 118 new shredders for Customs, at more than $5,300 a pop - when agencies such as ASIO that deal with top secret material spend $353 per shredder.

 “This revelation comes at a time when Customs Border Protection Command are struggling to find the resources to cope with the constant flood of illegal boat arrivals that are coming daily.

 “There have been 13 boat arrivals this past week carrying 815 people - with Labor’s unprecedented mismanagement of  our border protection regime and our economy, Customs are going to struggle to mop up the Government’s mess as this  farce continues,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 10,000 BOAT ARRIVALS SINCE BUDGET > Michael Keenan MP

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

