---
title: "Transcript of press conference: 4 September 2012: Afghanistan; Newspoll; healthcare and education funding; public service job cuts; sheep on the Ocean Drover; super trawler"
date: "2012-09-04"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211381418
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1895468%22
---

 Christine Milne   Australian Greens Leader   

 Tuesday 4 September 2012   

 Press conference   

 Transcript   

 Subjects: Afghanistan, Newspoll, healthcare and education funding, public service job cuts, sheep on  the Ocean Drover, super trawler   

 CHRISTINE MILNE: The tragedy in Afghanistan continues and Australia’s soldiers are in danger all the  time and it is absolutely the point at which we need to bring our soldiers home and as quickly and as  safely as possible. Today I have written to the Prime Minister asking her to bring on a debate about  the war in Afghanistan in the first week that we return and that is next week. With New Zealand now  bringing  its  soldiers  home,  setting  a  date  for  the  withdrawal  for  next  year,  early  next  year,  it  is   essential that Australia does the same. When you look at what’s actually going on in Afghanistan, the  level of  trust  in  all sorts  of areas,  not  only  President  Karzai  and  the  corruption  in  that  regime, but   there are an increasing number of green on green attacks where there are fights within the security  forces  in  Afghanistan,  not  to  mention  green  on  blue  attacks  with  the  security  forces  attacking   Australian and other soldiers. It is time we brought our troops home.   

 2014 is a totally artificial date. There is going to be no magic about 2014, it is just a decision that was  made  with  the  Americans  that  Australia  would  bring  our  troops  home  then.  On  the  ground  in   Afghanistan there is going to be very little difference between now and 2014 but what we do know  is that there’s a high probability more Australians will be killed. That’s unacceptable. There is nothing  more responsible or having such long-term and profound effects than to commit people to war. And  you  had  better  be  really  sure  that  that  war  is in  the  national  interest.  There  can  no  longer  be  any   claim that the war in Afghanistan is going to significantly change Afghanistan between now and 2014  and on that basis we need our troops to come home. 

 

 JOURNALIST:  I  think  New  Zealand  is  bringing  its  troops  out  five  months  early.  Are  you  wanting  Australia to do a similar thing or to get them out right now?   

 CHRISTINE MILNE:  I want to see the troops come home as soon as they can be safely brought home.  I’m  not  going  to  put  a  date  on  that,  that  would  be  up  to  the  defence  chiefs  to  determine  how to  withdraw them as quickly and as safely as possible, but I would like them brought home as soon as  possible  and  I’m  calling  on  the  Prime  Minister  today  to  bring  on  a  debate  in  the  Parliament  on   Afghanistan.    

 When we signed the agreement to provide Government to Prime Minister Gillard, having a debate  on  Afghanistan,  a  parliamentary  debate,  was  part  of  that  agreement.  We  are  one  of  the  very  few   parliaments in the world that has no say as to whether our troops are committed to a war or not.  We  have  legislation  in  the  Parliament  to  say  that  the  Parliament  should  determine  whether  our   troops are deployed to war and that needs to be a parliamentary decision. It certainly needs to be a  parliamentary debate about bringing them home.   

 JOURNALIST: To what extent do you think the Newspoll results today are a sign that Australians are  not warming to your leadership?  

 

 CHRISTINE MILNE The poll today, it’s disappointing, of course, especially since we’ve delivered one  of  the  biggest  injections  into  health  care  in  Australia  in  decades  with  dental  care  -  $4  billion  into   dental health across the country and the first step towards universal access to Denticare, and I know  that Australians are delighted that that is going to change. So I’m disappointed that that perhaps is  not  reflected  in  the  poll,  but  from  my  point  of  view,  I’m  in  the  Parliament  to  lead  a  party  and  to   engage  in  the  serious  issues  of  the  day.  Delivering  Denticare  was  one,  linking  with  the  European   Union  is  another,  and  now  bringing  the  troops  home  from  Afghanistan  and  also  investing  in   education. These are the issues of the day, the Greens have a very strong perspective, and we will  continue to argue them.   

 JOURNALIST:  Do  you  think  this  poll  shows  that  perhaps  the  Greens  made  the  wrong  choice  in   choosing you as a successor to Bob Brown?   

 CHRISTINE MILNE: The Greens have made a choice about my leadership. I noticed that none of you  were saying when the polls remained the same and went up after Bob left that that was any kind of  reflection  on  him.  Come  on,  it’s  one  poll,  it’s  disappointing  but  we’ve  got  work  to  do  in  the   Parliament on Afghanistan, on education funding, we’ve delivered on dental care, we’re working on  carbon pricing, and I intend to continue.   

 JOURNALIST:  Do  you  put  any  of  it  down  to  sticking  so steadfastly  to  things  like  the  asylum  seeker  issue?   

 CHRISTINE MILNE: It’s always hard to know what people take into account as they’re rung up by a  pollster.  It  may  well  be  that  people  have  misunderstood  I  think  a  lot  about  the  asylum  seeker   debate.  I  think  they  weren’t  aware  that  the  Greens  are  the  strongest  advocates for  increasing  the  humanitarian  numbers  and  actually  putting  money  into  Indonesia  to  assess  and  have  much  better   regional  assessment  processes.  We  are  the  ones  calling  for  codification  of  lives  at  sea  and  often   there is a lag between what happens in Parliament and community’s understanding of it. But we will  continue to prosecute the right thing for refugees. And that is prioritising safe passage to Australia  and  other  countries  and  making  sure  that  people  recognise  deterrence  does  not  work,  what  will   work  is  informing  people  in  Indonesia,  in  the  camps  that  now  the  humanitarian  intake  is  to  be   increased, they don’t need to get on the boats. We do not want them on those leaky boat,  the best  way of stopping them is to tell them there is hope, there is hope that you can come and be resettled  in Australia.   

 JOURNALIST:  You  mentioned  the  Gonski  reforms  indirectly,  obviously  with  the  budget  situation  in   Canberra being tight, how would you suggest the Government raises the revenue to fund that and  other commitments?   

 CHRISTINE MILNE: The Greens have been the only political party who are prepared to bite the bullet  and  to  raise  money.  We  were  the  ones  who  opposed  the  tax  cuts  to  big  business,  we’re  the  ones   now  saying  if  you’re  really  serious  about  addressing  climate  change  then  you  need  an  internally   consistent approach, we should be getting rid of the $7.2 billion in fossil fuel subsidies that we pay  out each year but also we’re staying close the loop on the Mineral Resource Rent Tax because that  would mean another $10 billion out to 2020. So we have plans to actually raise money but I cannot  believe that both the Prime Minister and Tony Abbott in a more extreme version want to attack the  public service so viciously. If they get their way you are going to see thousands of public servants out  of  work.  They  are  real  people,  those  job cuts  hurt in the  community  just  as much as  people losing  their jobs from various factories that close or mines that close. Public servants actually work in the  public service - in our interest as a community, and I think we have to stop this idea that if you want 

 to raise money you can just axe thousands of public servants. And Tony Abbott also has to say where  is he going to get the money to do what he wants to do. He hasn’t said how he’s going to fill the $70  billion black hole. On Gonski you’ve got the Prime Minister saying she adopts the framework but the  money not really flowing until 2020. That’s way too late, but Tony Abbott is also saying he wants to  put money in schools, well where is the money going to come from? He was in the Howard Cabinet  that  brought  in  this  absolutely  unequal  funding  model  that  currently  exists.  Our  public  schools   around Australia are desperate, and so we want to raise the money to implement Gonski as quickly  as possible, but if there is going to be such a long phase in as the Prime Minister  is suggesting, we  want to see money brought up front and invested in public schools because the majority of students  are  in  public  schools  and  the  greatest  need,  particularly  for  disabilities,  for  special  needs,  for   supporting communities, so that students are ready to learn, we need that money to go into public  schools.    

 JOURNALIST: Just on finding those revenue streams, I just wonder whether one might be looking at  superannuation and for example high income earners, tax breaks for them?   

 CHRISTINE  MILNE:  Well  it’s  clear  that  the  Prime  Minister  has  signalled  that  she  is  going  to  look  to   raise  some  of  the  money  from  higher  income  earners.  The  Greens  have  already  been  part  of   proposing more  equitable  arrangements in terms of superannuation. We  also  have  a policy  to  say  that if people earn more than $1 million then the tax should be increased to them, so we are already  out there prepared to talk to the Government about raising revenue rather than slashing jobs in the  public service. But it’s also about raising revenue to nation build. We need money in education now,  we’re falling behind the rest of the world, we have to give our students the best opportunity in life  by investing in our schools. That is critical. But equally, national disability insurance -  long overdue,  the community wants. Denticare, putting that into a Medicare arrangement it’s something that the  community  has  wanted  for  a  very  long  time.  If  we  want  good  social  outcomes  for  people,  good   environmental outcomes, you have to find the money to pay for them and the Greens are prepared  to do that.   

 JOURNALIST:  Have  you  had  any  discussions  with  the  Government  along  those  lines,  on  super  or   other areas where there’s no means tests for benefits like child-care rebates?   

 CHRISTINE  MILNE:  We  haven’t  had  any  discussions  with  the  Government  to  date  on  some  of  the   measures that the Prime Minister might have in mind. But we have certainly put to the Government  that we are prepared to close that loophole in the Minerals Resource Rent Tax and I’m introducing a  private  member’s bill to  that  effect  and we  have  certainly  argued to  the  Government  ad infinitum  that we should get rid of the fossil fuel subsidies. So we are on the record and we are prepared to  put our costings and our proposals through the Parliamentary Budget Office, and this is a challenge  for  Tony  Abbott.  Not  only  has  he  no  plan  in  terms  of raising  his  $70  billion  but  he’s  running  away   from proper scrutiny of where he might say he is going to get the money from in the context of the  next election.   Achieving  a  Parliamentary  Budget  Office  and  getting  that  set  up  this  part  was  part  of  the  Greens’   agreement with  Prime  Minister  Gillard  because  we  knew  it’s  critical  that  everybody  in  the   Parliament  gets  their  election  policies  properly  costed,  not  just  the  Government.  Last  election  the   Coalition  ran  away  from  proper  costing,  this  time  they  have  no  excuse.  The  Parliamentary  Budget   Office is set up, the Greens will put all our costings to it and we’re calling on Tony Abbott to do the  same.   

 JOURNALIST:  And the child-care rebate, is that an area where you think that should be looked at?   

 CHRISTINE  MILNE:  Well  we  are  not  going  to  engage  in  hypotheticals  about  what  the  Government   may  or  may  not  propose,  but  we  will  talk  to  the  Government  on  what  is  necessary  to  raise  the   money for things like the implementation of Gonski.   

 JOURNALIST:  To the situation in the Middle East where there are thousands of sheep on the Ocean  Drover and it is unable to dock, does that show that that Memorandum of Understanding that was  signed isn’t really up to scratch?   

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Well quite clearly the Memorandum of Understanding is not worth the paper it’s  written on. It’s very clear that those sheep should have been unloaded within 36 hours. That hasn’t  happened, so all of the talk about proper management and concern about animal welfare is just that  - talk. We now have a situation where the Government simply can’t deliver on what it says it will do  in terms of the live export trade and that is why the Greens have always opposed it.   

 JOURNALIST: what could happen immediately, what could the Government do immediately?   

 CHRISTINE  MILNE:  Well  the  Government  should  be  in  touch  immediately  with  the  relevant   authorities  and  see  what  they  can  do  to  have  that  ship  unloaded.  It  is  unacceptable  I  think  to  all   Australians to think that the animals are left on board that boat indefinitely, it is cruel and we have  to do something about it and that means the Government has to put its shoulder to the wheel and  make sure something is done.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister Burke seems happy with the by-catch conditions for the super trawler.   

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Peter Whish-Wilson gave a press conference on that in Launceston, but anyway  I’ll make a quick statement about that, but he’s got carriage of it and will have done a lot with it.   

 JOURNALIST: Did they go far enough, what he’s announced?   

 CHRISTINE MILNE:  If Minister Burke wanted to stop the super trawler, all he had to do was make it a  requirement of the conditions that no turtles, no seals, would be caught in the nets, in which case  that  ship  would  not  proceed.  Having  said  that,  the  Government  still  has  the option,  as  does  the   Coalition of stopping the super trawler by disallowing the quota. The Greens have got that legislation  in the  Senate, it’s  already under  debate and will be  when we  go  back  and the  issue  here  is  do  the  Government really want to stop the super trawler? I don’t think so. Do the Coalition want to stop the  super trawler? I don’t think so. It is only the Greens out there saying no to the super trawler. And as  for  Minister  Burke’s  suggestion  that  they  won’t  be  catching  any  more  fish  than  otherwise  would   have been the case, perhaps he can explain why the quota was increased specifically for the super  trawler.  Super  trawlers  will  suck  out  of  the  ocean  huge  volumes  of  fish  and  the  long-term  consequences for the marine food chain are serious. We’ve seen depletion of fish stocks everywhere  they’ve been, from West Africa and into the Pacific and Australians simply do not want these super  trawlers in our waters.   

 JOURNALIST:  Isn’t  it  the  case  with  fishing  that  there  is  always  a  possibility  of  by-catch with  a  boat   when you’ve got a net involved? Sometimes you do get by-catch.   

 CHRISTINE  MILNE:  The  by-catch  in  the  case  of  the  super  trawler,  when  you  look  at  the size  of  the  nets, the enormity of what they’re actually dredging, to say that the punishment for catching seals  or turtles is pull up the net and you can’t put it in for 50 kilometres, well how many minutes later is  that?  That’s  really  not  a  very  great  stick  if  you  like,  to  doing  the  right  thing  by  the  marine   environment.  What  we  need  to  do  is  stop  it  before  it  begins.  What  we’re  hearing  from  Minister  

 Burke is a wringing of hands, ‘I can’t do anything, we’ll just watch and see what goes on’. There’s no  actual management plan that tells you about localised depletion and if the Minister really wanted to  stop it, then he would say no threatened species, no licence.   

 JOURNALIST: One of the conditions that Sea Fish has agreed to is to have two government officers,  personnel, on board observing what goes on. You must think that’s a good thing at least?   

 CHRISTINE MILNE:  Of course it’s good to have observers on board. But what are they going to do?  Are  they  going  to  observe  as  the  nets  are  brought  up  and  the  by-catch is  there?  And  then  at best  you’ll have the net pulled out and moved 50 kilometres, that’s all.   

