---
title: "Another Tony Abbott boat arrives"
date: "2012-06-13"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374814
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2273128%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Another Tony Abbott boat arrives  Sunday, 10 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Jason Clare MP - Minister for Home Affairs, Minister for  Justice and Minister for Defence Materiel. 

 The Coalition's continued refusal to support offshore processing legislation is a  significant factor in the increase of asylum seeker arrivals, the Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Home Affairs, Jason  Clare MP, said today. 

 Tony Abbott's aggressive negativity continues to play into the hands of people  smugglers, with another asylum seeker boat intercepted overnight - the 48th since  the coalition rejected the government's offer to implement offshore processing. 

 'The coalition is trying to walk both sides of the street on this issue. On the one hand,  they deny the government the ability to limit boat arrivals by blocking offshore  processing legislation. On the other, they attack the government for the number of  boat arrivals,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'Boats will continue to come for as long as Mr Abbott and the coalition put their own  political interest ahead of the national interest, so it's time for them to put their  negativity aside and vote for offshore processing.' 

 'We have a solution. It is called offshore processing. Tony Abbott is stopping it being  implemented,' Mr Clare said. 

 'If Tony Abbott is really concerned about people smugglers give us the power to put  them out of business. No one will pay them $10 000 to be sent back to Malaysia. 

 'Tony Abbott knows this - he wants more boats to come because he thinks it will  mean more votes for him. That is why he is stopping the government from passing  laws to put people smugglers out of business. 

 'We can stop this now. Tony Abbott just has to stop opposing laws that will put the  people smugglers out of business.' 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb187439.htm 

