---
title: "Bowen must explain spin over $36.7 million taxpayer charter flight bill"
date: "2012-12-10"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211386935
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2101298%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Bowen must explain spin over $36.7 million taxpayer  charter flight bill  10/12/12 

 Immigration Minister Chris Bowen, the biggest spending Immigration Minister in Australian history,  must explain how much of the $36.7 million asylum charter flight bill identified in 57 separate and  specific Government tenders is to transfer asylum seekers to Nauru, Manus Island and Sri Lanka, as  he has tried to claim today, otherwise drop the spin, Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison said. 

 “On radio this morning Minister Bowen tried to blame the increase in charter costs on the decision  to restore offshore processing, claiming the charters included ‘the cost of doing things like  implementing Nauru and Papua New Guinea which we always said would be expensive.’ 

 “Of the 57 tenders identified by the Coalition, 32 of these were specifically for domestic flights and  not one of these 57 tenders made any reference to overseas flights.  In addition to the 57 tenders  worth $36.7 million, there were six further tenders for charter flights over the same period, worth  $4.5 million, that specifically refer to Nauru and Manus Island including ‘charter transfers to Nauru’  [attached]. 

 “For the Government to try and blame the increase in charter flight costs on offshore processing is  just more deceit from a Government that is so embarrassed by the scale of their own failure they  cannot even be honest with themselves, let alone taxpayers. 

 “Only about 400 people have been sent to Nauru and 67 to Manus Island since August 14. At the  same time the Government is flying asylum seekers around Australia, including on jumbos to Sydney,  to release them into the community. If Minister Bowen wants to argue that most of the $36.7 million  in asylum charter flights over six months specifically relates to reopening Nauru and Manus Island he  should back it up and detail the cost. Otherwise it’s just more of the same old NSW-style Labor spin. 

 “Labor are desperately trying to spin attention away from their surrender to people smugglers with  their new ‘visa first and ask questions later’ policy for asylum seekers.  This failed policy will only  mean more costs and encourage more people to come by boat. 

 “Labor’s border failure just goes from bad to worse. They’re now spending more running their own  asylum airline, ferrying asylum seekers all around Australia including on jumbo jets, than they are  actually funding the operations of the Royal Flying Doctor Service. 

 “Labor’s border failures have long passed the point of no return for this Government. Only a change  of government can now reverse Labor’s failure and stop the cost, chaos and tragedy on our borders  that have occurred on their watch,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

