---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Canberra: 14 August 2012: Houston Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers"
date: "2012-08-14"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211380162
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2602166%22
---

 

 

 Transcript of press conference, Canberra  TUE 14 AUGUST 2012 

 Prime Minister 

 Subject(s): Houston Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY 

 PM: This morning the Minister for Immigration, Minister Bowen, has been in discussions  with his counterpart, the Shadow Minister for Immigration, Scott Morrison. 

 Those discussions about potential further amendments to the legislation are proceeding in  good faith and I’m not going to run a running commentary on them. 

 But I do want to say this. The time for politics is over; the time for action is here. It’s time to  get this legislation amended, and the Government is prepared to make any arrangements  necessary in order to facilitate a vote in the House of Representatives today. 

 We want this legislation through. 

 I am obviously concerned that people smugglers might seek to exploit this window, as I and  the Minister for Immigration said yesterday, anybody who gets on a boat at this time is at risk  of being transferred to Nauru or PNG. 

 But clearly people smugglers seeking to profit might be trying to exploit this window so the  sooner we legislate, the better. 

 I spoke this morning to the Chief of our Defence Force, and asked him about the logistics for  making arrangements for a processing facility on Nauru and in PNG. 

 He has advised me that if legislation passes the Parliament this week, it would be possible to  have reconnaissance teams in Nauru and PNG on Friday looking at the sites for the  processing facility, for the regional processing centre. 

 He has advised me that subject to what those reconnaissance teams find, it would then be  possible for Defence to facilitate the construction of temporary facilities in both locations. 

 That means that within a month, we would hope to see people being processed in Nauru and  in PNG. That’s clearly subject to the work of the reconnaissance teams that could go as early  as Friday. 

 This morning I’ve spoken to the President of Nauru and the Prime Minister of PNG. 

 I have explained to both of them the circumstances of the Houston report, the details of its  findings, and also the work that is happening here in Parliament to amend the legislation. 

 I’ve asked them if we succeed in amending the legislation so that there can be offshore  processing, whether or not they would be prepared to enter discussions with the Australian  Government to host such centres. 

 Both of them have been positive about hosting centres and positive about entering those  discussions. 

 Both of them have said that if legislation passes this week, they would welcome the  reconnaissance teams from our Defence Force on Friday and they would work with those  reconnaissance teams and with Defence to facilitate the establishment of temporary facilities. 

 That is the work that has been done to date. 

 Clearly the Australian people want to see us act. They are over listening to the yelling and  shouting of politicians about this matter. 

 They want to see change and we can see change this week in the legislation and then act on  that change as early as Friday. 

 I’m happy to take a few questions. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when you talk about temporary facilities, are you talking  about tents or something more substantial than that. And having you picked up the phone to  the President of Nauru, have you either picked up the phone or written to Tony Abbott to  seek his support for the legislation? 

 PM: Well that work is happening through our relevant Ministers, so Scott Morrison is  obviously empowered by the Opposition to discuss matters on their behalf and Minister  Bowen is meeting with his counterpart. 

 He’s done that this morning, and discussions are continuing. 

 As for the temporary facilities, yes they would involve tents and other sorts of temporary  structures. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will any special payments be made to Nauru or PNG? 

 PM: Look I’m not in a position to talk to you about the details of an agreement that hasn’t  been struck yet. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister I understand last night the Opposition provided a list of 44  speakers to speak (inaudible). Is that your understanding and isn’t it right there should be  significant debate on this legislation? 

 PM: I can’t give you a specific number but my understanding is the Opposition has quite a  large number of people who have put their names on the speaking list. 

 My view is that the time for the politics, the political point scoring, the yelling, the shouting,  that time is over. People want to see action. 

 We need this legislation to pass the Parliament so that we can get on with that action. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the former Defence Force chief yesterday said that there  should be a limit of five years for asylum seekers sent to Nauru. Would you feel comfortable  with genuine refugees being held in Nauru, or Manus Island for that matter, for five years? 

 PM: I’ve endorsed, in principle, the recommendations of the Houston report as I indicated  yesterday. 

 One of those recommendations is about people who travel by boat being processed on Nauru  or in PNG - and then remaining there for what would have been the same period of time as if  they had not travelled on the boat. 

 So it’s fundamental to the propositions in the panel’s report that you don’t get an advantage  because you’ve got on a boat. 

 Now there’s a need to implement that and work through what it means, what processing times  are in our region, for example, and we would take UNHCR advice on that and work the  implementation arrangements through. 

 JOURNALIST: It could be up to ten years. 

 PM: What I’m saying to you, and I’m not going to endorse figures that haven’t been -  obviously Angus Houston used a figure yesterday - what the report is saying to us we should  do is we should work out what processing times are and make an equivalent that would  require careful advice from UNHCR - we’d take that advice. 

 So I’m not going to nominate a figure before we take that advice, but as a question of  principle, do I think we should do that, yes I do. The Houston report recommends it. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott says that since Labor has had an absence of an  offshore processing policy, hundreds of people have died at sea. Was it Labor’s fault? 

 PM: Look on the politics of this, I think the time for the politicking has well and truly gone,  including politicking of that nature. I don’t think the Australian community want us  exchanging insults - they want us to act - and that is what I am determined to do. 

 As people would be aware, and this is a very common sense point that everybody in this  audience particularly would be aware of, there has not been a compromise on the table until  we are working through this today. 

 So the Houston report has done what I hoped it would do, which is bring a fresh perspective  and a new way forward in this debate. 

 As recently as six weeks ago, Scott Morrison wasn’t able to say on television whether if the  Government adopted every element of the Opposition’s plan, the Opposition would back it. 

 That’s where we were six weeks ago, I’m not interested in canvassing all of those matters of  history, I’m not interested in finger-pointing or blame throwing. I’m interested in action and  getting something done. 

 JOURNALIST: On this question of the timing, it obviously worries many critics, would you  be willing not just to take the advice of the United Nation refugee group, but hand over the  determination of that time to the group? 

 PM: Look, I’m prepared to do what the Houston report has asked us to do. That does of  course require consultation with UNHCR. 

 You are asking me about the implementation of arrangements. We will implement carefully,  we’ll take the best possible advice, we’ll work it through. 

 But the question for today is will we get there. Will we get to implementing these  arrangements? In order to do that, legislation has to pass this Parliament. 

 JOURNALIST: I know you don’t want to go back on the history but the report yesterday also  seems to contradict the advice you’re getting from the Immigration Department about the  value of Nauru and Manus Island. Who’s right, and what does it say about the quality of the  advice you’re getting from the Immigration Department if it is in fact now valuable to deal  with? 

 PM: Well as I made the point yesterday, the model on Nauru and Manus Island is a different  model than has been contemplated in the past, and consequently I don’t think it’s fair to look  at advice that was given on a different model and say that that advice can somehow be  uplifted to the new model that the Houston report is putting. 

 JOURNALIST: Did the Department never put to you an alternative model that involved  keeping people there longer or removing this advantage? 

 PM: In my view, this is a new approach from the Houston team as part of an underlying  strategy of ensuring that there is no net advantage from moving. 

 You would be aware, Karen, that the debate about public service advice and about the politics  of this to date has been about detention centres on Nauru and PNG as those detention centres  were run in the past. 

 The Houston panel has recommended a different approach to that. Now as I said very frankly  yesterday, I’m not interested in the political scoreboard out of the Houston panel. 

 The truth is every political party in this Parliament can say ‘that bit gives me a tick, and  actually I got a cross over here.’ 

 That’s true of the Government; it’s true of the Opposition; it’s true of everyone else. 

 That is not what we need to debate our way through today. We need to get this legislation  done. 

 JOURNALIST: Just on this point of how long these people would stay there and whether it  might be five years or whatever, isn’t the point, isn’t this the point of it all, and that the no  advantage- 

 PM: Correct. 

 JOURNALIST: -means that this will provide the deterrent that will stop more people coming,  so isn’t that actually the design? 

 PM: Correct. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said you’d spoken to the leaders of Nauru and PNG.  Have you spoken to Malaysia yet, because you said yesterday you were going to give that a  red-hot go. 

 PM: Thank you for that question. I have sought to speak to the Prime Minister of Malaysia  today. I haven’t been able to do so as yet. 

 He is travelling outside Malaysia, and so it hasn’t been possible in his program, but I  certainly will be speaking to him as soon as it is possible for us to do so, and my message to  him would be that we’ve received this report. I would explain what the report recommends. 

 I would explain what it recommends in relation to Malaysia, and I would seek his agreement  for officials to have further discussions about the matters that are in the report and obviously  for Minister Bowen to work with Malaysia in the way that he has in the past. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the expert panel was quite clear that the recommendations  worked as a package. Would you be worried if you get support in the Parliament for Nauru  and Manus Island, but you are unable either because of the Parliament or because of the  international negotiations, to not get support for Malaysia, do you accept that in that  circumstance this package won’t work to achieve its aims? 

 PM: My view is an integrated package has been recommended to us and so my view is that  we should do everything we can to keep true to that integrated package. 

 That’s why I stood before you yesterday and said that the Government has endorsed in  principle all of the recommendations of the Houston report. 

 Now I am not in a position to control the actions of others in this Parliament, and discussions  with governments of other nations are discussions with governments of other nations and  they will make their own decisions about how they respond to Australia’s advances on these  questions. 

 But I think the Houston report is an integrated package, so it is incumbent upon us to accept  and work on the integrated package, and that is what we are intending to do. 

 We’ll take the last two and then I’ll go. Yes. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott went to Aurukun at the weekend and Wild  Rivers has popped up again. The Senator Larissa Waters, Greens Senator for Queensland has  written to Tony Burke about whether the Federal Government would look at protecting those  areas under federal legislation. Do you support that move, or do you think that Aboriginal  groups in the Cape area have a right to mine that area and go ahead with their own plans? 

 PM: Look, I’m going to have to refer you to Minister Burke on that. 

 JOURNALIST: Look back on that Malaysia stuff, I don’t totally understand. Is the  Government’s strategy to effect somehow a legally-binding agreement with Malaysia which  you can do without legislation so that you don’t have to bring legislation or amendments to  the Migration Act? 

 PM: Our strategy is to endeavour to implement what is in the Houston report. The Houston  report talks about an MOU or comparable instrument. 

 It talks about building on Malaysia, the current Malaysia agreement. It describes it as vital, so  our intention is to try and pursue the further recommendations in the Houston report about the  oversight in the Malaysia agreement and about the protections in the Malaysia agreement. 

 That’s what we would be endeavouring to do. 

 The only motivation is being faithful to what is in the Houston report, no other motivation. 

 JOURNALIST: Just further to that question, the report says that the Malaysian negotiations  are to be conducted at the highest levels of government. I know it’s only early days but would  you be hoping to maybe have some sort of conversation with your counterpart at APEC, on  the sidelines for example? 

 PM: Well I am the highest level of government, and I’m seeking to speak to the Prime  Minister of Malaysia who is the highest level of his government. 

 Thanks very much. 

 

