---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 23 November 2012: Coalition's reheated asylum seeker policies; humanitarian program; Significant Investor visa; bridging visas and the AWU"
date: "2012-11-23"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Coalition's reheated asylum seeker policies"
  - "humanitarian program"
  - "Significant Investor visa"
  - "bridging visas and the AWU"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211385810
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2062929%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 *TRANSCRIPT*   

 PRESS CONFERENCE, SYDNEY   

 FRIDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2012 

 

 SUBJECTS: Coalition’s reheated asylum seeker policies, humanitarian  program, Significant Investor visa, bridging visas, AWU.   

 CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning. I wanted to respond to a couple of things the  Opposition have said today.    

 Firstly, the Opposition have announced that they will not, if in Government, deliver on  the increase in the humanitarian program 20,000 places. It’s worth just spending a  minute going through the Opposition’s many positions on this. We know that after the  2010 election, Tony Abbott offered Andrew Wilkie an increase in the refugee program to  more than 20,000 places in return for his vote on the floor of the House of  Representatives. And we know that Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison stood on the floor  of the House of Representatives and in a press conference in June and said the Liberal  Party would support an increase in the refugee program to 20,000 places. And today  we’ve seen a backflip on that position.   

 Now, more importantly than that, there will be many people very disappointed in this  announcement today. Many people who want to see Australia resettling people out of  camps around the world, giving people who have been in a desperate situation for a  long time the best chance of resettlement in Australia. People who would like to see us  taking refugees out of camps in Africa, out of Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon, out of Thailand;  people who have been in that situation for a very long time. They’ll be very disappointed  and they’re right to be disappointed. Members of the African community who would like  to see people resettled in Australia, members of the various communities in the Middle  East who would like to see that happen, members of the Burmese community and  Australians who would like to see Australia giving those people a better chance of life in  Australia.   

 Now, I’ll give you one example of the implications of this. A couple of months ago, I  announced an increase in the allocation of Australia’s refugee program for people  affected by the Syrian crisis by 1,000 places. And Mr Morrison came out and said he  supported that. Well, you can’t support that sort of increase if you don’t support the  increase in the total program. The increase in the allocation for Syria, for example, came  out of that increase in the refugee program, the humanitarian program to 20,000 places.    

 Now, Mr Abbott has said today that the increase sends all the wrong signals to asylum  seekers. He just doesn’t get it. It sends the right signal. It sends the signal that there’s  another way, that you don’t have to get on the boat to get a chance of a better life in  Australia, that you can if you’re in a refugee situation around the world apply and there’s  a path and there’s a chance for resettlement to Australia if you don’t have the resources  to get on a boat or you don’t want to get on a boat.    

 So we’re seeing this negative approach today in relation to the humanitarian program.  That’s disappointing. I think many Australians will be disappointed in it.    

 Secondly, the Opposition has re-announced an old policy from the 2010 election in  relation to mutual obligation for asylum seekers. Now, I want to say a couple of things.    

 A couple of days ago, the Opposition were beating their chest in outrage that not every  asylum seeker who comes to Australia by boat would be sent to Nauru or Papua New  Guinea. I think today’s re-announcement shows that the Liberal Party accepts that if  Nauru and Papua New Guinea are at capacity, then some people who arrive in Australia  by boat would be processed in Australia.    

 They’ve announced a policy - re-announced a policy as to how they’d deal with it.  Therefore, that chest beating of two days ago really looks now pretty hollow given that  they’ve today said they would also be processing people in Australia. Now this is a policy  which is strong on rhetoric and short on details.    

 We are providing very basic support for asylum seekers under this program. It appears  that Liberal Party policy would be that that support would be withdrawn if they don’t  participate in some sort of mutual obligation process, or people would be re-detained.  So it’s now up to the Liberal Party to provide the details: what would people live on if  that support is withdrawn, what’s the legal basis for re-detaining people who may have  already been regarded as a refugee?    

 These are matters for the Liberal Party to answer, but this is more chest-beating -  strong on chest-beating, very low on substance.    

 Happy to take a few questions.    

 JOURNALIST: The Coalition is saying that it’s going to save $1.3 billion over four years  with this decrease in the intake though. Is it not important at this point in time to be  balancing the budget, looking for other savings?   

 BOWEN: Well we’re managing to balance the budget as well as doing this. It’s the  Liberal Party who has a very big budget black-hole they have to fill - I understand that.  But we’re delivering a surplus at the same time delivering, what I think is a very  important increase in our humanitarian intake.    

 JOURNALIST: At the same time, you want rich foreigners to come here and invest.  Who are you targeting and how successful do you think we’ll be?   

 BOWEN: I think the Significant Investor visa, which you’re referring to, which comes  into force tomorrow, is a very important reform for Australia. It’ll encourage people who  are investors, who have a lot to invest in Australian jobs and Australian industry, to look  at Australia as a potential home.    

 It means that we’re competitive with other countries, like the United States and Canada,  in attracting these investors. There’ll be strong interest around the world, there’ll be  strong interest in Asia, there’ll be strong interest in China, and I think that’s a very good  thing for Australia.    

 JOURNALIST: Are there particular industries that you want investment, or particular  areas other than the ones that you mention in terms of China coming here?   

 BOWEN: No, it’s a matter for investors, as long as they meet the criteria that we’ve  outlined in the regulations in terms of the investment being ASIC-regulated, and the  other criteria that are outlined. We’re not about picking winners, we’re not about saying  you must invest in this particular sector. Some of the States and Territories will have  some requirements to invest in State bonds, that’s okay, as part of the total $5 million  investment.    

 But as I say, this is, I think, a very good reform, I’m very pleased with it, I’ve been very  pleased with the feedback that this is a very competitive visa compared to other  countries around the world, and we’re getting a lot of interest from around the world.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, you mentioned that there’ll be very basic support for people  who live in the community under the new arrangements. Given that they’ll be here for  so long and they won’t be able to work, do you agree that there could be significant  social catastrophe?   

 BOWEN: No. I can understand where people are coming from there, and I’ve seen  what some of my colleagues have had to say, and I can understand where they’re  coming from. In a perfect world, I understand why we would have work rights, but in  the same instance, where we’re got people smugglers who are selling a product, to say,  ‘Look, it doesn’t matter if you are a refugee, doesn’t matter if you eventually get sent  back, you might be able to work for three years and then you’ll make more money in  Australia than you would here in Sri Lanka or elsewhere’, then that is a big problem, and  that needs to be dealt with.    

 So while we’ve got that happening then this needs to be the policy that we’ve  implemented. We haven’t done so lightly, we’ve done so after much consideration and  we’ll obviously be working very closely with the refugee sector and my department to  make sure that this is managed in an appropriate way.   

 There are many bridging visa holders at the moment. People who arrive by aeroplane,  for example, and then claim asylum, get bridging visas with no work rights, and this is  applying the same approach.    

 JOURNALIST: I’ve spoken to many people recently who’ve said a lot of those people,  particularly those who arrive by plane end up sleeping rough, they’re sleeping on the  streets, they can’t get [inaudible]?   

 BOWEN: As I say, we’ll be working to make sure that the appropriate arrangements are  in place. Yes, some would see this as a tough approach, and perhaps it is, but it’s a  necessary approach. As I say, it is not done lightly, not done with any sense of joy, but  it is done because it’s necessary to defeat that particular product that’s been sold by  people smugglers, at the moment particularly in Sri Lanka.    

 JOURNALIST: So do you see - Tony Abbott wants to make people on those bridging  visas work for welfare. Do you see that as a carrot rather than a stick?    

 BOWEN: Well I think he’s trying to ‘out-tough’ the Government’s approach here. I think  he’s tried to go back to this old policy for political reasons and say, ‘Well look, we’re  tougher because we would make them work for what is a very basic entitlement’.    

 So I think there’s politics at play here, that’s a matter for him, and as I say it’s a matter  for him to outline the details: this is a re-announcement, still, two years later, very, very  light on details.    

 JOURNALIST: He also says it’s okay to use the term ‘illegal arrivals’ and points to  examples of the PM in opposition and the UN Convention saying [inaudible] of illegal  arrivals. What do you think?   

 BOWEN: I think Australia’s law is clear, it is legal to claim asylum in Australia and I’ve  always used the appropriate language in all my public comments.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, do you think the AWU scandal is beginning to tarnish the  Government?   

 BOWEN: No, I’ve yet to see any allegations or any substantiated claims of any  wrongdoing or illegal behaviour by the Prime Minister.    

 Okay. Thank you, thank you very much.    

 Ends    

