---
title: "Abbott's 'no' vote aiding people smugglers"
date: "2012-06-20"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375224
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1726977%22
---

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 JASON CLARE MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE  MINISTER FOR DEFENCE MATERIEL 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 20 June 2012 

 

 ABBOTT’S ‘NO’ VOTE AIDING PEOPLE SMUGGLERS   

 The 55th and 56th boats since Tony Abbott rejected working with the Government to  implement offshore processing were intercepted today.   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and the Minister for  Home Affairs, Jason Clare MP said the boat arrivals were yet another consequence of  the Coalition’s refusal to put the national interest ahead of their own political interests.   

 “Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison are helping people smugglers to ply their evil trade by  refusing to vote for offshore processing,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “It’s all cheap politics and tough talk on boat arrivals, but no action - and the people  smugglers know that.”   

 Mr Bowen said as the Government had warned countless times that without a genuine  deterrent in place - such as the Malaysia Arrangement - more boats would continue to  arrive.    

 “The reason we cannot implement offshore processing is because of Tony Abbott’s  destructive negativity - he even rejected his own Nauru policy,” he said.   

 Mr Clare said it was time for Tony Abbott to stop voting against offshore processing.   

 “We have a solution. It is called offshore processing. Tony Abbott is stopping it being  implemented,” Mr Clare said.   

 “If Tony Abbott is really concerned about people smugglers give us the power to put them out of  business. No one will pay them $10,000 to be sent back to Malaysia.     

 “Tony Abbott knows this - he wants more boats to come because he thinks it will mean more  votes for him. That is why he is stopping the Government from passing laws to put people  smugglers out of business.   

 “We can stop this now. Tony Abbott just has to stop opposing laws that will put the people  smugglers out of business.”   

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769  (Bowen)  Korena Flanagan 0418 251 316 (Clare)  UNCLASSIFIED 

 

