---
title: "Address at the70th Anniversary of Japan's raid of Broome, 3 March 1942, Broome Western Australia"
date: "2012-03-31"
creators:
  - "Gray, Gary"
source: "MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND INTEGRITY"
subjects:
  - "Broome (WA)"
  - "Japan"
  - "World War 2"
  - "Western Australia"
  - "Air warfare"
  - "Anniversaries"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211370764
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2054939%22
---

 Speech

 Address by The Hon Gary Gray, AO MP  Special Minister of State,  and Special Minister of State for Public Service and Integrity 

  z Acknowledgments  { Survivors who are present today: Elly Doeland, Piet Koens, Henk Hasselo, Fritz Van 

  Hulssen

  { Ambassador of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, His Excellency, Mr Willem Andreae 

  { Consul General of the United States of America (in Western Australia), Ms Aleisha 

  Woodward 

  { The Premier of Western Australia, Mr Colin Barnett 

  { Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, AC, AFC (Ret’d), Chair of the Anzac Centenary 

  Advisory Board 

  { President of the Shire of Broome, Councillor Graeme Campbell 

  { President of the Broome RSL, Mr John McCourt

  { President of the Shire of Derby/West Kimberley, Councillor Elsia Archer

  { Federal Member for Durack, Mr Barry Haase 

  { Senator for Western Australia, Dr Alan Eggleston 

  { Deborah O'Neill, the Member for Robertson

  { Western Australian Member for Mining & Pastoral, Hon. Ken Baston MLC

  { Western Australian Member for the Kimberley, Mrs Carol Martin MLA

  z I acknowledge The Yaruwu People, the traditional custodians of the land. 

  z  Today I represent the Prime Minister as we commemorate a sad and tragic day in the  history of Broome and of our nation. 

  z The attack on Broome by the Japanese on 3 March 1942 was grievous and killed many 

  people. We reflect on the loss of life that day and also on the sad effects of the war on  Broome and its remarkable community. 

  z 1942 was a grim year. Here in Broome, today, it is difficult to imagine what local residents, 

  defence forces and refugees from nearby Indonesia experienced as war came to this  beautiful place.   

  z Only two weeks earlier, Japan had bombed Darwin, killing nearly 250 people. As the Prime 

  Minister said in Darwin two weeks ago, events of that day sparked a series of raids across  Northern Australia which lasted almost two years. 

  z I think many youngsters would be surprised to learn that there were at least 97 attacks by 

  Japanese aircraft on mainland Australia, our northern islands and coastal shipping. 

  z Two days before the attack on Broome, the Australian light cruiser HMAS Perth and the 

  70th Anniversary of Japan's raid of Broome 3 March 1942

  Bedford Park, Corner of Hamersley & Louis Streets, Broome,  Western Australia 

  Page 1 of 3 70th Anniversary of Japan's raid of Broome

  19/11/2012 http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2012/sp_022012.html

  American heavy cruiser USS Houston faced a major Imperial Japanese Navy task force in  the Battle of Sunda Strait. After a fierce battle both Allied ships were sunk. 375 Australian  and 696 American sailors lost their lives.  

  z We need to remind ourselves that the Sunda Strait is 1000km closer to Broome than is

  Sydney.  

  z In November of the previous year, 1941, HMAS Sydney was sunk with a loss of 645 lives. 

  Days later, on the morning of 7 December, Pearl Harbour was attacked with the loss of 2402  American lives. 

  z After the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbour in December 1941, Australia joined with the

  United States in declaring war on Japan.  

  z The declaration of war had a devastating effect on the pearling community on which the town 

  was built.  

  z War affected the fabric and community of Broome; a town that was unique in Australia. 

  Broome enjoyed a remarkable diversity; one that was not shared by southern towns in this  state or any other.  

  z This exceptional community was built on the pearling industry.  Japanese pearl divers came 

  to Broome and many built their lives here. The township of Broome was a cosmopolitan  community. In large part, the pearl lugger owners related more to Singapore which was 7  days sailing away, than Perth, which was 8. Even food supplies for Broome principally came  in from Singapore. 

  z A pattern of migration that had begun in the 1890s with Japanese coming to Broome as pearl

  divers, and which saw Japanese families as part of the local community ended swiftly as  Japanese residents were interred in camps.  

  z As Australian men went off to war, remaining local residents had to round up and inter friends, employees, and highly regarded community members because they were Japanese.  Many had been born and raised in Broome and had no ties to the Japan that was now  attacking their home.  

  z My good friend Paul Papalia talks passionately of such internments of Italian families at 

  Harvey, in the South-West. 

  z While all of this frightening and dreadful warfare was escalating just over the horizon, 

  Broome had rapidly become a staging point for hundreds of evacuees who were fleeing the  Japanese invasion into the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia).  

  z During the last two weeks of February, 1942, up to 8000 refugees escaped southern Java,  flying through Broome on their journey southward. 

  z All available Dutch, American, British and Australian military and civil aircraft, capable of 

  transporting passengers, were employed in this airlift out of Java. The effort was intense;  however there were never enough aircraft to meet the high demand. 

  z Broome was soon overflowing with military personnel and refugees.  

  z By the start of March 1942, Japanese forces had occupied much of Timor and from there 

  Japanese aircraft were within striking range of the North and West Australian coast.

  z The greatest fears of the people of Broome were realised when - on this day; 3 March 1942 -Japanese aircraft launched a surprise air attack on Broome.  

  z The war was here. 

  z It was a tragic day for Australia and for our Allies. 

  z Nine Japanese ‘Zero’ fighters accompanied a ‘Babs’ reconnaissance aircraft and arrived 

  over Roebuck Bay, Broome at 9.30 on the morning of Tuesday, 3 March.   

  z On the Monday before, the Dutch had evacuated their last nine flying boats carrying aircrew, 

  their families, and widows and orphans from the Battle of the Java Sea.  

  z The Dutch refugees thought themselves safe - lying at anchor in the calm waters of

  Roebuck Bay, awaiting the start of the next leg of their journey south to Perth.  

  z The Japanese attacked the unprotected Dutch flying boats carrying the refugees. All of the 

  Dutch Dornier and Catalina aircraft were destroyed and sunk at their moorings. 

  z 48 of the 161 people aboard the flying boats were killed - 16 men, 12 women and 20 

  children. It was truly horrific.  

  z Attacked soon after takeoff, a US Air Force B-24A Liberator crashed into the sea and killed 

  all but one of the 30 passengers on board. The survivor swam the 10 miles to shore. It took 

  Page 2 of 3 70th Anniversary of Japan's raid of Broome

  19/11/2012 http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2012/sp_022012.html

  him 36 hours. 

  z All told, it is thought that up to 88 people lost their lives the day the Imperial Japanese Navy 

  Air Service attacked Broome.  Exact numbers will never be known.  

  z A dark day. 

  z The frenzied, deadly and merciless attack lasted about 20 minutes.  

  z The Japanese forces destroyed every Allied aircraft they found with cannon and machinegun 

  fire. As there were no Allied fighters in the area, the Japanese faced barely any opposition.  

  z Not a single operational aircraft was left in Broome when the Japanese departed a short 20 

  minutes after they arrived. 

  z There were, of course, heroes. As the Prime Minister noted in her statement to the

  Parliament this week, many people who survived owed their lives to courageous individuals  like Charles D’Antoine, a local Aboriginal man. 

  z Charles swam through burning fuel and wreckage to rescue two Dutch women and was 

  awarded a Silver Medal for Humane Assistance by the Queen of the Netherlands.

  Tribute

  z Most of us here today can only imagine what the people of Broome witnessed on the 3 

  March 1942. We can only imagine the mixed emotions of a community that was - { seeing its proud pearling industry destroyed; 

  { seeing friends with Japanese heritage held in internment camps; 

  { seeing Imperial Japanese forces attack their home of Broome, the home of a valued 

  Japanese community; and

  { seeing helpless women and children slaughtered as they tried to outrun a war.

  z We can only imagine what this day must have been like 70 years ago. 

  z Today we remember those that died in the attack on Broome. We pay tribute to the many 

  acts of bravery witnessed on 3 March 1942 and to those survivors that are here with us  today. 

  z And we pay tribute to the people of Broome, who stood firm in the face of such a brutal 

  attack and rebuilt their lives, their community, and their town and who have created the  beautiful town we see today and the Kimberley, at peace with the world. 

  z They created this a welcome haven secure in the belief that they will remember those lost 70

  years ago and now build friendships that span the ages with our nearest neighbours,  Indonesian, Japanese and American all together in this great Broome melting pot. 

  z A place where the beauty of the land is matched only by the warmth of the people. 

  ***

  Last Updated: 6 March, 2012

  Page 3 of 3 70th Anniversary of Japan's raid of Broome

  19/11/2012 http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2012/sp_022012.html

