---
title: "Over 21,000 people arrived illegally by boat since the election"
date: "2012-11-03"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384642
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731307%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling OVER 21,000 PEOPLE ARRIVED ILLEGALLY  BY BOAT SINCE THE ELECTION November 03, 2012

 Over 21,000 people have now arrived illegally by boat in Australia since the Gillard Government was elected to power,  Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection Michael Keenan said.

 “These latest boat arrivals, carrying 75 passengers, have been intercepted amid revelations that 116 Sri Lankan asylum  seekers have been sent home since August, under a ‘turn back’ provision,” Mr Keenan said.

 “Finally Labor has enacted what the Coalition has been calling for them to do since they first abolished the proven border  protection policies of the Howard Government - sending people with invalid claims of asylum home.

 “In order to send the strongest possible message to the people smugglers they must start sending the planes back as fast  as the boats are arriving.

 “For years the Labor Party has demonised the Coalition’s strong stance on border protection but now after 28,422 people  on 488 boats they are backflipping and reinstating selected aspects of the same policies.

 “This Government still needs to learn that they cannot simply cherry pick from the Coalition’s border protection policies as  this has rendered them ineffective - only a return to the full suite of Howard Government policies will stop the boats from  coming.

 "This includes temporary protection visas and turning the boats back around when it is safe to do so.

 “With boat arrivals this financial year occurring at three times the rate of last financial year, it is very clear that only a  change of Government will rectify the dire situation occurring at Australia’s borders,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 OVER 21,000 PEOPLE ARRIVED ILLEGALLY BY BOAT SINCE THE ELECTIO...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

