---
title: "Labor fails yet another test of resolve on our borders"
date: "2012-09-18"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382221
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2733061%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LABOR FAILS YET ANOTHER TEST OF  RESOLVE ON OUR BORDERS September 16, 2012

 The latest two illegal boat arrivals, with a total of 79 people on board, are being taken to Christmas Island instead of being  sent straight to Nauru as Labor fails yet again to send the strongest possible message to people smugglers, Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection 

 Michael Keenan said.

 "By failing to take every person who has arrived on illegal boats straight to Nauru, Labor is yet again failing the test of  resolve on our borders," Mr Morrison said.

 "The only message the people smugglers understand is strength. Unfortunately they know Labor's heart is just not in it  when it comes to border protection and the boats continue to arrive.

 "All boat arrivals should be sent straight to Nauru. That's what the Coalition would do and that's what would send the  strongest possible message.

 "Since Labor was dragged kicking and screaming into reopened Nauru 240 people have arrived in Australia on illegal  boats, almost half the number of asylum seekers Minister Bowen has said will be on Nauru at the end of the month.

 "Boats continue to arrive as Labor fails the test of resolve on our borders and refuses to implement the full suite of proven  Howard Government border protection measures," Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “As the first asylum seekers have been transferred to Nauru, yet another vessel has been successfully  smuggled across Australia borders giving the people smugglers another big pay day.

 “In the short few months of this financial year we have already seen 80 boats arrive illegally carrying well over 5000  people.

 “These unprecedented rates of arrivals have again proven that Labor is unable to squash the people smuggling  syndicates through their half hearted attempt at protecting Australia’s borders.

 “Along with the reinstatement of offshore processing on Nauru, Labor must also adopt the proven Coalition policies of  temporary protection visas and turning the boats back around - only by doing this will they achieve Howard Government  results on stopping the boats,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 LABOR FAILS YET ANOTHER TEST OF RESOLVE ON OUR BORDERS > Mich...

 18/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

