---
title: "Large group of Sri Lankans sent home"
date: "2012-11-21"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211385577
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2060962%22
---

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 21 November 2012 

 

 LARGE GROUP OF SRI LANKANS SENT HOME   

 A group of 100 Sri Lankan men has been sent home to Sri Lanka today - the ninth  involuntary removal this month and the largest return to Colombo to date.   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, said the Sri Lankan  men were all recent arrivals from a number of different boats.    

 “This latest removal was achieved with the cooperation of the Royal Australian Air  Force who made a KC-30 aircraft available to enable a larger number of people to be  removed at one time than was previously possible,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “This group of 100 people takes to 426 the number of Sri Lankans returned  involuntarily since 13 August, as we continue to return people where they do not  engage Australia's international obligations.   

 “The message here is very clear: people who pay smugglers are risking their lives  and throwing their money away. They are being told lies. There is no visa on arrival,  there is no speedy outcome, and there is no special treatment.”   

 The Sri Lankan men were advised of their status and that they were subject to  removal from Australia. They raised no issues that engaged Australia’s international  obligations.    

 Without a valid visa they had no legal right to remain in Australia and were removed  at the earliest opportunity.   

 “The Government is absolute in its resolve to implement the recommendations of the  Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers to break the people smuggling trade, stop the flow  of boats and prevent people from taking these dangerous boats to Australia,” Mr  Bowen said.   

 “We will continue to return people to Sri Lanka, we will continue to transfer people to  Nauru, and now to Manus Island as well.”   

 Since 13 August, 525 Sri Lankans have returned home - both voluntarily and  involuntarily - as people realise that these smugglers only sell lies and false promises  about what awaits people in Australia.   

 Yesterday, the Government also completed the first involuntary return of an Afghan  man found not to be a refugee under Australia’s return agreement with Afghanistan.   

 People returned involuntarily do not have access to reintegration assistance.   

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 

 

