---
title: "Over 15,000 illegal arrivals this year"
date: "2012-11-17"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211385378
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731240%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling OVER 15,000 ILLEGAL ARRIVALS THIS  YEAR November 17, 2012

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat, has brought with it the 15,000th person to illegally arrive this year under Labor's failed  border protection policies,  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 "Another day, another boat and another milestone of failure on our borders under Julia Gillard, with over 15,000 people  having arrived on 238 boats so far this year," Mr Morrison said.

 "The Prime Minister who promised to break the people smuggler’s business model has become their business model and  no embrace of half hearted policies on our borders will deter illegal boats.

 "The level of failure on our borders under Julia Gillard is astonishing and gets worse with every new day. The massive  profits made by people smugglers and the chaos, cost and tragedy witnessed by Australians have become commonplace.

 "Only an election will give the Australian people the chance to stop the boats by electing a Coalition government with the  proven policies and resolve to get it done," Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest interception is the 25th boat arrival of November, yet Labor is once again cutting staff from  the very frontline agencies that are tasked with protecting our borders.

 "More than 15,000 people have now arrived illegally on Australia’s shores this year alone, with the rate of arrivals  constantly increasing every month.

 “How can the Government justify further staff and funding cuts to an agency whose workload has increased from an  average of three boats a year under the previous Howard Government to almost 240 boats in this year under Labor?

 “The Coalition understands the vital role that the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service have in upholding our  national security and we will always prioritise adequately funding these frontline agencies,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 OVER 15,000 ILLEGAL ARRIVALS THIS YEAR > Michael Keenan MP

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

