---
title: "New South Wales celebrates Refugee Week 2012"
date: "2012-06-16"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375045
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2134858%22
---

 

 

 New South Wales celebrates Refugee Week 2012  June 16, 2012  

 People in New South Wales will celebrate the valuable contribution of refugees to the  community during Refugee Week 2012, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris  Bowen MP, and Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, said today. 

 Refugee Week is being celebrated from 17-23 June, with World Refugee Day on Wednesday,  20 June. As part of the celebrations, there will be more than 100 events across the nation in  recognition of the plight of refugees and the new lives they have established in Australia. 

 “Australia welcomes people from many lands and has a generous humanitarian tradition,” Mr  Bowen said. 

 “Australians can be rightly proud of the fact that Australia resettles more refugees per capita  than any other nation and provides much needed protection to people who have suffered  persecution.” 

 Senator Lundy said Australia’s settlement support services are among the best in the world,  helping refugees to rebuild their lives here. 

 “Resettlement in Australia provides a chance for refugees to enjoy all the freedom and  opportunities this nation has to offer,” Senator Lundy said. 

 “Refugees in Australia have overcome hardship to live, study and work here, and Refugee  Week is a time to reflect on the contribution they have made to our community, economy and  culture.” 

 At 1pm on 23 June, thousands of people across Australia - including from NSW State  Parliament in Sydney’s Macquarie Street and Central Promenade in Wharf Road, Newcastle  - will walk in unity to celebrate different paths people have taken to become Australian, as 

 part of the Walk Together initiative. Each walk will finish with a festival celebrating cultural  diversity. 

 In Sydney, the UNHCR will host its annual World Refugee Day fundraising breakfast on 20  June, with funds to go to the Nakivale refugee settlement in Uganda. 

 On the same day, Greater Western Sydney will host an AFL gala day showcasing refugee  talent for Intensive English Centre schools. The free event for boys and girls will be held at  Blacktown International Sports Park oval two. 

 Granville Town Hall will host the Horn of Africa Relief and Development Agency’s  (HARDA) annual cultural night on 23 June, featuring colourful African performances and  traditional food. 

 The Australian Refugee Film Festival, sponsored by Coffs Harbour City Council on the NSW  mid-north coast, will feature screenings, performances and multicultural cuisine at the Jetty  Memorial Theatre on 23 June. 

 In Newcastle, Refugee Week will be marked by an afternoon of sports events, food and  performances at a community event at the Ethnic Communities Council in Waratah on 24  June. 

 Australia’s contribution to international protection and humanitarian efforts continues this  year, with 13,750 places offered under the humanitarian program in 2012-13. 

 Australia has resettled around 775,000 refugees and other people in humanitarian need since  the end of World War II. 

 

