---
title: "Latest boat arrivals should go to Nauru"
date: "2012-09-10"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211381780
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2733066%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LATEST BOAT ARRIVALS SHOULD GO TO  NAURU September 10, 2012

 Passengers on the latest illegal boat to arrive should be transferred to Nauru, Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "Labor was dragged kicking and screaming into introducing the legislative instrument into the Parliament today to allow  people to be transferred to Nauru for processing. Every single person who arrives by illegal boat from now, including this  latest arrival, should be sent to Nauru to send the strongest possible message and avoid the risks of legal challenges," Mr  Morrison said. 

 "Rather than making ‘arrangements for the people onboard…to be transferred to Christmas Island’, the government  should be immediately preparing these arrivals to be transferred to Nauru," he said. 

 "Labor’s asylum lottery will take place to decide who of the almost 2,000 people that arrived after Labor announced they  would re-open Nauru will be sent there but any boat and any person that arrives on a boat now must go to Nauru with no  exceptions. If the government says they are now in a position to send people there for processing then send people there  they must. 

 "Any exceptions on those the government sends to Nauru will only dilute what is already a half hearted message that this  government is sending out to people smugglers. 

 "The government cannot expect the full Howard Government results without the full Howard Government measures  including the resolve to stand up to people smugglers," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "This is now the 12th boat arrival of the month - already triple the amount of boats that arrived in  September last year; and we are only 10 days in. 

 "The enormous influx should push the Labor Government into adopting the whole of the Coalition’s proven strategy yet  they continue to apply half measures and the people smugglers continue to respond to their weak signals. 

 "Border Protection Command is being required to do the impossible with their available resources as this unprecedented  influx continues. 

 "The Labor Party’s history of prevarication and the adoption of wildly different policies at various times means that they  need to send the clearest possible message that this time it is different. 

 "You cannot do that whilst adopting part of the required solution and only pursuing the three pillars of the Coalition’s  proven solution will signal that," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 LATEST BOAT ARRIVALS SHOULD GO TO NAURU > Michael Keenan MP

 18/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

