---
title: "100 boats since Labor announced a return to offshore processing on Nauru"
date: "2012-11-02"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384636
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731311%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling 100 boats since Labor announced a return to  offshore processing on Nauru November 02, 2012

 100 boats have now arrived illegally in Australia since the Labor Government’s backflip on offshore processing on Nauru,  Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection Michael Keenan said.

 "The latest boat arrival comes as the Indonesian Government has highlighted their lack of faith in the ability of Labor to  stop the boats,” Mr Keenan said.

 "Indonesian officials have for years urged the Australian Government to "take the sugar off the table" and remove the  incentives Labor has created for people smugglers.

 "But for years, Labor has failed to acknowledge that it is their policies that have created the people smugglers business  model and have led to unprecedented numbers of illegal boat arrivals.

 "Labor's response has been to deny that there was a problem, then to blame outside factors for the problem and finally to  belatedly cherry pick from previous successful policies in a way that will render them ineffective.

 "Once they created the problem, Labor has compounded it further with every flawed decision and the addition of their  trademark incompetence.

 "The people smugglers are so emboldened by the Government’s actions over the last four years that it is difficult to see  that the Labor Party will ever be able to have the required credibility to halt this criminal activity.

 "Only a change in Government will restore Australia's border protection system,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 100 boats since Labor announced a return to offshore processing on Nauru > Michael ...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

