---
title: "Greens: For how many decades will children be locked up on the island prisons?"
date: "2012-08-15"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211380234
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1849805%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 Wednesday 15 August 2012   

 

 Greens: For how many decades will children be locked up on the island prisons?    

 The Australian Greens today expressed deep concern that the Prime Minister has picked  up the phone to call the President of Nauru but has not called the UNHCR, the  organisation the government claims will be advising on welfare protections for people  cast offshore for indefinite detention.   

 "The Prime Minister must inform the Parliament whether she agrees with Mr Abbott that  ten years of detention on Nauru is appropriate and how long children will be dumped on  the island under the government’s new laws.    

 "What it is the limit to the cruelty Julia Gillard is prepared to inflict on refugees dumped  offshore?    

 “The fact that the Prime Minister hasn’t yet consulted the UNHCR about any welfare  arrangements or protections for people to be held in Nauru just shows that this Howard-era proposal is about locking people up for decades on an island prison, not about  establishing protections or a genuine regional response” said Greens spokesperson for  immigration, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.    

 “I would like to know how many children are amongst the 220 people who have arrived  since Monday and will be shipped off to Nauru for indefinite detention under this  retrospective legislation.”   

 "Time limits are critical to minimising the damage that will be caused to refugees and the  government’s bill should not pass the House of Representatives without them.    

 “The Greens’ amendment ensures that any transfer of a person to an offshore place  cannot be longer than 12 months, limiting the dumping of refugees on Nauru and Manus  island to no longer than a year.    

 “We know that beneath the spin of the ‘no advantage’ test is a punitive deterrence regime  that is, astoundingly, even more cruel than Howard’s Pacific Solution because it is  expressly founded on locking people up on Nauru or PNG for decades.   

 “The Greens want to put a ceiling of one year on cruel offshore dumping, while the  Coalition has stated they are comfortable with dumping people on Nauru for 10 years,  and the government bill allows for indefinite detention.    

 “Linking the length of detention of people in Nauru to wait times in our region means  dumping people offshore with no rights or hope for much of their lives. You can export  people but you cannot export Australia’s responsibilities to care for these people.   

 “Without doubt, this offshore processing will lead to self-harm, severe depression and  suicide attempts just like it did last time.   

 “It is simply unacceptable to dump children and their families on an island prison with no  limit to how long they will have to be there. History shows leaving people to rot in Nauru  will cost lives, not save them.    

 “The only way to save lives with humanity and in accordance with the Refugee  Convention is to take away the desperation that forces people to board boats, by  providing opportunities for people to safely apply for protection within our region  without having to board boats first.   

 

 Amendments text attached   

 Media contact:   Kelly Farrow or Ali Neyle 0427 604 760   

 

 

 Migration Legislation Amendment (Offshore  Processing and Other Measures) Bill 2011   

 

 (Amendment to be moved by Mr Bandt) 

 (1) Schedule 1, item 25, page 10 (after line 8), after section 198AD, insert: 

 198ADA  12 month limit on transfer to offshore processing country 

  (1) The Minister must ensure that a person who is transferred to an offshore processing  country under section 198AD is transferred to Australia no later than 12 months after  the day on which the person arrived in the offshore processing country. 

  (2) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to a person who is not in the offshore  processing country 12 months after the day on which the person arrived in the  country. 

  (3) Section 198AD does not apply in relation to a person who is transferred to Australia  under subsection (1).  [12 month limit on transfer] 

 

 

