---
title: "42 boats but Abbott's destructive negativity is unwavering"
date: "2012-06-03"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374269
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2275327%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 42 Boats but Abbott's destructive negativity is  unwavering  Sunday, 03 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Jason Clare MP - Minister for Home Affairs, Minister for  Justice and Minister for Defence Materiel. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Home Affairs, Jason Clare MP, today called on Tony Abbott to work with the  government to implement offshore processing as another boat was intercepted  overnight. 

 Mr Bowen said the 42nd boat since the coalition refused to negotiate a compromise -  even rejecting Nauru - showed that the arrivals were continuing to increase, as  predicted. 

 'I have said it before and I'll say it again - boats will continue to come for as long as  Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison put their political interests ahead of the national  interest,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'Tony Abbott's destructive negativity knows no bounds. But until the Coalition is  prepared to allow offshore processing to occur, the Australian people can only  conclude that he prefers to see more boats arrive, because it's in Mr Abbott's political  interests.' 

 Mr Clare said it was time for Mr Abbott to act in the national interest and stop saying  'no' to Nauru and Malaysia. 

 'Working together we can help stop people dying at sea. We can pass legislation that  is in the Parliament right now to introduce offshore processing,' Mr Clare said. 

 'If Mr Abbott is serious about stopping the boats he must get out of the way, stop  saying 'no' and pass this legislation to allow asylum seekers to be processed  offshore.' 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb187283.htm  Last update: Monday, 04 June 2012 at 09:58 AEST  

