---
title: "Tasmania celebrates Refugee Week 2012"
date: "2012-06-16"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375029
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2264851%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Tasmania celebrates Refugee Week 2012  Saturday, 16 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Senator Kate Lundy - Minister for Sport, Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation. 

 People in Tasmania will celebrate the valuable contribution of refugees to the  community during Refugee Week 2012, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, said  today. 

 Refugee Week is being celebrated from 17-23 June, with World Refugee Day on  Wednesday, 20 June. As part of the celebrations, there will be more than 100 events  across the nation in recognition of the plight of refugees and the new lives they have  established in Australia. 

 'Australia welcomes people from many lands and has a generous humanitarian  tradition,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'Australians can be rightly proud of the fact that Australia resettles more refugees per  capita than any other nation and provides much needed protection to people who  have suffered persecution.' 

 Senator Lundy said Australia's settlement support services are among the best in the  world, helping refugees to rebuild their lives here. 

 'Resettlement in Australia provides a chance for refugees to enjoy all the freedom  and opportunities this nation has to offer,' Senator Lundy said. 

 'Refugees in Australia have overcome hardship to live, study and work here, and  Refugee Week is a time to reflect on the contribution they have made to our  community, economy and culture.' 

 At 1pm on 23 June, thousands of people across Australia, including Hobart, will walk  in unity to celebrate the different paths people have taken to become Australian, as  part of the Walk Together initiative. Each walk will finish with a festival celebrating  cultural diversity. 

 In Hobart, the Royal Hobart Hospital will feature a poster display from 17 June to  raise awareness of the plight of refugees and educate visitors about the services it  provides to refugees. 

 Also in the city, the Multicultural Council of Tasmania will hold a youth consultation  for 16- to 24-year-olds from Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Bhutan, Burma and Nepal on 21  June at the Migrant Resource Centre. 

 On 22 June, the Migrant Resource Centre Hobart will host an art exhibition on the  theme of 'Identity, Translation and Transformation' at the Moonah Arts Centre. 

 The Young Women's Multicultural Leadership Program will host an event on 26 June  at Glenorchy Civic Centre to connect people of all ages and share stories. Funded  through the Australian Government's Diversity and Social Cohesion Program,  'Looking Back Looking Forward' aims to promote better understanding between  generations from diverse cultures. 

 Australia's contribution to international protection and humanitarian efforts continues  this year, with 13 750 places offered under the humanitarian program in 2012-13. 

 Australia has resettled around 775 000 refugees and other people in humanitarian  need since the end of World War II. 

 

