---
title: "Abbott needs to turn back on dangerous asylum seeker policy"
date: "2012-07-09"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211427988
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1767160%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 9 July 2012 

 

 Abbott Needs To Turn Back On Dangerous Asylum  Seeker Policy   

 Revelations over the weekend that the Leader of the Opposition failed to raise the Coalition’s  ‘turn backs’ policy in a face-to-face meeting with the Indonesian President are embarrassing  and highlight the flaws in Coalition asylum seeker policy.   

 Tony Abbott is happy to have Australian navy personnel do the ‘dangerous’ heavy lifting on  turn backs, but he doesn’t even have the courage to raise his policy directly with the  Indonesian President.   

 Mr Abbott has more questions to answer on his fraught turn backs policy.   

 What will happen to asylum seeker boats that don’t originate from Indonesia?    

 Would Mr Abbott turn back boats to Sri Lanka knowing that they will never make  the return voyage?   

 Would Mr Abbott turn these same boats back to Indonesia?    

 If Mr Abbott is looking to create some form of exemption of boats depending on  what country they come from, won’t that encourage people to make even more  dangerous journeys from countries that are further away than Indonesia?   

 How are turn backs to Indonesia or elsewhere consistent with the Coalition’s  2010 election commitment that boat turn backs ‘require a commitment from the  return country not to return persons seeking asylum to the place from which they  claim to be fleeing persecution’*?   

 The turn backs policy is dangerous and unworkable. Tony Abbott continues to shamelessly  spruik a policy the experts say is a dud, that the Navy says risk lives, that the UN's refugee  chief believes breaches the Refugee Convention, and which the Indonesians have clearly  and repeatedly said they won’t agree to.   

 Last month we saw an impassioned plea from Joe Hockey that he would never agree to  minors being sent overseas unsupervised, but he was a minister in a government that did  just that. If his current position is to be taken seriously, he must demand that Tony Abbott  drop his turn back the boats policy.   

 The Coalition’s policy of turn backs to Indonesia underlines Tony Abbott’s and Joe Hockey’s  hypocrisy on asylum seekers - on the one hand they oppose asylum seekers being  transferred safely to a country like Malaysia where we have protections in place, and on the 

 other hand they support asylum seeker boats with young children being turned back to  Indonesia, also a non-signatory country, where they have no such agreements in place.   

 Mr Abbott needs to drop the policy that he admits puts Australian personnel in harm’s way  and work with the expert panel, the Government and the Parliament to come up with a  genuine solution that will stop people making these dangerous journeys to Australia.   

 * Source:  http://www.liberal.org.au/~/media/Files/Policies%20and%20Media/National%20Security/Co alition%20Border%20Protection%20Policy.ashx   

 (1. TURN BACK BOATS … In particular, these requirements require a commitment from the  return country not to return persons seeking asylum to the place from which they claim to  be fleeing persecution …)(page 5)   

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

