---
title: "Boost to settlement services for new migrants and refugees"
date: "2012-06-20"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375259
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2264697%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Boost to settlement services for new migrants  and refugees  Wednesday, 20 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Senator Kate Lundy - Minister for Sport, Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation. 

 The Federal Government's latest round of settlement grants reinforces its  commitment to help newly arrived migrants and refugees become self-reliant and  successfully settle in Australia, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris  Bowen MP, and Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, said today. 

 Mr Bowen said the services funded under the program focused on assisting new  arrivals to gain employment and access to education and training, but also included  sporting activities, help to increase knowledge of Australian culture and navigating  the rental market. 

 'Settlement services make a very real difference to the lives of many of our new  arrivals, helping them to adjust to life in Australia and contribute to the community,'  Mr Bowen said. 

 'This is about getting people ready for work, getting kids into school, and making  sure they have every opportunity to make a success of life in Australia, further  enhancing the productivity of our migration program.' 

 From 1 July 2012, a total of 97 new projects worth $39 million - and delivered  through 95 organisations - will be funded under the in 2012-13 Settlement Grants  Program (SGP). The SGP aims to help humanitarian entrants and new migrants to  acquire the skills and knowledge to fully participate in the community as soon as  possible after arrival. 

 Senator Lundy said the Settlement Grants Program reaffirmed the Australian  Government's commitment to helping refugees and migrants successfully settle into  their new communities. 

 'These services help people to make the transition into Australian life by building on  their existing skills and, at the same time, help them to learn valuable new ones,'  Senator Lundy said. 

 'They provide practical assistance for people starting new lives in Australia, help  them create valuable links to the wider community and empower migrants and  refugees to become self-reliant so they can forge a better life.' 

 Some of the successful applicant organisations include migrant resource centres,  multicultural service agencies, educational institutions, community groups and  welfare organisations. 

 A list of successful applicants in the 2012-13 funding round is available on the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 2012-13 Grant Recipients 

