---
title: "Labor cannot stop the boats as 199 arrive on two more"
date: "2012-11-18"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211385392
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731239%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LABOR CANNOT STOP THE BOATS AS 199  ARRIVE ON TWO MORE November 18, 2012

 Labor just can't stop the boats, as almost 10,000 people have arrived on 177 illegal boats since July 1 this year, including  another two over the weekend with 199 on board,  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and  Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 "People smugglers are bolder than ever before under Labor's half-hearted policies sending  boats daily," Mr Morrison said.

 "Every new boat that arrives is another vote of confidence by people smugglers that their business is safe under Labor. 

 "Daily boat arrivals, overcrowded detention centres, a processing freeze and rescues at sea are the status quo under Julia  Gillard and Chris Bowen.

 "Australians will get the opportunity to end the chaos on our borders at the next election by  voting for a Coalition  government to once and for all stop the boats," Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “It has been yet another bonanza weekend of boat arrivals under Labor with over 250 people arriving on  three boats - making for yet another healthy pay day for the people smugglers.

 “There have been more people arrive by boat this calendar year alone than in the last 3 calendar years combined.

 “The Labor Party are their own worst enemy when it comes to border protection - they spent years vilifying the very  policies that they now need to introduce to stop people smuggling.

 “The people smugglers will never take this Government seriously and therefore whilst Labor is still in power the boats will  continue to come,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 LABOR CANNOT STOP THE BOATS AS 199 ARRIVE ON TWO MORE > Micha...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

