---
title: "Government to adopt Greens push for a National Children's Commissioner a welcome step: Greens"
date: "2012-04-30"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372196
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1601354%22
---

 Government to adopt Greens push for a National Children's Commissioner a welcome  step: Greens   

 The Australian Greens welcome the announcement today, by Attorney-General Nicola Roxon and  Ministers Collins and Macklin, that the government will establish a National Children’s Commissioner  within the Australian Human Rights Commission.   

 "Throughout my years in the federal parliament, I have been working to establish a special advocate  for our youngest citizens so I am very pleased to hear that the government has at last taken action"  said youth and children's spokesperson Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.   

 "This will also be a welcome announcement for the numerous organisations and individuals who have  lobbied so hard over the past two decades".   

 "I have brought two bills to the Senate to establish a Children's Commissioner, winning broad support  by the youth and children's welfare sector. I look forward to seeing the details of the government's  proposal when the legislation is released later this year."   

 "The Greens will make sure this is one promise the Government fulfills, for the sake of the tens of  thousands of children who are homeless, at risk and need a strong independent voice.   

 This crucial reform is well overdue. In 2002 and 2003, the UN’S Committee on the Rights of the Child  called on Australia to create the commissioner role. Twice in 2011, the visiting UN Human Rights  Commissioner, Navi Pillay, repeated the call.   

 "Now that the Government has committed to legislation for a National Children's Commissioner to  work alongside the other human rights commissioners, I hope that the government will turn it's  attention to the Third Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which Australia  has not yet signed up to" said Senator Hanson-young.   

 "I also hope that, in line with the recommendations of the recent inquiry into the immigration  detention network, the government will take swift action to establish an independent advocate for  asylum seeker children".   

 Media contact: Kelly Farrow  0427 604 760   

