---
title: "More boats and more tired excuses"
date: "2012-06-02"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374256
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2742647%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling MORE BOATS AND MORE TIRED EXCUSES June 02, 2012

 The arrival of the latest boat carrying 88 people, has been met with the same old tired excuses from Labor, Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection,  Michael Keenan said today. 

 "This is a Government of excuses, not action, on border protection. Rather than pick up the phone to their Coalition  partners, the Greens, to insist on support for their Malaysian people swap, they continue to use the proposal as a political  shield from their own accountability," Mr Morrison said. 

 "Labor are not serious about their own policies, let alone restoring the proven policies of the Howard Government they  abolished. 

 "The Coalition also does not trust this Prime Minister to make good on any pledge. The only day the Coalition would  believe a Gillard Government commitment to reopen Nauru would be on the day it opened. 

 "This is a Government and a Prime Minister that simply cannot be trusted on our borders or anything else," Mr Morrison  said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "Another illegal boat arrival, another million dollar pay day for the people smugglers, all courtesy of  Labor’s inadequacy to effectively control Australia’s borders. 

 "The people smugglers know that when they test this Government they always win because so far they always have. 

 "If this influx of boat arrivals continues at this rate then not only will our Border Protection Command struggle to cope but  our detention network will again be dangerously overcrowded. 

 "We need the strong proven policies of the Howard Government to regain control of our borders and put an end to the  people smuggling business model that has flourished under Labor," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 MORE BOATS AND MORE TIRED EXCUSES > Michael Keenan MP

 23/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

