---
title: "Government must act immediately on humanitarian intake and regional funding"
date: "2012-08-20"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211380469
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1863055%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 20 August 2012   

 Government must act immediately on humanitarian intake and regional funding   

 The Australian Greens today called on the government to immediately implement some of the  outstanding recommendations of Houston Report, starting by increasing the humanitarian intake to  20,000 and tabling the legislative documents for offshore processing in Nauru and PNG.   

 “In unseemly haste the Government has rushed through laws to lock refugees up indefinitely  without any protections but has failed to act on the Houston Report recommendation to increase  the humanitarian intake immediately, “said Senator Sarah Hanson-Young today, Greens’  spokesperson for Immigration and Citizenship.   

 “The Government must also act to limit the length of time people will be dumped on the island  prisons on Nauru and Manus Island.    

 “Even Alexander Downer recognises indefinite detention is a problem. That's why both the ALP and  Coalition need to change their approach and get behind the Greens’ moves to put safeguards in law.   

 “Despite the serious concerns from experts about the harm of long-term and indefinite detention,  the Government’s news laws allow for refugees including children to be detained for years and even  decades. The only way to fix this is to ensure time limits on detention are outlined in the country  designation.    

 “Safeguards and welfare protections must also be guaranteed in each country designation, and  Parliament should only support designations that contain them.    

 “The Government must guarantee what safeguards and welfare protections will be in place before  refugees are dumped on Nauru and Manus Island.    

 “Today I gave notice of a Greens motion in the Senate, which will be voted on tomorrow, calling on  the government to make good its promise to raise the humanitarian intake and to declare the  intended timeframes for the remaining Houston Report recommendations.    

 “This crucial information should have been provided before, not after, Parliament was asked to  amend the Migration Act to make way for offshore dumping.    

 

 Media contact: Ali Neyle or Kelly Farrow 0427 604 760   

 

 TEXT OF NOTICE OF MOTION  20 August 2012   

 Senator Sarah Hanson-Young   

 I give notice that on the next day of sitting I shall move that the Senate -    

 1. Calls on the Government to immediately increase the Humanitarian Program to 20,000 as  recommended by the Houston Report on Asylum Seekers in Recommendation 2.  

 2. Calls on the Government to immediately make available an additional $70 million to fund  programs in support of a regional framework for improved protections, registration,  processing, integration, resettlement and returns as per Recommendation 3; and   3. Calls for immediate disclosure of the government’s implementation timeframe for the 

 remaining Houston Panel recommendations.   

