---
title: "Gillard delivers 200 illegal boats and a carbon tax"
date: "2012-07-17"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211428879
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736683%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling GILLARD DELIVERS 200 ILLEGAL BOATS  AND A CARBON TAX July 17, 2012

 The  arrival  of  two  illegal  boats  yesterday,  with  over  170  people  on  board,  means  Julia  Gillard  has  delivered  200  boats since the last election in the same month as delivering the world's biggest carbon tax, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "At  the  last  election  Australians  did  not  vote  for  a  carbon  tax  or  another  200  boats  but  in  the  same  month  Labor  have delivered both," Mr Morrison said. 

 "Labor’s lie on their carbon tax and incompetence on our borders are reason enough for this government to be voted out of office and for most Australians that day cannot come soon enough," he said. 

 "Over 6,000 people have come on illegal boats this year and under Julia Gillard’s failed Prime Ministership over 14,000  people have arrived and yet she refuses to act to restore the Coalition’s proven policies and has instead contracted out  her responsibilities to yet another committee. 

 "As boats are being turned around by the Sri Lankan Navy, five have arrived in Australia in two days as Labor continues to denigrate our own Navy as incapable of doing anything but ferrying illegal boat arrivals to Christmas Island. 

 "Unlike Labor, who mark another milestone of failure on our borders, the Coalition will restore the full suite of measures necessary to stop the boats including turning back boats when it is safe to do so," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "The arrival of a boat undetected at an oil and gas platform off Darwin highlights the impossible situation Border Protection Command (BPC) is placed in by Labor’s open borders policies. 

 "The  role  of  BPC  is  to  protect  Australia’s  offshore  assets  but  the  illegal  arrival  of  five  boats  within  48  hours  places unsustainable pressure on the organisation that does not have the resources to deal with this unprecedented influx. 

 "BPC should be  on the  front foot protecting offshore oil  platforms but in this instance it was down  to  the  people on  the installation to notify BPC that a vessel had arrived. 

 "With  our  Border  Protection  Command  under  so  much  pressure,  asylum  boats  are  making  it  almost  to  the  mainland without being detected - with this boatload of arrivals to be transferred directly to Darwin. 

 "The  Government’s  refusal  to  right  their  wrongs  and  reinstate  the  proven  policies  of  the  Howard  Government  only continues  to  aid  the  people  smugglers  business  - with  over  200  boat  arrivals  and  over  14,000  people  arriving  illegally under Prime Minister Julia Gillard. 

 "This  abhorrent  trade  places  not  only  asylum  seekers  lives  at  risk  but  also  the  hardworking  men  and  women  of  the Australian Navy and Australian Customs and Border Protection Service - another reason why this Government needs to  fulfil the primary role of the Commonwealth and protect our borders. 

 "With Labor offering no durable solution to the crisis they have created - the Australian people can only hope for an early  election and a Coalition Government to put an end to this often tragic situation at our borders," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 GILLARD DELIVERS 200 ILLEGAL BOATS AND A CARBON TAX > Michael K...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

