---
title: "Statement - update on community detention"
date: "2012-03-22"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211370322
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1688852%22
---

 Search this site 

  Go  

 Home

 Biographical details

 Media Centre

 Contact details

 Department

 Minister for Multicultural  Affairs

 Links

 

 

 Statement - Update on community  detention Thursday, 22 March 2012

 The Federal Government is continuing to move children and  vulnerable families out of detention facilities, with more than 1670  people currently residing in community-based accommodation.

 As at 22 March 2012, more than 3400 people have been granted  community detention since Prime Minister Julia Gillard and I  announced the expansion of the program in October 2010.

 There are over 630 children in and transitioning into community  detention arrangements — 63 per cent of all asylum seeker  children.

 Of these, 193 are unaccompanied minors (UAMs) — that means  all eligible UAMs who arrived in Australia prior to 7 December 2011  have been moved into community arrangements.

 All eligible accompanied children who arrived in Australia prior to  20 November 2011 have been moved into community  arrangements.

 The small number of children who arrived prior to these dates and  who remain in detention are not eligible for community detention  due to security, behaviour or risk requirements.

 This government recognises the importance of the community  detention program, which has been particularly successful in  providing appropriate care for people — especially children —  accommodated in the community while their asylum claims are  assessed.

 People who are approved for community detention are the most  vulnerable in the detention network because they are children,  families with children, or because they have serious mental or  physical health issues or have suffered torture and trauma.

 As always, I would like to thank organisations such as the  Australian Red Cross for the ongoing work they do with the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship in maintaining this  program.

 See: Index of Media Releases

 URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb184506.htm  Last update: Thursday, 22 March 2012 at 15:58 AEST 

 Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

 Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 1 of 1 Statement - Update on community detention

 4/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb184506.htm

