---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Rockhampton: 15 October 2012: Settlements Works report; refugee resettlement in regional areas; humanitarian intake; Tony Abbott in Indonesia; boat arrivals; Malaysia Arrangement; the Newman Government"
date: "2012-10-15"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Settlements Works report"
  - "refugee resettlement in regional areas"
  - "humanitarian intake"
  - "Tony Abbott in Indonesia"
  - "boat arrivals"
  - "Malaysia Arrangement"
  - "the Newman Government"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211383505
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1981807%22
---

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 *TRANSCRIPT*   

 DOORSTOP, ROCKHAMPTON   

 MONDAY, 15 OCTOBER 2012 

 

 SUBJECTS: Settlements Works report, refugee resettlement in regional areas,  humanitarian intake, Tony Abbott in Indonesia, boat arrivals, Malaysia  Arrangement, the Newman Government. 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN: I’m delighted to be here with Kirsten Livermore to launch this Settlement  Works report. Around the country, there are lots of regional centres, lots of towns that have  talked about attracting more people into their communities to work and to live.  Rockhampton is one community which has not just talked about it, it’s done it. And this is a  tribute to government agencies working together with local private employers, with 

 settlement services, to make sure that there’s enough support, enough connections in place.  This means that everybody wins. The community wins, the individuals win, employers win in  filling jobs that are very difficult to fill and of course giving people who have come to  Australia under our humanitarian program, the chance to live, work and prosper in a great  regional community setting like Rockhampton.   

 Now Kirsten is often telling me what a great place Rockhampton is, and she’s right, and it’s  a pleasure to join her here today to launch this report. Happy to take some questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Where are people coming from?    

 BOWEN: People who come to Australia under the humanitarian program come from a  whole range of countries that have been in difficult circumstances - not just the ones that  are high profile like Afghanistan, Sri Lanka and Iraq, but also throughout Africa, from Burma  and around the globe. Now here you see a cross-section of people from those very difficult  circumstances across the world.    

 JOURNALIST: What’s the estimated number of refugees moving to regional centres?   

 BOWEN: Well, around 15 to 20 per cent of our refugees that come into Australia move to  regional centres. But in Queensland the figure is higher than that; it’s over 50 per cent. So  we’re talking about many hundreds of people who have moved to different regional centres, 

 not just Rockhampton of course, but different places around New South Wales and  Queensland have worked very hard to attract humanitarian entrants to work in jobs which  are, frankly, difficult to fill, particularly in abattoirs and meatworks and other similar places.   

 JOURNALIST: What does central Queensland offer?   

 BOWEN: Well I think what central Queensland offers - apart from being a wonderful place  to live, a great environment, access to some of the most beautiful parts of Australia - is a  holistic service matching our settlements services, our English language training, with our  employers. And I think MDA (Multicultural Development Association) and other settlement  service providers, together with the Federal Government and local chambers of commerce  have worked very well to put this together.   

 JOURNALIST: Has the report identified any extra services that are needed here?   

 BOWEN: Well no, I don’t think this report has identified any extra services. I think what this  report identifies is what can work and what can be taken to work more broadly across the  country.   

 JOURNALIST: So what’s the general response been from the people in the area to  refugees coming here?   

 BOWEN: Well I think Kirsten might be best placed to answer that, being the full-time local  representative.    

 KIRSTEN LIVERMORE: Well I think the stories speak for themselves. The refugees who  speak as representatives of the larger population of migrants who have come here in recent  years, talk of the community being very welcoming. Obviously, the employers who have  been involved are very, very committed to making this work and providing the support that’s  required.    

 As the local member, all I see is that welcoming and acceptance from the local community.  We had a march for refugees earlier in the year here that was very well supported, people  from the broader Rockhampton community wanting to show their support for the success of  this program and showing their welcome to these migrants who have settled in our  community. So all I see are good things for our community - it’s a true win-win for  employers, for the migrants themselves and our broader community that are welcoming  very hard-working and community-minded people to live in our town.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister, we’re hearing incredible stories about men who have settled here.  Why are we seeing more men than women?   

 BOWEN: Well because the majority of our refugee intake in recent years has been single  men, for a whole range of reasons. But of course one of the things I have endeavoured to  do is to make sure we see more women represented because women are in very difficult  circumstances right around the world. We have a Women at Risk program. One of the  advantages of the changes we’ve made to our refugee programs - increasing the intake to  20,000, trying to take more people out of camps and difficult circumstances around the  world - is that we can prioritise and target those women that are in very difficult  circumstances who may have lost their partner, lost their husband through war and are  bringing up families by themselves.    

 There are many hundreds of thousands of women in that situation around the world. They  are people who will be very heavily represented in the increase in the program that I’ve  already announced and then you’ll see that flowing through of course to various regions in  terms of resettlement.    

 Of course the work that’s done here in Rockhampton, work that these men have undertaken  is work that they feel that they can - as fit young men - undertake in that environment. And  that’s entirely up to them, but of course we’d also encourage women to take up all those  opportunities that are available in Rockhampton and elsewhere as well.   

 JOURNALIST: I have some questions for Canberra. Are you surprised the Indonesian  President is meeting Tony Abbott?   

 BOWEN: No, not at all. It’s common practice for leaders of the opposition to be extended  courtesies when visiting other countries, including meetings with heads of state and heads  of government. The challenge is, here, will Mr Abbott actually raise the things with President  Yudhoyono that he failed to raise last time he met with President Yudhoyono. He met with  him a few months ago and didn’t even raise what he says is the cornerstone of his policy:  turning back the boats.    

 Now, Mr Abbott needs to explain to the President of Indonesia, will he do it with or without  Indonesia’s agreement, or will he try and only do it if Indonesia agrees? He’s taken multiple  positions on this. It’d be good if he could clarify it, not only to the President of Indonesia but  also to the people of Australia.    

 JOURNALIST: Could the meeting, diplomatically, be a slap in the face though to the  Government?   

 BOWEN: Oh not at all, not at all. As I say, it’s common practice for leaders of the  opposition to meet with heads of state and heads of government. Labor leaders of the  opposition did it when we were in opposition, Mr Abbott and other Liberal leaders have done  it when they’re in opposition.    

 It’s common practice and courtesy for heads of government to meet with alternative Prime  Ministers, but it would be common courtesy for Mr Abbott to talk to Mr Yudhoyono about the  policy that he insists that he will implement - as I understand it - regardless of the views of  Indonesia. He says, now, that they’ll workshop issues with Indonesia, when Indonesia’s  made it very clear they want nothing to do with Mr Abbott’s policy.    

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister was in Indonesia recently. Why didn’t she meet with the  President, given the issue of asylum seekers is still unresolved?    

 BOWEN: The Prime Minister is in regular talks, regular discussions with the President of  Indonesia - including in New York recently. Of course Mr Abbott said that - he tried to pull  off a stunt and said she shouldn’t have gone to New York and she should’ve gone to Jakarta  to meet with President Yudhoyono, when President Yudhoyono was in New York at that very  time.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, a question in regards to the Malaysia agreement. What work have  you done to progress the agreement…?   

 BOWEN: Well the Malaysia agreement is a very, very important one in breaking the people  smugglers business model; very, very important as recognised by the independent panel.    

 Now, we have been in discussions with the Malaysian Government, of course that’s no  revelation, I’ve said that several times. The real question is: if we bring this back to the  Parliament will the Liberal Party actually allow the Malaysia agreement - which everybody  admits, everybody admits, would act to break the people smugglers business model - will  they allow it to be implemented?    

 They say they oppose the Malaysia agreement because Malaysia is not a signatory to the  Refugee Convention at the same time as they argue that boats should be turned back to  both Indonesia and Sri Lanka - neither of which are signatories to the Refugee Convention.  Their argument against the Malaysia agreement is in tatters. The best thing they can do is  let the Government get on with the job of implementing the Malaysia agreement, so that we  can actually break this pernicious trade.    

 JOURNALIST: When will it be put to Parliament?    

 BOWEN: Well, I will provide further updates. Of course, we’re in discussions with the  Malaysian Government and I’m not going to provide a running commentary on them. Very  clearly, Malaysia is committed to implementing this, the Australian Government is committed  to implementing this. We want to see the Australian Parliament have the same commitment  to saving lives as the Malaysian Government and the Australian Government have shown.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, some Sunshine Coast homestayers are waiting up to four months  to receive a refugee, when reports claim that we’re being inundated by them. What’s  happening there?   

 BOWEN: Well we’ve had the Homestay program in place for some months now. It’s worked  very successfully. There are checks that have to be undertaken with anybody who offers to  host asylum seekers under the Homestay program, and then people need to be matched to  the program. It’s been a successful program but of course there are, sometimes, issues that  need to be worked through.    

 JOURNALIST: What’s the average waiting time?    

 BOWEN: I’d need to get an update on the average across the network but you have seen  people settle with Homestay quickly and it’s been working very successfully, despite some of  the fear campaigns that were run by the Opposition and others when I announced this.    

 JOURNALIST: Will the Newman Government’s policies have a negative impact on the  Coalition at the next Federal Election?    

 BOWEN: I think what people are seeing, here in Queensland more than anywhere else in  the nation, just what a Liberal Government means. A Liberal Government means cuts. A  Liberal Government means cuts to services, and I note that Mr Newman said he would get a  Commission of Audit; he got Mr Costello to do it and he only revealed the cuts after the  election.    

 Now, we have a pattern here because Mr Abbott has also said that he’ll have a commission  of audit. So I think you can look at what Mr Newman has done here in Queensland and you  can see that writ large across the country under the model that Mr Abbott has appropriated 

 from Mr Newman - and I do think that the people of Queensland are rightly outraged by  many of these cuts. They’re outraged by the cuts themselves and outraged that Mr Newman  wasn’t honest with them before the election; and we’re seeing the same model from Mr  Abbott.    

 JOURNALIST: Going back to a former issue, there’ve been three more boats over the past  24 hours. Clearly Nauru and Manus Island are not a deterrent are they?    

 BOWEN: Well I’ve always said that Nauru and Manus Island can be a deterrent if put in  place with a full suite of other measures. That’s what we’re doing, implementing all of the  recommendations from the Houston Panel. Now, all of those recommendations need to be  implemented and the Parliament needs to give us the authority to implement them.    

 Of course, we are in a battle with people smugglers who are out there spinning that  somehow you’ll only be on Nauru for a short time. We’re seeing, from those people who’ve  been sent to Nauru, or supposed to be sent to Nauru, that it is a deterrent because many of  them have chosen to go home and many others are saying they don’t want to be sent to  Nauru.    

 Now, that is a tough message for us to have with those people but it’s an important  message in terms of saving lives. We’re increasing the refugee program to 20,000, we’ve  made changes to the family reunion program, we’re implementing those recommendations  which we can get on and implement without the approval of Parliament; and there are  others, like the Malaysia Arrangement, for which we will need the approval of Parliament.    

 Okay. Thanks.    

 Ends  

 

