---
title: "MYEFO 2012-13: more debt, more taxes, more money shuffles and continued Labor dishonesty"
date: "2012-10-22"
creators:
  - "Hockey, Joe"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211383872
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1994859%22
---

 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 THE HON JOE HOCKEY MP 

 SHADOW TREASURER 

  

 Monday, 22 October 2012 

 MYEFO 2012-13: MORE DEBT, MORE TAXES, MORE MONEY SHUFFLES AND  CONTINUED LABOR DISHONESTY 

 The  Government  has  used  today’s  Mid-Year  Economic  and  Fiscal  Outlook  as  yet  another   chance to tax Australians to pay for their reckless spending.  

 The  Government  thinks  they  got  away  with  the  carbon  tax  -  and  are  now  using  this  as   another  opportunity  to  make  Australian  families  and  businesses  pay  more.  The  changes   announced today will mean Australians will pay more for private health insurance, pay more  for having more than one baby, pay more for asylum seeker management, and pay more for  management  of  self-managed  superannuation  funds  -  all  to  fund  Labor’s  reckless  spending   sprees.  

 Labor’s  poor  Budget  management  makes  life  harder  and  not  easier  for  Australian  families,   who are already suffering under cost of living pressures. 

 The Government continues their Budget trickery with regards to their $120 billion great big  Budget black hole of unfunded promises. The Government has made a promise to deliver an  NDIS, but has provided no further funding for its implementation. The Government has also  made  a  promise  to  implement  the  Gonski  education  reforms,  but  has  not  provided  a  single  

 dollar  towards  their  implementation  -  instead  Labor  has  cut  education  and  health  spending   since the May Budget.  

 This is a confused document, from a confused and dishonest Government.  

 Once  again,  Labor  tries  to  con  Australians  with  yet  more  money  shuffles.  By  introducing   monthly  PAYG  tax  for  companies,  Labor  expects to raise an extra $5.5 billion in 2013-14.  Without these changes, Labor’s promised Budget surplus in 2013-14, an election year, would 

 not be a surplus, but a deficit of over $3 billion. Furthermore, the changes will make it more  difficult for companies to deliver dividends, will create red tape and will affect cash flow at a  time when the job market is weak. 

 This money shuffle is on top of at least $10 billion of money shuffles for the current financial  year, when the Government is also keeping almost $6 billion of NBN spending ‘off budget’.  Without  these  accounting  tricks,  Labor’s  almost  invisible  $1  billion  surplus  for  this  year   would be a deficit of $15 billion or more.  

 Labor’s  money  shuffles  extend  to  the  Government  grant  programs,  where  changes  in  the   timing of grant payments is expected to bolster the Budget bottom line by $324 million this  financial year.  

 The Government’s asylum seeker mess has once again blown out by another $1.1 billion in  this year alone. However, this is not the full story - Labor appears to be hiding the real cost of  its increase in the humanitarian intake to 20,000 persons a year. Only in August the Minister  for Immigration said the cost could be as high as $1.3 billion over the forward estimates, and  Labor’s own expert panel were advised this measure would cost $1.4 billion. However, only  $432  million  has  been  provided  over  the  forward  estimates  in  the  Budget.   Australians   deserve to know where the extra $1 billion of unbudgeted expenditure will come from.   

 The  changes  to  the  Baby  Bonus  will  mean  having  more  than  one  baby  in  Australia  will   become more expensive, at a time when Australian families need all the assistance they can  get with the rising cost of living. 

 The  indexation  of  Private  Health  Insurance  continues  Labor’s  attack  on  Australian families   and  will  raise  over  $1  billion  over  the  forward  estimates.  The  changes  can  only  result  in   higher premiums for Australian families.  

 Labor also continues to raid superannuation to bolster their Budget bottom line.  Over half of  the Government’s promised surplus in 2012-13 will be achieved through ripping even more  money  out  of  the  superannuation  system  -  a  system  already  undermined  by  Labor’s   consistent tax grabs since coming to power.  

 Wayne Swan confirmed today that more pain is in order, with further tax rises to come. He  said: 

 “I'm also saying there will be other structural saves we will have to take as well.”  (Source: Wayne Swan, Media Conference, 22 October 2012)    

 Wayne Swan has to tell Australians which part of their lives he will choose to tax next.   

 The Treasurer has once again confirmed his inability to provide accurate forecasts, cutting the  size of the surplus by a third in just four months.  

 This is a Government still spending over $90 billion a year more than in the last year of the  Howard Government - and the Government is still borrowing to fund its reckless spending.  At  the  same  time,  the  erosion  of  Labor’s  promised  surplus  over  the  forward  estimates  will   make it even more difficult to begin to repay Labor’s record debt.  

 Under  Labor,  the  only  certainty  is  more  taxes,  more  debt  and  more  pain  for  all  Australian   families and businesses.  

 [ENDS] 

    

