---
title: "Abbott rehash more chest-beating, no substance"
date: "2012-11-23"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211385847
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2069985%22
---

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 23 November 2012 

 

 ABBOTT REHASH MORE CHEST-BEATING, NO  SUBSTANCE   

 Tony Abbott’s shameful backflip to cut back Australia’s refugee intake is a blow for  desperate refugees in camps in Africa, the Middle East and Asia who can’t afford to pay a  people smuggler, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, said today.   

 Along with Mr Abbott’s reheated mutual obligation plan - straight out the Coalition’s 2010  policy document - this is more of the same tired ideas from the Liberal Party.   

 Mr Bowen said Tony Abbott’s flip-flop on the humanitarian intake, adopting and now  abandoning the increase to 20,000 was sending the wrong message to vulnerable refugees  in camps across the world - the very people the Coalition claims to be helping.   

 “In line with the recommendations from the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers, the  Government increased the refugee intake to 20,000 to provide safer, alternative pathways  to taking a dangerous boat - Tony Abbott is taking that away,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “This is a shameful backflip. First he offered to double the humanitarian intake for Andrew  Wilkie’s support in Parliament in 2010, then he adopted the increase to 20,000 in a June  press conference this year to win over the crossbenchers and his own party room.”   

 Bereft of any new ideas, Mr Abbott also dipped into his 2010 playbook to rehash his mutual  obligation for asylum seekers.   

 Before the 2010 election the Coalition’s border protection policy contained the same policies  Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison ‘announced’ today.   

 …A Coalition Government will require that access to benefits, in particular income support,  will be subject to satisfying mutual obligation requirements to undertake work in return for  accessing these benefits - i.e. work for benefits…     

 …The total number of places under the Refugee and Humanitarian program would remain  capped at 13,750… (Excerpts from, ‘Restoring Sovereignty and Control to Our Borders:  Policy Directions Statement’, 21 July 2010)   

 “With nothing new to say, Mr Abbott can only reheat old ideas and feign their novelty,” Mr  Bowen said.   

 The Coalition’s 2010 document can be found here:  http://www.liberal.org.au/sites/default/files/ccd/Coalition%20Border%20Protection%20Polic y.pdf   

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

