---
title: "Tragedy and costs continue as more illegal boats arrive"
date: "2012-08-31"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211381201
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1891695%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Scott Morrison 

 Tragedy and costs continue as more illegal boats arrive 

 31/08/12  

 The arrival of the latest boat to illegally enter Australia, with 31 people on board, is  the 34th this month and follows yet another tragedy, as the financial costs also  continue to rise, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison  said today.    

 “This latest tragedy in the Sunda Strait is just as horrific as the many that have  preceded it over the past four years. These tragedies are not new, and the risk of  further tragedies remains,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “The Coalition welcomes the fact that Ministerial meetings will now be held in  Indonesia next week to discuss search and rescue arrangements, having called for  such a response following the last major tragedy in June [see op-ed attached].  These discussions must deal with the dangerous incentives that have been created  where asylum seekers are now calling in our Navy to take them to Australia and  merchant vessels have been forced to do the same.    

 “The discussions must address where rescued asylum seekers will be taken and  what additional resources and assets are needed to support the Indonesian  Government undertake these difficult search and rescue operations.    

 “The arrival of another illegal boat also makes a mockery of Labor's budget which  estimated just 450 people would arrive each month.    

 “So far in 2012/13, as many people have tuned up on illegal boats in just over eight  weeks as the Government was budgeting to turn up in eight months.    

 “Added to this there has been a further $650 million blowout on the immigration  detention network in Australia and  Labor have said they will be spending another  $1.3 billion taking additional refugees over the next four years.    

 “The question for Wayne Swan is where is all the money coming from to pay for  Labor's border failures and when is the Treasurer going to front up and tell  Australians what the full cost will be?    

 “For months now, arrivals on illegal boats have been running at more than three  times the budget estimate. This month has already set another new record of almost  2,000 arrivals with more than one illegal boat per day. 

 

 “This is twice the number of illegal boats and seven times the number of people that  turned up in the last six years of the Howard Government when the full suite of  successful policies was operating.    

 “You cannot expect the Howard Government results that stopped the boats if you do  not implement the full suite of Howard Government policies and the resolve needed  to back it up.    

 “Labor must do more than Nauru and implement temporary protection visas and be  prepared to turn boats back where it is safe to do so,” Mr Morrison said. 

