---
title: "Over 20,000 boat arrivals since election"
date: "2012-10-18"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211383745
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731314%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling OVER 20,000 BOAT ARRIVALS SINCE  ELECTION October 18, 2012

 Over  20,000  people  have  arrived  on  illegal  boats  since  the  last  election,  as  two  more  boats  turn  up  with  a  total  of  131 people  on  board,  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Julia Gillard continues to break records on illegal boat arrivals with over 20,000 people having arrived on boats since the 2010  election  when  she  promised  to  break  the  people  smugglers’  business  model  but  instead  became  it,”  Mr  Morrison   said.

 “Almost  5,000  people  have  arrived  since  Labor’s  backflip  on  Nauru,  over  twice  the  combined  capacity  of  Nauru  and Manus Island. More arrivals will continue so long as Labor fails to implement the full suite of Coalition border protection policies.

 “The arrival of yet another boat from Sri Lanka comes as Labor refuses to address the massive boat surge coming from that country.

 “While  an  alleged  act  of  piracy  occurs  off  Sri  Lanka  from  people  seeking  to  come  to  Australia  by  illegal  boat,  Prime Minister Gillard and Minister Bowen won’t even lift a finger to assist the Sri  Lankan  government to turn back boats or discuss sending Sri Lankans intercepted outside our waters back to Sri Lanka" Mr Morrison said.

 Mr  Keenan  said:  “News  of  these  two  latest  boat  arrivals  carrying  131  people  comes  on  the  same  day  a  boatload  of potential asylum seekers from Sri Lanka committed an alleged act of piracy at sea.

 “Boat  arrivals  since  polling  day  on  21  August  2010  have  now  reached  20,117  people  on  309  boats,  adding  to  Prime Minister Gillard’s list of border protection failures.

 “Labor’s weak border protection policies are drawing these boats to Australia like magnets and are causing problems for our regional neighbours, including Sri Lanka and Indonesia.

 “With 27,466 people having arrived since Australia’s border protection regime was dismantled, it is high time Labor took the sugar off the table and reinstate the Coalition’s policies which have a real deterrent effect,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 OVER 20,000 BOAT ARRIVALS SINCE ELECTION > Michael Keenan MP

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

