---
title: "Latest arrival represents Labor's biggest border protection failure"
date: "2012-08-10"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211378895
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1845664%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  

 Scott Morrison 

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection  

 Michael Keenan 

 Latest arrival represents Labor's biggest border protection failure 

 10/08/12  

 Julia Gillard has reached a new level of policy failure on our borders with the arrival  of the largest illegal boat on Labor's watch, carrying more than 200 people, Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “This latest arrival is the largest illegal boat to have arrived on Labor's watch since  they abolished the Howard Government's proven border protection measures and  they still show no sign of restoring these proven measures,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “More than 22,000 people have now turned up on 379 boats under Labor, and this  latest arrival is the largest. It also means more than 7,500 people have arrived so far  in 2012, adding to the annual record. 

 “There are two Navy vessels being used in this latest water taxi operation, due to the  large number of passengers on this latest boat, putting even more pressure on an  asylum budget straining under the pressure of almost daily arrivals. 

 “While the boats keep arriving and the number of passengers crowding onto these  boats sets new records, Labor remains in a policy deadlock of their own fabrication. 

 “It is only Julia Gillard who stands in the way of the Coalition's proven measures  being restored. She doesn't need a committee, she does need to swallow her pride  and make a decision,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “The biggest boat arrival under Labor is intercepted as recent  revelations show that the people smugglers are operating their business from right  within our community.    

 “The Government keep claiming that they are capable of protecting Australia’s  borders but the numbers speak louder than words - 380 boats carrying over 22,000  people have arrived illegally by boat since Labor unwound the proven policies of the  Howard Government.    

 “It is pure common sense to reinstate the suite of policies that worked to stop people  smuggling yet Labor’s wounded pride has them instead trying failed policy after  failed policy, whilst the boats keep coming. 

 

 “We need to return to Temporary Protection Visas, offshore processing on Nauru  and turning the boats back around when it is safe to do so, in order to stop the chaos  Labor has placed our borders in,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

