---
title: "New single protection visa process set to commence"
date: "2012-03-19"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211370075
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1511036%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 19 March 2012 

 

 NEW SINGLE PROTECTION VISA PROCESS SET TO  COMMENCE   

 The new single protection visa process announced last year for both boat and air  arrivals will apply from 24 March, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris  Bowen MP, said today.   

 Mr Bowen announced in November last year that the Government would be changing  the two parallel processes for boat and air arrivals to a single system for all asylum  seekers.   

 “The current onshore arrangements for application and independent review through  the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT) system will now apply to all people seeking  asylum in Australia, regardless of their mode of arrival, from 24 March 2012,” Mr  Bowen said.     

 “Under the new framework, people who arrive by boat from that date will have their  claims heard under a statutory process with merits review by the RRT on appeal,  instead of the previous Independent Merits Review (IMR) system.   

 “This means the protection obligations assessment process for irregular maritime  arrivals will be consistent with that of onshore protection visa applicants.”   

 Mr Bowen said with the legislative impasse over offshore processing and the  resulting move towards greater community placement, there was no longer any  benefit to parallel processing arrangements for offshore entry persons.   

 “The Malaysia Arrangement presented a genuinely innovative regional response to  the people smuggling problem, but the High Court’s decision and Tony Abbott’s  negativity in blocking offshore processing prevent the Government from pursuing this  option,” he said.   

 “It is therefore only prudent to introduce this new single, consistent and efficient  process.”   

 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) has consulted extensively  with key stakeholders, including non-government organisations, refugee advocate  groups and other agencies in developing the new framework.   

 The new system will apply to asylum seekers who arrive in Australia from 24 March  as well as those who arrived prior to that date but had not yet had a primary  assessment interview.   

 Those who are currently having their asylum claims assessed in the non-statutory  process will continue in that process with access to existing IMR arrangements. All  asylum seekers will continue to have access to judicial review.   

 DIAC will also commence processing complementary protection claims as part of the  protection visa framework from 24 March, in line with legislation passed by the  Australian Parliament in September 2011.    

 This will mean people facing certain types of harm - not covered by the Refugee  Convention but still warranting protection - will be recognised sooner, making the  process more efficient and less stressful for vulnerable people at risk of violation of  their fundamental human rights.   

 Mr Bowen said the Government remained committed to ensuring the timely and  efficient consideration of claims for protection and reduce the time asylum seekers  spent in immigration detention or in community arrangements awaiting an outcome.    

 More information on the processing changes is available at  www.immi.gov.au/visas/humanitarian/onshore/   

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

