---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Penrith, NSW: 6 June 2012: Interest rates; the Government's failed border protection policies."
date: "2012-06-06"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Interest rates"
  - "the Government's failed border protection policies."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374525
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1695615%22
---

 1 

 

 JOH  

 

 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH   

 6 June 2012 

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW,  PENRITH 

 

 Subjects: Interest rates; the Government's failed border protection policies.    

 EO&E.............................................................................................................................................................. 

 

 TONY ABBOTT:    

 It’s good to be here at the Panthers. I want to thank Senator Marise Payne for helping to arrange today’s  visit. I’m very pleased to be here with Fiona Scott, our candidate for Lindsay, who I know is going to run a  very energetic local campaign. It’s great to have the chance to talk to local business. Local business wants a  change of government. Local business knows that there is very little confidence in our economy and the best  thing we can do to restore confidence in our economy is to have a change of government. Now, one of the  factors behind the general lack of confidence is the inability of this Treasurer to ensure that Reserve Bank  interest rate cuts are passed on to customers. This is a Treasurer who is very good at talking to the banks but  very bad at actually influencing them. This is a Treasurer who is all talk and very little action and what I fear  we are going to see is an interest rate cut for banks but not an interest rate cut for home buyers and for small  businesses.    

 We see the continuing disaster on our borders and it seems that this government is not only incapable of  controlling our borders but it’s incapable of stopping people smuggling in Canberra itself. This is a  government that talks a lot about the need for other countries to crack down on people smuggling but it can’t  even crack down on people smuggling in the heart of Canberra. Is it any wonder that we have problems with  people smuggling when the Government has cut some $200 million from the funding to agencies like the  Federal Police and other border security agencies?   

 Now, my message consistently to the people of Australia is that there is a better way. The public knows that  with the right policies in place, we can be a prosperous, confident, dynamic country because for many years  under the Howard Government that’s exactly what we were. So, there are three elements to our economic  policy. We’re going to get spending down, we’re going to get taxes down and we’re going to get  productivity up and that means higher economic growth. That is the way to give the Australian people back  the hope, reward and the opportunity that they have a right to expect.   

 QUESTION:   

 Mr Abbott, a rate cut is intended in some ways to benefit borrowers, not to bolster the profits of the banks.  What do you say to those banks that continue to fail to pass on cuts in full?   

 2 

 

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Well, they should pass those cuts on in full, that’s what they should do. I am incredibly disappointed that  this Treasurer is much better at talking than delivering. The Australian people know that when Peter  Costello was in charge of our nation’s economy, the banks invariably passed on these rate cuts in full. It  hardly ever happens now and that’s a comment on the fact that no one takes this Treasurer seriously.   

 QUESTION:   

 Do you think with the lack in confidence at the moment in the economy, the Treasurer will have to abandon  his plans for a surplus?   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Look, he should not break a commitment and this is a government which has been protesting up hill and  down dale that it is going to deliver a surplus; no ifs, no buts, it’s going to deliver a surplus. Well, I’ll  believe it when I see it, because the record of this government is not surpluses, but deficits. This is a  Treasurer who has forecast plenty of surpluses but he’s never delivered one. What he’s actually delivered  are the four biggest deficits in Australian history.   

 QUESTION:   

 The Australian economy grew 1.3 per cent in the first three months of the year. How do you explain that?   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Look, some sectors are still doing it very tough and that’s why this is the worst possible time to be hitting  our economy with the world’s biggest carbon tax.   

 QUESTION:   

 Mr Abbott, just on the refugee, M47, how do you explain the fact that this individual is going to court  claiming that he was kept against his will without any explanation for why that was the case?   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Well, I think it’s up to the Government to explain their consistent failures to protect our borders. It’s not my  job to make excuses for a bad government. It’s up to this government to put in place the policies that will  actually stop the boats. That’s what the Government has to do. Now, they are so obviously and manifestly  failing that so far this month we’ve had five boats in five days. What could be more graphic an illustration of  this government’s failure than five boats in five days?   

 Thank you.   

 [ends] 

