---
title: "New services to help migrants and refugees in Queensland"
date: "2012-06-20"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375230
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2264692%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP 

 New services to help migrants and refugees in  Queensland  Wednesday, 20 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Senator Kate Lundy - Minister for Sport, Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today announced 14 new projects will be  funded in 2012-13 under the Settlement Grants Program (SGP) to assist newly  arrived migrants and refugees settle in Queensland. 

 From 1 July 2012, Queensland settlement agencies will receive a total of $2.4 million  in additional funding to deliver new services that will help new arrivals become self-reliant and acquire skills and knowledge to fully participate in the community. 

 As part of the funding allocated to Queensland this coming financial year, the  Multicultural Development Association in Brisbane will receive a grant to link women  and youth support groups to sporting organisations and activities. 

 'This innovative project will help new migrants in Queensland connect with their  community through a shared passion for sport and open up their social network,' Mr  Bowen said. 

 'The Multicultural Development Association delivers a range of services that  encourage inclusion and integration into Australian life for new migrants and  refugees while providing them with general support and a pathway to successful  settlement in the community.' 

 'Services like these are critical to ensuring positive settlement outcomes for migrants  and refugees building a new life in Queensland and helping migrants develop their  skills so they can become self-reliant and contribute to the community.' 

 Announcing the Queensland grants, Senator Lundy said the Australian Government  reaffirmed its commitment to helping refugees and migrants settle into their new  communities through the Settlement Grants Program. 

 'These grants help people to make the transition into Australian life by building on  their existing skills and, at the same time, help them to learn valuable new ones,'  Senator Lundy said. 

 'These services provide practical support which assists the settlement process,  building confidence and support networks. Whether it is improving people's ability to  gain access to mainstream services, housing assistance or the community legal 

 education support, these services are all activities that empower new arrivals by  helping them connect with local communities, develop greater independence and  improve their life skills. 

 'The community sector plays a vital role in supporting newly arrived refugees and I  commend all organisations in Queensland for their contribution to the successful  settlement of migrants and humanitarian entrants.' 

 The Australian Government will spend $39 million in 2012-13 to deliver services to  humanitarian entrants and new migrants to acquire skills and knowledge to fully  participate in the community as soon as possible after arrival. 

 A list of successful applicants in the 2012-13 funding round is available on the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 2012-13 Grant Recipients 

