---
title: "150 boat arrival and 150 policy failures under PM Gillard"
date: "2012-04-03"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211370864
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2085045%22
---

 150 BOAT ARRIVALS AND 150 POLICY FAILURES  UNDER PM GILLARD 

 Posted on Tuesday, 3 April, 2012

 The illegal arrival of the 150th boat since Julia Gillard became Prime Minister, with 84 people on board,  is her 150th policy failure and exposes the deceit of her promise to smash the people smuggling trade  before the last election, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow  Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “The  150th  boat  arrival  under  Julia  Gillard’s  failed  leadership  reminds  Australians  that  just  as  she   misled them over the carbon tax, her pledge to smash the people smugglers business model  is just  another broken promise,” Mr Morrison said.

 “People smugglers have made more than $90 million since Julia Gillard became Prime Minister, and  business remains as strong as ever. So far in 2012 the number of people to arrive by boat is up more  than 75% on the same period last year.   

 “150 boat arrivals represent 150 policy failures by Julia Gillard as PM, according to the standard she  set herself when on the odd occasion a boat arrived under the Howard Government’s proven border  protection regime she said, ‘another boat arrival , another policy failure’. 

 “Rather  than  restore  the  polices  that  worked,  Labor’s  only  response  to  boat  arrivals  is  to  blame  the   Opposition and seek to reinvent history about their longstanding opposition to offshore processing, that  included abolishing the Pacific Solution.   That’s not a policy, it’s just another lame excuse. 

 “The only vote that has been held in the Parliament on the Government’s Malaysian people swap bill  was voted against by the Government, who refused to even have it debated. The Malaysian people  swap bill is just an excuse to do nothing and blame the Opposition for the Government’s own failures,”  Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “The interception of yet another illegal entry vessel in Australian waters once again  highlights  the  disastrous  state  of  our  borders  in  which  people  smugglers  are  running  a  rampant   business  to  the  detriment  and  risk  of  people’s  lives,  all  courtesy  of  the  Gillard  Government’s  policy   failures.

 “How  can  this  Labor  Government  justify  ripping  millions  of  dollars  out  of  the  key  border  protection   agencies at a time when they are severely overstretched and under resourced thanks to the disastrous  mismanagement of funding by the Gillard Government.

 “The immense strain and pressure that has been placed on the men and women who work tirelessly in  our frontline national security and border protection agencies is of great concern to the Coalition.

 “How  much  longer  will  the  Gillard  Government  continue  to  risk  the  lives  of  our  Border  Protection   Command and those who continue to make this dangerous journey across our borders, through their  consistent inaction and their inability to accept responsibility for the crisis they created?

 “As Australia’s borders crumble around us it is essential that the Minister for Home Affairs, Jason  Clare, starts to repair the extensive damage caused by Labor’s cuts. To start with the Minister must  reinstate the $58.1 million that Labor gutted from Customs before he even begins to address the other  multiple holes left in our border protection system,” Mr Keenan said.

 Page 1 of 1 150 BOAT ARRIVALS AND 150 POLICY FAILURES UNDER PM GILLARD > ...

 3/12/2012 http://www.keenan.net.au/Media/PortfolioMediaReleases/tabid/80/articleType/Article...

