---
title: "Salute to Frank Lowy AC: address to the Inaugural Australian Multicultural Council Lecture, Canberra"
date: "2012-09-20"
creators:
  - "Gambaro, Teresa"
source: "SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR CITIZENSHIP AND SETTLEMENT"
subjects:
  - "LOWY, Frank"
  - "Multiculturalism"
  - "National identity"
  - "Racial discrimination"
  - "Tolerance"
  - "Immigration"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382392
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1927358%22
---

 Speech  

 

 

 The Hon Teresa Gambaro MP  Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for International Development Assistance  Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Citizenship and Settlement   

 

 

 1 

 

 20 September 2012 

 

 Adjournment Debate 

 Inaugural Australian Multicultural Council Lecture - salute to Frank Lowy AC 

 Federation Chamber, Parliament House, Canberra 

 

 [check against delivery] 

 Thank you very much Mr Deputy Speaker, it is with great pride that I rise to  salute a great Australian, Mr Frank Lowy who last night delivered the  Inaugural Australian Multicultural Lecture in the Main Committee Room in this  Parliament.   

 Immigration has made Australia the nation we know today. It has made us a  stronger Australia. Community confidence in immigration provides a  foundation for social harmony and for the continued success of our  immigration programme.   

 In the words of Judge Rauf Soulio in his welcoming address to last night’s  inaugural lecture, “multicultural Australia transcends the usual division of  politics” and “diversity is a defining strength of Australia.”   

 Since WWII, immigration has transformed Australia from a nation of some  seven million to one of more than 22 million people with more than 260  different cultural backgrounds.    

 In that time, immigration has seen more than seven million people settle here,  including almost 750,000 refugees.   

 As a Jewish immigrant from Czechoslovakia who fled the Nazis in WWII,  Frank Lowy is certainly a testament to the opportunities Australia provides to 

 Speech  

 

 

 The Hon Teresa Gambaro MP  Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for International Development Assistance  Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Citizenship and Settlement   

 

 

 2 

 

 people from a migrant background.   

 I am proud to say that I share in this migrant heritage being born to Italian  immigrant parents who owned and operated the local corner store and  worked hard to develop their business and support their family. And I, as the  daughter of immigrant parents, have the honour of being elected to represent  not one, but two electorates in the federal Parliament - first in the seat of  Petrie and now in the seat of Brisbane.   

 Australia is arguably the world's most successful immigration nation.  However, as Frank Lowy reminded us all last night, “we should resist the  temptation to view Australia's multicultural experience through rose-coloured  glasses.”    

 Our success is not something we should take for granted nor should we be  misguided about the reasons for our success.    

 And that is why the universal condemnation from across our great nation in  response to the violence in Sydney last week is a tribute to us all.   

 Extremism has no place in Australia.    

 Extremism is not part of the fabric of Australian society and is not part of our  cultural diversity.    

 And to those who would seek to hurt this country with their prejudice and their  hatred I say this - you have no place here.    

 If you sought to weaken our resolve against racial and religious prejudice you  have failed.    

 If you sought to divide us you have failed. We stand united against you.   

 Speech  

 

 

 The Hon Teresa Gambaro MP  Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for International Development Assistance  Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Citizenship and Settlement   

 

 

 3 

 

 Australians come from nations and ethnic cultures right across the world and  have the right to express their cultural identities and beliefs in a tolerant  society. But, that special privilege comes with rights and obligations of being  an Australian citizen and respecting the rule of law.   

 We must jealousy protect and maintain our national unity and social cohesion  as an immigration nation.   

 We must have policies that decry racism, reject discrimination and recognise  our diverse backgrounds. We should continue to be conscious of removing  barriers to participation in the Australian community. In fact, we should be  more insistent about that participation.    

 To achieve this, we also need to focus policy on appreciating the things we  have common, rather than just focusing on our differences. We must also  insist on a one-rule-for-all approach. We must build a culture of participation  based on shared obligations and responsibilities, rather than just equal  entitlements.    

 Australia is the land of the fair go, but opportunities will only be realised by  those who have a go. Our most successful immigrants have always  understood and appreciated and celebrated this about Australia. It is this spirit  of inclusiveness, participation and having a go that has made Australia great  and will ensure we remain great into the future.   

 

 ENDS   

 Media contact: John Lamont  0408 737 450 

 

 

 

