---
title: "Record month of arrivals while Labor refuses to act"
date: "2012-06-30"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375900
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736694%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling RECORD MONTH OF ARRIVALS WHILE  LABOR REFUSES TO ACT June 30, 2012

 The  arrival  of  the  latest  illegal  boat,  with  67  people  on  board,  means  1,781  people  have  arrived  this  month,  a  record number  of  arrivals  in  a  single  month,  as  Julia  Gillard  continues  to  refuse  to  act,  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "People smugglers are continuing to take advantage of the weak and incompetent Gillard Government’s failure to act on  border protection," Mr Morrison said. 

 "Julia Gillard’s stubbornness and failure in the Parliament this week resulted in her getting 100% of nothing rather than 50% of something on border protection legislation and while she continues to refuse to act and restore that measures that worked to stop the boats, people will continue to risk their lives on illegal boats," he said. 

 "Labor’s failure and refusal to break the deadlock over offshore processing makes it clear to the Australian people that the only way they will see a return to strong border protection policies is to elect a Coalition government with the policies and the determination to stop illegal boat arrivals. 

 "The Coalition still has a bill on the table that puts offshore processing for refugee convention countries beyond any legal doubt. This bill can still be supported by the government, despite the fact they voted this week to shut down this bill being considered by the Parliament. 

 "What the Australian people want to see is action. That action can be taken now, including reopening Nauru which can be done today as can reinstating temporary protection visas and issuing new instructions to the navy," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said "The latest boat arrivals are the 69th and 7th boats to make the treacherous journey to Australia for 2012. 

 "Whilst the Government has no border protection policies, people will continue to risk their lives and make the dangerous voyage to Australia. 

 "Labor’s failure to address this crisis over the last few years has only emboldened the people smugglers to continue to make huge profits from this evil and illegal trade. 

 "The Australian people are crying out for this Labor Government to offer up a viable solution to people smuggling and put an end to the tragedies at sea. 

 "If Labor cannot fulfil the role of the Commonwealth and adequately protect our borders then they should call an election,"  Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 RECORD MONTH OF ARRIVALS WHILE LABOR REFUSES TO ACT > Michael...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

