---
title: "Migration and women at risk"
date: "2012-03-08"
creators:
  - "Cash, Michaelia"
source: "SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211434678
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1483888%22
---

 

 

 JOINT PRESS RELEASE 

 THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MR SCOTT MORRISON MHR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  CITIZENSHIP   SENATOR MICHAELIA CASH, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  

 IMMIGRATION AND THE STATUS OF WOMEN   

 

 MIGRATION AND WOMEN AT RISK 

 

 

 The Coalition will re-focus Australia’s refugee and humanitarian program and give priority to genuine  refugees and offshore women at risk.     

 A Coalition Government will provide a guaranteed minimum of 1,000 places for women at risk and their  dependents within Australia’s annual humanitarian intake.    

 We will ensure that Australia’s refugee and humanitarian resettlement programme provides places to those  we can help most and those who are most in need.     

 Women at risk and their dependents waiting in camps and other desperate places offshore are among the  most vulnerable of all who seek a better life in Australia. They have neither the means nor the opportunity to  escape their circumstances.    

 This group will be given a very high priority by a Coalition government in Australia’s refugee and  humanitarian programme.     

 In recent years, the annual intakes in the women at risk category have steadily fallen from 995 visas in 2005-06 to 759 visas in 2010-11.     

 This reflects the downward trend that has seen fewer places made available to poorer and more vulnerable  offshore refugees, including those in the women at risk category. This is a direct consequence of Labor’s  decision to abolish the Coalition’s proven border protection policies.   

 Currently the number of places available for offshore refugee and humanitarian entrants has fallen to fewer  than 9,000 places.  The Coalition will reserve a minimum of 11,000 places available in the 13,750 place  Refugee and Humanitarian programme for offshore applicants.  Of these 11,000 places, a minimum of 1,000  Woman at Risk visas will be allocated.   

 A Coalition government will ensure that appropriate settlement services are provided to women at risk once  they arrive in Australia.   

 Our policies will ensure Australia’s refugee and humanitarian resettlement programme provides hope to the  most vulnerable.   

 

 8 March 2012   

 Background: Woman at Risk Visa (Subclass 204) 

 How many places in the Coalition’s Refugee and Humanitarian programme will be  reserved for offshore applicants?  

 A minimum of 11,000 places of the 13,750 places for the Refugee and Humanitarian programme will  be reserved for offshore applicants.  Of these 11,000 places, a minimum of 1,000 Woman at Risk  visas will be allocated. 

 How many Woman at Risk Visas will be issued by a Coalition Government? 

 A Coalition Government will provide a minimum of 1,000 Women at Risk visas.  This is an increase  of 32% over 2010-11 when 759 Women at Risk visas were granted.  

 Who is eligible for this visa? 

 According to the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, for a woman to be eligible for  this visa, she must be: 

  living outside her home country; and   subject to persecution in her home country or registered as being ‘of concern’ to the  UNHCR; and   without the protection of a male relative; and   in danger of victimisation, harassment or serious abuse because she is female. 

 Eligibility of Family members as part of a Woman at Risk Visa 

 The following people may be included in an application for a Woman at Risk Visa: 

  the applicant’s partner   dependent children of the applicant and the applicant’s partner    certain dependent relatives living with the applicant. 

 What does the Woman at Risk Visa allow? 

 The visa allows the recipient and any dependent family members included in the visa  application to live as permanent residents in Australia. 

 Australian permanent residents can: 

  live and work in Australia permanently    study in Australian schools and universities    access subsidised healthcare through Medicare and the Pharmaceutical Benefits  Scheme (PBS) 

  access certain social security payments (subject to waiting periods)   be eligible for Australian citizenship (subject to the residence eligibility criteria)   propose or sponsor people for permanent residence. 

