---
title: "Visit to Lebanon"
date: "2012-07-19"
creators:
  - "Albanese, Anthony"
source: "MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE AND TRANSPORT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211429917
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1790526%22
---

  

 

 

 Media Statement 

 

 VISIT TO LEBANON 

 

 Next week I am visiting Lebanon for discussions on transport, infrastructure and  joint business opportunities.   

 My visit to Lebanon will be the first undertaken by a Federal Minister in more than  a decade and follows the first ever visit of a Lebanese President to Australia in  April 2012.    

 The last visit by a Federal Minister took place in 2001 when Phillip Ruddock was  the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs.    

 Australia and Lebanon share a warm and productive bilateral relationship that is  underpinned by strong community and people-to-people links.    

 The approximately 350,000 Australians of Lebanese descent have made  significant contributions to Australian society in government, politics, business as  well as sporting and cultural life, including NSW Governor Professor Marie  Bashir, and the bilateral relationship today encompasses cooperation in a  number of fields including defence.  Efforts to build our trade relationship are also  being spearheaded by the recently established Australia Lebanon Chamber of  Commerce and Industry and the Australian Lebanese Chamber of Commerce.   

 Australia also strongly supports the humanitarian work of the United Nations  Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees (UNRWA) in Lebanon.    

 While in Lebanon, I plan to meet with the Lebanese Minister for Public Works,  Ghazi Aridi, whom I first met during his visit to Australia in April this year.    

 There is significant potential for Australian involvement in port construction and  expansion, aviation and rail and I will be discussing these opportunities with the  Minister.     

 I also plan to call on President Michel Suleiman, Prime Minister Najib Mikati and  Speaker of the Parliament Nabih Berri during my visit.    

 

 Media contact:                    Virginia Kim             0407 415 484 

 

 Thursday, 19 July 2012   

 

    

 

