---
title: "One stop forward on Nauru and two steps back as another boat arrives"
date: "2012-09-30"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382842
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2732997%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ONE STEP FORWARD ON NAURU AND TWO  STEPS BACK AS ANOTHER BOAT ARRIVES September 29, 2012

 As 28 more Sri Lankans choose to head home from Nauru, more than 60 new arrivals have made their way to Christmas  Island from Indonesia on the latest boat to illegally enter Australian waters, Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “The tenth boat in a week, with more than 60 people on board, has added even further to Labor's record month of more  that 2,000 illegal boat arrivals,” Mr Morrison said.

 “It's a case of one step forward and two steps back as the latest arrival more than doubles the number of Sri Lankans in  the latest group to elect to go home from Nauru. 

 “We welcome the fact that Nauru is having at least some impact, with almost 50 Sri Lankans now having chosen to return  home. However, we remain completely frustrated at the Government's refusal to restore all the Howard policies that  worked. Just imagine how more effective Nauru could be if Labor denied permanent visas and turned boats back where it  was safe to do so.

 “With a monthly record of more than 2,000 people arriving on boats In September, this completely dwarfs the total number  of Sri Lankans that have decided to go home.

 “Over the past month, it's a case of one step forward and 40 steps back under Labor's half hearted approach,” Mr  Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “95 boats have now been intercepted in the short few months of this financial year as the Government  continues to implement their half measures at our borders. 

 “Given this is the 300th illegal boat to arrive since this Prime Minister took power, it is high time the Gillard Government  started to take responsibility for the crisis they have created at our borders.

 “How many more people are going to arrive in this country illegally by boat before they admit that unravelling the robust  border protection system that they inherited from the Coalition, was their greatest failure?” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 ONE STEP FORWARD ON NAURU AND TWO STEPS BACK AS ANOTHER B...

 18/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

