---
title: "Blaming refugees for people smugglers' tricks not the solution: Greens"
date: "2012-06-05"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374382
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1691194%22
---

 Tuesday, 5 June 2012   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Blaming refugees for people smugglers' tricks not the  solution: Greens    

 Desperate people will keep risking everything they have and flee for Australia via leaky boats if they  feel they have no other alternative because of limited protection options, the Australian Greens said  today.   

 "In the rush to punish people smugglers, we mustn't lose sight of the bigger picture and the causes  that force people to run for their lives," Greens' immigration spokesperson, Sen. Sarah Hanson-Young, said.   

 "People will continue fleeing from war, torture or persecution and will always take their chance by  boat because Australia resettles so few people directly from places such as Malaysia and Indonesia.   

 "Australia's humanitarian intake is among the lowest in the world - indeed as the UNHCR reported  in March, we take 3 percent of the world's asylum seekers, fewer people as a percentage than  Switzerland does.   

 “The best way to stop the people smuggling is to undercut their business by giving the most  vulnerable safer options for seeking protection. Australia must do more practically to help asylum  seekers by increasing our humanitarian intake and resettling more people directly.    

 "Australian authorities should punish people smugglers and their syndicate leaders, but not asylum  seekers who are exercising their legal right to seek our help.   

 “In wanting to crack down on people smugglers, we shouldn’t be resorting to punishing the very  people we are meant to protect.      

 "The Australian government has talked tough about cracking down on smuggling leaders, but the  result has been the prosecution of poor Indonesian fisherman and boys, some of whom had no idea  the boats they were crewing would be carrying people.   

 "The Four Corners report also highlights problems with AFP in Australia and the agency's posts in  Southeast Asia, and also ASIO.   

 "ASIO’s negative assessments have meant the indefinite detention of 57 refugees including women  and children, yet it could not detect a people smuggling ringleader living in Canberra. If they had it  wrong in this case, how can we have confidence they don’t have in wrong in the 57 cases of those  indefinitely detained without explanation or right of review?    

 "This raises many questions about ASIO's effectiveness and its reasons for adverse security  assessments that result in detention possibility for the rest of their lives.    

 "The Greens will continue to insist that Australia honours its international obligations to offer  protection under the Refugee Convention, and will never support efforts to reinstate the Malaysia  deal, Nauru or any other offshore option." 

 

 MEDIA CONTACT: PARIS LORD 0427 604 760   

