---
title: "Cocos farce just another day under Labor's chaos on our borders"
date: "2012-08-02"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR PRODUCTIVITY & POPULATION, IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211433570
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1822486%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population, Immigration & Citizenship  Scott Morrison 

 Cocos farce just another day under Labor's chaos on our borders  

 02/08/12  

 Labor's claim to have intercepted the most recent illegal boat arrival off Cocos  (Keeling) Islands when passengers on board actually swam ashore shows just how  ridiculous border protection has become under this government, Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice,  Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "Just one day into August and two illegal boats have arrived, as people smugglers  continue to sell their product to a wider market under Labor's inaction on our  borders," Mr Morrison said. 

 "People coming on illegal boats are now even swimming ashore when they get to  Australia, yet the Government is still claiming to have 'intercepted' the boat. It won't  be long before they'll have to put flags up on the beach at Cocos (Keeling) Islands,  with the boats continuing to come at such an historic rate,” he said. 

 "The chaos and confusion on our borders will continue for as long as Labor  continues to refuse to restore the proven policies that they abolished in a fit of moral  vanity on coming to office. 

 "Labor's border failures have reduced our navy to a water taxi service, the  Department of Immigration into a reception desk, and Cocos and Christmas Islands  into a transit lounge for people smugglers. 

 "A committee isn't needed to tell the Australian people what's gone wrong and what  action needs to happen. Labor's continued failure to act to restore the Coalition's  proven policies means only an election will fix the mess on our borders, " Mr  Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest illegal boat to land on the doorstep of Cocos Island  adds to the litany of disastrous consequences Labor's lack of border protection policy  has caused. 

 “With one or two boats arriving every day over the past month it is no surprise that  Border Protection Command (BPC) can't send vessels out further to intercept the  constant stream of illegal boats. 

 “The people smugglers are making a complete mockery of our border protection  system and will continue to send boatloads across to Australia will full confidence  their product will be an attractive one under the Gillard Labor Government. 

 “BPC currently do not have the resources to effectively manage the consequences of  Labor's failure. 

 “Yet Labor expects them to able to take on the additional responsibility of rescue  within the Indonesian search and rescue zone without any extra resourcing,” Mr  Keenan said. 

 

