---
title: "Australia and Papua New Guinea sign updated Memorandum of Understanding"
date: "2012-09-08"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/242217630
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2599684%22
---

 

 Australia and Papua New Guinea Sign  Updated Memorandum of Understanding  SAT 08 SEPTEMBER 2012 

 Prime Minister, Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Vladivostok, Russia 

 Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Chris Bowen  today announced that Australia and Papua New Guinea have entered into a new  Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in relation to regional processing arrangements on  Manus Island. 

 PNG Foreign Minister Rimbink Pato and Minister for Trade and Competitiveness Craig  Emerson signed the MOU today, which builds upon the previous agreement of 19 August  2011 and paves the way for processing on Manus Island, subject to the designation of PNG as  a regional processing country under Australian law. 

 This is a significant step towards establishing a regional processing centre on Manus Island,  as recommended by the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers. 

 The MOU contains new elements, including assurances relating to key elements of the  Refugee Convention, as outlined in recent changes to the Migration Act. 

 The agreement underlines the Government’s resolve to work with regional partners to break  the people smuggling trade and prevent the tragic loss of life at sea on dangerous boat  journeys. 

 The Government is committed to implementing the Expert Panel’s recommendations. There  will be no advantage for people risking their lives on people smuggling boats. 

 The MOU demonstrates the positive and long-standing relationship of our two countries on  migration issues, and recognises the need for cooperative measures to tackle irregular  migration in the region. 

 It also provides for ongoing discussions with PNG on the specific operational details of the  regional processing centre. 

 We are committed to working with PNG to operationalise the regional processing centre at  the earliest opportunity. 

 The MOU also reaffirms both countries’ commitment to the Refugee Convention, with  people to be treated with dignity and respect in line with human rights standards. 

 

