---
title: "Labor's island hopping service for illegal boats resumes"
date: "2012-09-08"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211381735
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2733090%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LABOR’S ISLAND HOPPING SERVICE FOR  ILLEGAL BOATS RESUMES September 08, 2012

 Another illegal boat, with 99 people on board, this time arriving in the Cocos (Keeling) Island lagoon, shows Labor’s island  hopping service for illegal boat arrivals has resumed normal service and still not a single person has been sent to Nauru for  processing,  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "Labor’s  island  hopping  service,  flying  people  arriving  on  illegal  boats  at  Cocos  (Keeling)  Island  to  Christmas  Island  on expensive  charter  planes  at  taxpayer’s  expense  has  resumed,  as  the  people  smugglers  continue  to  take  advantage  of Julia Gillard’s failure on our borders," Mr Morrison said. 

 "Under Julia Gillard no one has been sent to Nauru for offshore processing. It has now been 26 days since Julia Gillard was dragged kicking and screaming into announcing she would reopen Nauru and still not a single person has been sent there for processing. In that time 1,748 people have arrived on 29 boats. 

 "The pink batts and school hall debacles showed this Labor government fails to live up to its rhetoric. Labor’s failure to get  Nauru up and running, including refusing to give itself the green light to send people to Nauru before the Parliament rose two weeks ago, has reinforced to people smugglers that they are a soft touch. 

 "Strong border protection is about having the resolve and proven policy measures needed to deter people smugglers and stop the boats. Labor has neither the full suite of Howard measures nor the Howard Government resolve to get this done," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr  Keenan  said:  "This  latest  arrival  is  the  70th  boat  to  be  intercepted  this  financial  year  - more  than  seven  times  the   amount of boats that arrived this time last year financial year. 

 "Our patrol boats are so overrun with asylum seekers that just last week a vessel was too overcrowded to transfer all the passengers to Christmas Island and instead transferred the remaining passengers directly to the mainland. 

 "It is a sad state of affairs that people are arriving at such a rapid rate that our patrol boats cannot even fit them all on one ship to be transferred to Christmas Island. 

 "This is just further evidence that the people smugglers are using our Navy and Customs vessels as their own personal water taxis and that the Government doesn’t have the resolve to stop it from happening. 

 "Transferring passengers directly to the mainland only reinforces to the people smugglers that this Government is not  serious about implementing the tough border protection policies that are needed to stop the boats," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 LABOR’S ISLAND HOPPING SERVICE FOR ILLEGAL BOATS RESUMES > Mi...

 18/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

