---
title: "400 illegal boats, 400 policy failures since Gillard appointed PM"
date: "2012-12-17"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211387264
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731175%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling 400 ILLEGAL BOATS, 400 POLICY FAILURES  SINCE GILLARD APPOINTED PM December 17, 2012

 The latest illegal boat, with 54 people on board, is the 400th since Julia Gillard was appointed Prime Minister in June 2010, cementing her reputation as the worst steward of our borders in our nation’s history, Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “The same Prime Minister who at the last election promised Australians she would smash the people smugglers’ business  model, armed with her farcical East Timor proposal, has now been responsible for 400 illegal boats arriving on her watch with almost 25,000 people on board,” Mr Morrison said.

 “In  her  own  words  this  Prime  Minister  is  responsible  for  400  boats  and  400  policy  failures.  Her  failure  has  resulted  in unprecedented cost, chaos and tragedy on our borders including $6.6 billion and counting in budget blow outs,” he said.

 “Neither the Prime Minister nor the government she leads have their hearts in stopping illegal boats. When they do act, they have to be dragged kicking and screaming by the Coalition and it is typically too little and too late. 

 “The  Government’s  latest  announcements  on  Sri  Lanka  are  just  another  example  of  the  Coalition  having  to  force  their hand to act. 

 “Since  Sri Lankan  boats began  arriving  en masse seven  months ago, the Coalition has consistently called for Labor to reach an agreement to help Sri Lanka turn them around to prevent them from leaving. 

 “As  recently  as  July  Minister  Bowen  described  the  Coalition’s  calls  for  such  an  agreement  as  a  ‘fundamental   misunderstanding’. Yet once again, they are forced to backflip after dragging their heels and allowing thousands more to arrive.

 “The other issue with Labor is that they are big on announcements and very short on delivery. As NSW Premier, Bob Carr was  an  announcement  addict,  and  we  all  know  what  state  he  left  NSW  in  after  the  reality  caught  up  with  his  hollow announcements and rhetoric. 

 “I look forward to visiting Sri Lanka with my colleagues in January to see just what is being delivered on the ground. 

 “Labor has spent the last five years rubbishing the very kinds of turn back arrangements they now say they are supporting the Sri Lankan government to achieve.

 “The  Sri  Lankan  deal  just  further  exposes  the  truth  - that  Labor’s  stubborn  pride  is  the  only  obstacle  to  turning  boats   around where safe to do so,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “There have now been 400 illegal boat arrivals under Prime Minister Julia Gillard’s watch despite one of  her election promises to stop the boats from coming.

 "The Prime Minister used the border protection crisis as one of her excuses to stab former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd in the back - yet under Gillard’s leadership 5 boats carrying, almost 300 passengers, is just two days work under Labor's non existent border protection regime.

 Page 1 of 2 400 ILLEGAL BOATS, 400 POLICY FAILURES SINCE GILLARD APPOINTED ...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

 "The people smugglers are clearly determined to end 2012 on a high with more boats having arrived in the first 2 weeks of this month than in the whole of December last year.

 "Labor  only  makes  half  hearted  attempts  to  end  this  criminal  trade  and  restore  control  to  our  borders  but  their  lack  of resolve has made Australia the laughing stock of the region.

 "If Labor cannot fulfil the role of the Commonwealth and protect our borders then they should call an election," Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 2 of 2 400 ILLEGAL BOATS, 400 POLICY FAILURES SINCE GILLARD APPOINTED ...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

