---
title: "New migration and refugee tribunal appointments"
date: "2012-06-29"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375844
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1744924%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 29 June 2012 

 

 NEW MIGRATION AND REFUGEE TRIBUNAL  APPOINTMENTS   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today announced a series of  new appointments, including a new principal member, to the Migration Review Tribunal  (MRT) and the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT).   

 Mr Bowen said the new principal member Kay Ransome would head the independent review  tribunals while three senior members and 33 other new members have also been appointed.   

 “Ms Ransome has an excellent knowledge of administrative law and having previously  worked as a member at the RRT she has a sound understanding of migration law,” Mr  Bowen said.     

 “The combination of her extensive administrative law practice, executive experience and  background in relevant tribunals, makes her an ideal appointee for this position.   

 “Ms Ransome will succeed Denis O’Brien, who will be remembered for his strong  contribution to the review tribunals.”   

 The MRT and RRT provide an independent and final merits review of decisions made in  relation to visas to travel to, enter or stay in Australia. The MRT reviews decisions made  relative to general visas (for example, visitor, student, partner, family, business, skilled  visas) and the RRT deals with decisions made about protection (refugee) visas.   

 Mr Bowen said the new senior members and members (14 full-time and 19 part-time) had  been selected from a competitive field of more than 500 applicants.    

 “The separate selection processes for the all the new appointments were merit-based. I’m  confident the successful applicants will bring a wide range of skills and will make a strong  contribution to the tribunals,” he said.   

 “The recommendations to Government by the independent selection committees were based  on the applicants’ demonstrated strong sense of fairness and understanding of  administrative law principles, as well the ability to determine review applications with sound  judgement.”   

 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship’s chief lawyer chaired the selection advisory  committee for the senior members and members, with the principal member of the MRT-RRT, a representative of the Australian Public Service Commission and a community  representative.   

 Members have been appointed on a part-time or full-time basis for periods of either three or  five years commencing 1 July 2012. All senior members have been appointed for five years  full-time starting 1 July. Ms Ransome has been appointed for five years, starting in August.   

 The new appointments are partially in response to an independent internal departmental  review by Professor Michael Lavarch to reduce system-clogging delays and improve the  efficiency and effectiveness of both the MRT and RRT. The review can be found here  www.immi.gov.au/visas/humanitarian/lavarch-review.htm   

 Biographies   

 Principal member, Kay Ransome  Kay Ransome was admitted as a solicitor of the Supreme Court of New South Wales in 2008.  Her most recent role was as the chairperson of the New South Wales Consumer, Trader and  Tenancy Tribunal. She has served as Registrar of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and  has previously worked as a member of the RRT.   

 Senior member, Miriam Holmes  Miriam Holmes holds a Bachelor of Laws as well as a Bachelor of Jurisprudence. She is  currently a senior member of the Social Security Appeals Tribunal. Ms Holmes has previously  been a member of the Building Appeals Board (1997-1999) and a part-time member for the  Tax Practitioners’ Board (2009-2011). From 2000 to 2002 she was the principal solicitor,  Administrative Law/Property and Commercial Branches in the Victorian Government  Solicitor’s Office. From 1995 to 2000, she was the manager of the Native Title Unit  Administrative Law Branch, Victorian Government Solicitor’s Office.    

 Senior member, Louise Nicholls  Louise Nicholls was admitted to practice in NSW and the ACT in 1977. She has practised as  a solicitor in private practice, in the ACT Legal Aid Office, as a senior instructor at the  Australian National University (ANU) Legal Workshop and a lecturer in Legal Ethics at the  ANU. Since 1996, she has taught students at the College of Law, Sydney. From 1996 to  2001, she was the Solicitor in Charge of the Parramatta office of the Legal Aid Commission  of NSW. She has served on the Professional Conduct Committee of the ACT Law Society and  the Ethics Committee of the NSW Law Society. She was a part-time member of the NSW  Consumer, Tenancy and Trading Tribunal from 2007 to 2010. She was appointed as a  member of the MRT-RRT in 2001. Ms Nicholls has also acted as senior reviewer with the  Independent Protection Assessment Office, and as senior member with the MRT-RRT.   

 Senior member, Sue Raymond  Sue Raymond holds a Bachelor of Laws as well as a Graduate Diploma of Legal Practice. Ms  Raymond is a senior member of the Social Security Appeals Tribunal. From 2004 to 2006,  she was the inaugural professional development and policy officer for the Office of the State  Department of Public Prosecutions. From 2000 to 2004, Ms Raymond was the director of  Legal Practitioners Conduct Board and from 1995 to 2000 she was a presiding member of  the Residential Tenancies Tribunal. Ms Raymond has completed courses in alternative  dispute resolution and mediation.   

 Further information about the tribunals and a full list of new appointees can be found at  www.mrt-rrt.gov.au   

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769 

