---
title: "Cocos farce just anther day under Labor's chaos on our borders"
date: "2012-08-02"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211433562
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2734855%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling COCOS FARCE JUST ANOTHER DAY  UNDER LABOR'S CHAOS ON OUR  BORDERS August 02, 2012

 Labor's claim to have intercepted the most recent illegal boat arrival off Cocos (Keeling) Islands when passengers on  board actually swam ashore shows just how ridiculous border protection has become under this government, Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection,  Michael Keenan said today.

 "Just one day into August and two illegal boats have arrived, as people smugglers continue to sell their product to a wider  market under Labor's inaction on our borders," Mr Morrison said.

 "People coming on illegal boats are now even swimming ashore when they get to Australia, yet the Government is still  claiming to have 'intercepted' the boat. It won't be long before they'll have to put flags up on the beach at Cocos (Keeling)  Islands, with the boats continuing to come at such an historic rate,” he said.

 "The chaos and confusion on our borders will continue for as long as Labor continues to refuse to restore the proven  policies that they abolished in a fit of moral vanity on coming to office. 

 "Labor's border failures have reduced our navy to a water taxi service, the Department of Immigration into a reception  desk, and Cocos and Christmas Islands into a transit lounge for people smugglers.

 "A committee isn't needed to tell the Australian people what's gone wrong and what action needs to happen. Labor's  continued failure to act to restore the Coalition's proven policies means only an election will fix the mess on our borders, "  Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest illegal boat to land on the doorstep of Cocos Island adds to the litany of disastrous  consequences Labor's lack of border protection policy has caused.

 “With one or two boats arriving every day over the past month it is no surprise that Border Protection Command (BPC)  can't send vessels out further to intercept the constant stream of illegal boats.

 “The people smugglers are making a complete mockery of our border protection system and will continue to send  boatloads across to Australia will full confidence their product will be an attractive one under the Gillard Labor  Government.

 “BPC currently do not have the resources to effectively manage the consequences of Labor's failure.

 “Yet Labor expects them to able to take on the additional responsibility of rescue within the Indonesian search and rescue  zone without any extra resourcing,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 COCOS FARCE JUST ANOTHER DAY UNDER LABOR'S CHAOS ON OUR BO...

 19/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

