---
title: "Labor should follow Kiwi lead on TPVs as boat 302 arrives"
date: "2012-05-01"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372275
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1603636%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection  Michael Keenan 

 Labor should follow Kiwi lead on TPVs as boat 302 arrives 

 01/05/12  

 The illegal arrival of 13 boats and almost 1,000 people in April, including another  overnight comes at the same time as the New Zealand Government has announced  it will introduce temporary protection visas, Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border  Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “The New Zealand Prime Minister has seen the wisdom of introducing TPVs after  just one boat sought to make its way to New Zealand and decided to stay in Darwin.  Prime Minister Gillard refuses to restore TPVs after 302 boats have turned up as a  result of Labor’s soft border policies,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “Illegal boat arrivals carrying 971 people in April were the second highest on record  for this Government. The record was set only last December when 991 people  turned up on illegal boats,” he said. 

 “We have now had our two highest levels of monthly arrivals on record under this  Government since they announced their 'let them in, let them out' policy of  community release and bridging visas last November. 

 “Rather than restore the policies that worked, Labor continue to make excuses and  blame others for their failures. If the New Zealand Government can introduce TPVs  then Prime Minister Gillard has no excuse for not doing the same,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “As the 30th boat of 2012 arrives carrying 27 people, bringing the  total number of illegal arrivals under Labor to almost 17,000, it is clear to all  Australians that under a Gillard Government there is no semblance of a border  protection regime.  

 “This rapid rate of arrivals is a direct response to a Labor Government that is once  again too busy dealing with its own internal scandals and leadership problems to  effectively control the crisis that is occurring at our borders.  

 “The Prime Minister and her Cabinet may continue to use smoke and mirrors tricks  but at the end of the day these extraordinarily high numbers speak loud and clear  about the state of Australia’s borders. 

 “Labor has no intention of offering any viable solutions to stop people smuggling -  only an election and a Coalition Government will restore order and control to our  Border Protection Command,” Mr Keenan said. 

  

