---
title: "Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison should quit the cheap political stunts and join with the Government to pass legislation enabling offshore processing"
date: "2012-06-09"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374673
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2273132%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison should quit the  cheap political stunts and join with the  Government to pass legislation enabling offshore  processing  Tuesday, 09 June 2012  

 Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison should quit the cheap political stunts and join with  the government to pass legislation enabling offshore processing.  

 The best way to ensure that refugees are processed in a fair and orderly fashion is to  break the people smugglers' business model. The Opposition know full well that all  the evidence indicates that the Government's Malaysia arrangement is the best way  to do that.  

 What the coalition want to do is introduce another layer of bureaucracy to asylum  seeker processing which would almost certainly be judicially reviewable, meaning  more asylum claims will be tied up in the courts.  

 The last thing refugee processing in Australia needs is another layer of bureaucracy  and more reviews.  

 This is completely unnecessary, as the government already has the power to revoke  visas where it is appropriate to do so.  

 However, unlike the previous government, we do not ignore advice and ride  roughshod over due process. That leads to debacles like the Haneef visa  cancellation, which was subsequently overturned in the courts and saw taxpayers  footing a hefty compensation bill.  

 Australia has a robust process for assessing asylum seeker claims under the UN  Refugee Convention, with each claim judged on a case-by-case basis.  

 People found to be genuine refugees must also pass health, security, identity and  character checks to be eligible for the grant of a protection visa.  

 If the opposition were genuinely interested in these issues they would stop their  cheap politicking and would work with the government to pass legislation to allow the  government of the day to implement border protection policies in the national  interest.  

 They should also stop passing off old policies as new ones, with Scott Morrison  admitting in November last year that their policy of presuming against refugee status  for people without documentation was one they took to the last election:  

 'Now our policy is that where we reasonably form the view that someone has thrown  away their documentation, ie. they've come through a port in another country by their  own admission, which would require documentation, and all of a sudden no longer  have it, then we would presume against their refugee status and we can do that  under the Act, under Section 91W. And that's been our policy, we announced it at  the last election and that goes further, I think, than where we were even when we  were in Government.'  

 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb187427.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 12 June 2012 at 10:57 AEST  

