---
title: "Changes to Minister's advisory council"
date: "2012-02-09"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211369368
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1409662%22
---

 

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Changes to Minister’s Advisory Council  Thursday, 09 February 2012 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today  announced he has extended the term for his Council for Immigration Services  and Status Resolution (CISSR), which will now be known as the Minister's  Council on Asylum Seekers and Detention (MCASD). 

 'The council's new name more accurately reflects its focus on issues relating  to asylum seekers and immigration detention,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'For example, the council has played an important role in areas such as  community detention and mental health in detention.' 

 Mr Bowen said he had extended the council's term to September 2014 and  made some changes to its terms of reference to clarify its legal status. 

 'I'd like to thank all of the existing members who have accepted my invitation  to continue to serve on the council, and welcome Associate Professor Mary  Anne Kenny and Bishop Daniel Eugene Hurley to the council,' he said. 

 'I also extend my thanks to Professor Samina Yasmeen, who is leaving the  council to focus on her work at the Australian Multicultural Council. Professor  Yasmeen has made a valuable contribution to the council, particularly in  relation to the needs of different cultural groups within immigration settings.' 

 MCASD is an independent advisory council to the Minister for Immigration  and Citizenship which brings together experts from a range of disciplines to  inform policymaking. 

 MCASD members 

 Mr Paris Aristotle AM (Chair)  Mr Paris Aristotle AM is the Director of the Victorian Foundation for Survivors  of Torture Inc in Victoria. 

 Air Marshal Ray Funnell AC (Deputy Chair)  Air Marshal Ray Funnell is former Chief of the Air Staff (1987-1992) and  former Vice Chief of the Defence Force (1986-1987). 

 Ms Kerrin Benson (Member)  Kerrin Benson is Chief Executive Officer of the Multicultural Development  Association (MDA) 

 Ms Caz Coleman (Member)  Caz Coleman is presently freelancing after finishing her work as Director of  the Hotham Mission Asylum Seeker Project. 

 Mr Noel Clement (Member)  Noel Clement is General Manager of Domestic Operations with the Australian  Red Cross which encompasses a significant suite of migration support  programs as well as social inclusion, youth and family programs. 

 Ms Libby Lloyd AM (Member)  Libby Lloyd is the current Chair of the Australian Commonwealth's Violence  against Women Advisory Group (VAWAG). 

 Associate Professor Harry Minas (Member)  Associate Professor Harry Minas is the Director of the Centre for International  Mental Health and the Director of the Victorian Transcultural Psychiatry Unit  at the University of Melbourne. 

 Professor Nicholas Procter PhD RN (Member)  Professor Nicholas Procter is a former Hawke Fellow and current group  leader for mental health and substance abuse research within the Division of  Health Sciences at University of South Australia. 

 Dr Maryanne Loughry AM (Member)  Dr Maryanne Loughry is Associate Director of Jesuit Refugee Service-Australia and research professor at the Centre for Human Rights and  International Justice, Boston College, USA and the Refugee Studies Centre  (RSC), University of Oxford. 

 Dr Jamal Rifi (Member)  Dr Jamal Rifi is a General Practitioner in Sydney and council member of the  Australian Lebanese Foundation (University of Sydney). 

 Associate Professor Mary Anne Kenny (Member)  Mary Anne Kenny has been employed at the Murdoch University law School  since 1997. She is currently the program manager for the Graduate Certificate  in Australian Migration Law and Practice. She is also an Adjunct Lecturer at  the Centre for Human Rights Education at Curtin University. She continues to  practice as a lawyer and migration agent through SCALES. 

 Bishop Daniel Eugene Hurley (Member)  Bishop Eugene Hurley served as a Catholic Priest in the Diocese of Port Pirie  for 43 years. He was appointed as Bishop of the Diocese of Port Pirie in 1999  and in 2007 was appointed as the fourth Bishop of the Diocese of Darwin. 

 

