---
title: "Creative communication for migrants wins top award"
date: "2012-06-20"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375220
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2134797%22
---

 

 

 Creative communication for migrants wins top award 

 June 20, 2012  

 Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today congratulated Moreland City  Council for its community initiative to teach new migrants and refugees about life in  Australia, which was honoured with a National Award for Excellence in Local Government  last night. 

 The Council was recognised for their CALDCOM (culturally and linguistically diverse  communication) project which uses storyboards to visually communicate information about  Australian society to new arrivals, helping them to settle and establish a new life. 

 Senator Lundy, who attended the presentation of the 2012 National Awards for Local  Government, congratulated Moreland City Council for its creativity in conveying important  messages to vulnerable community members. 

 “I wish to commend Moreland City Council on winning this fantastic award and for finding a  creative way to communicate on issues such as water safety, cyber-bullying, aged care, and  voting in Australia,” Senator Lundy said. 

 “CALDCOM will greatly assist new migrants and refugees to adjust to life in Australia. In  addition, this will also support Victoria’s existing migrant population, which represents  communities speaking more than 132 different languages.” 

 Moreland City Council edged out other category entrants to be announced the winner of the  2012 National Awards for Excellence in Local Government announced by Minister for  Regional Australia, Regional Development and  Local Government, Simon Crean. 

 “These awards reflect the important partnership between the federal government and local  councils. They recognise, reward, and promote the innovative work of local governments  across Australia,” Senator Lundy said. 

 In May Moreland City Council won the Strength in Diversity award for the innovative  response to the challenge of engaging with a diverse community. 

 Further information about CALDCOM project visit  http://www.moreland.vic.gov.au/community-services/multicultural-services/caldcom.html 

 

