---
title: "Government acts to remove incentive for longer boat journeys"
date: "2012-10-31"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384373
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2014332%22
---

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 31 October 2012 

 

 GOVERNMENT ACTS TO REMOVE INCENTIVE FOR  LONGER BOAT JOURNEYS   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today moved to  implement another recommendation of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers, introducing  legislative changes to remove the incentive for asylum seekers to undertake especially  risky boat journeys to the Australian mainland.   

 The Migration Amendment (Unauthorised Maritime Arrivals and Other Measures) Bill  2012 gives effect to recommendation 14 of the Expert Panel report, which  recommended that boat arrivals should have the same legal status regardless of where  they enter Australian territory.   

 “The Government is committed to implementing the recommendations of the Expert  Panel and giving people better options than risking their lives at sea,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “These changes remove the perverse incentive for people to take even greater risks by  seeking to reach the Australian mainland to avoid being subject to regional processing  arrangements.   

 “As the Expert Panel warned, such attempts would only amplify the dangers inherent in  these perilous boat journeys.”   

 Under the existing legislative framework, people who arrive at excised offshore places -  such as Christmas Island or the Cocos (Keeling) Islands - are subject to be taken to a  designated country for regional processing. People who arrive at the Australian mainland  are not currently subject to these provisions.   

 The proposed amendments mean a person will be subject to regional processing based  on their status as an unauthorised maritime arrival, rather than the place of entry in  Australia.   

 “The changes ensure there is one rule for all boat arrivals, as the Expert Panel  recommended,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “At the same time, we are committed to putting in place an orderly migration which says  to vulnerable people that there is a safer way of getting to Australia. That is why we  have increased the Humanitarian Program to 20,000 places.   

 “But the message for people arriving by boat is clear: regardless of where you land, you  risk being processed in Nauru or Papua New Guinea.   

 “To those contemplating the journey, I reiterate: the people smugglers are lying to you.  It is not worth risking your life. There is no visa on arrival, there is no special treatment  and there is no advantage given to those who come by boat.”   

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

