---
title: "Budget 2012: Australia committed to refugees most in need"
date: "2012-05-08"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372711
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1622377%22
---

 

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 8 May 2012   

 AUSTRALIA COMMITTED TO REFUGEES MOST IN NEED   

 The Gillard Government will continue its commitment to providing refuge for the world's most  vulnerable people by again designating 13,750 places under the humanitarian program in  2012-13.   

 “Australia resettles the third largest number of refugees of any country, and we resettle more  refugees, per capita, than any other nation. Australians should be proud of the part we play in  providing protection to refugees,” Mr Bowen said.   

 The humanitarian program is for offshore refugees referred by the United Nations High  Commissioner for Refugees; people in Australia seeking protection and found to be refugees;  and for those in need with links to Australia through the Special Humanitarian Program.   

 “Under the 2012-13 program, our main resettlement focus will continue to be on refugees  from the three key regions of Africa, Asia and the Middle East,” Mr Bowen said.    

 Significant pressures on the Special Humanitarian Program from the high number of  protection visa grants in Australia will require further consideration of options to alleviate  pressure on the program.   

 “The exceptionally high demand for visas under the humanitarian program far exceeds the  number of places available,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “That is one of the reasons why the government remains committed to arrangements that  eliminate the incentive for people to make the dangerous boat journey to Australia,  maximising the number of places available to those in greatest need.”   

 Meanwhile, the Government is continuing to look at ways of improving the humanitarian  program.   

 “Consequently, we will be seeking the community's views on the feasibility of introducing a  private sponsorship pilot program. We are keen to see if we can build on the goodwill towards  refugees that exists in the Australian community to develop such a program,” Mr Bowen said.    

 

 “In the coming months, we will be seeking input from peak refugee bodies, non-government  organisations and other relevant community stakeholders on the feasibility of such a  program.”   

 Mr Bowen also announced the streamlining of health waiver provisions for offshore  humanitarian applicants in response to a recommendation in the Joint Standing Committee on  Migration report, Enabling Australia: Inquiry into the Migration Treatment of Disability.    

 “Streamlining the health waiver provision means that offshore humanitarian applicants who do  not meet the health requirement on cost grounds are more likely to have a visa granted,” Mr  Bowen said.    

 “This change brings requirements for offshore applicants into line with those for applicants  under the onshore protection program. However, the change does not alter policies relating to  health conditions that are a public health risk, or would require health care or community  services that would prejudice the access of Australian residents.”   

 Vulnerable women will continue to be a priority under the humanitarian program through the  'woman at risk' initiative, set at 12 per cent of the refugee component of the program.   

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

