---
title: "More boats arrive due to Abbott's negativity"
date: "2012-05-21"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211373518
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1650050%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 JASON CLARE MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE  MINISTER FOR DEFENCE MATERIEL 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 21 May 2012 

 

 MORE BOATS ARRIVE DUE TO ABBOTT’S NEGATIVITY   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Home  Affairs, Jason Clare MP, today called on Tony Abbott to stop standing in the way of real  action on people smuggling.    

 Another two asylum seeker boats have arrived, being the 36th and 37th since Tony Abbott  again chose relentless negativity over the national interest and rejected the Government’s  offer to implement offshore processing.    

 “The Coalition’s hypocrisy on this issue is boundless. They criticise the Government for boat  arrivals on one hand but with the other Tony Abbott’s negativity prevents the  implementation of offshore processing,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “Mr Abbott continues to stand in the way of this genuine deterrent. The Government even  offered a processing centre on Nauru - but he said no; no to his own policy.”   

 Mr Clare said the boats would keep coming and people would continue to risk their lives at  sea while Mr Abbott said no to offshore processing.   

 “Remember what this is all about - 200 people died off the coast of Indonesia last year.  Another 11 died off the coast of Malaysia,” Mr Clare said.   

 “We can stop people risking their lives. The legislation is in the Parliament. It shouldn’t take  another 200 people to die before Mr Abbott agrees to pass it.”   

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769 (Bowen)  Korena Flanagan 0418 251 316 (Clare)  UNCLASSIFIED 

  

