---
title: "Australia joins Jordan in quest for peace"
date: "2012-08-15"
creators:
  - "Carr, Bob"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211380222
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2761380%22
---

 

 

 Australia joins Jordan in quest for  peace  Media release 

 15 August 2012 

 Foreign Minister Bob Carr held discussions on regional peace during his recent visit  to Jordan, meeting with His Majesty King Abdullah II and Jordan's Minister of Foreign  Affairs, Mr Nasser Judeh. 

 Senator Carr said discussions were on the Syrian crisis and its potential  repercussions for the region, the Middle East peace process and interfaith dialogue,  in addition to ways of broadening the bilateral relationship. 

 "Australia is conscious of the burden being carried by Jordan and other countries in  hosting Syrian refugees," Senator Carr said. 

 "While in Jordan I visited Za'atri refugee camp on the Syrian border where I  announced $4 million in additional Australian assistance for food, blankets, and  medical treatment for the more than 145,000 refugees now in camps in Jordan, Iraq,  Turkey and Lebanon. 

 "The international community must continue to strive to find a way to end the  bloodshed which is causing Syrians to flee their homes and lose their livelihoods." 

 Senator Carr acknowledged the constructive role Jordan has been playing in  advancing the Middle East peace process, including hosting negotiations between  Israeli and Palestinian officials in Amman earlier this year. 

 "There can be no peace without negotiations, whose objective must be a two-state  solution with agreed national borders," Senator Carr said. 

 Senator Carr also attended an interfaith dialogue roundtable. 

 "Jordan has long been a model for religious and cultural tolerance in a region riven  by sectarian violence," Senator Carr said. 

 "I have especially taken to heart His Majesty KingAbdullah's calls for an "overlap of  civilisations" in charting Australia's own efforts to promote interfaith dialogue. 

 "The interfaith roundtable provided a valuable and timely opportunity for me to  discuss these issues with some of Jordan's pre-eminent thinkers on theology, law,  and multiculturalism" 

 Foreign Minister Bob Carr visited Jordan from 2-5 August. 

 Media enquiries 

  Minister's office: (02) 6277 7584 

  DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555 

 

