---
title: "Another boat as Coalition ignores warnings"
date: "2012-05-20"
creators:
  - "Clare, Jason"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211373489
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1650034%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 JASON CLARE MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE  MINISTER FOR DEFENCE MATERIEL 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 

 20 May 2012 

 

 ANOTHER BOAT AS COALITION IGNORES WARNINGS   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Home  Affairs, Jason Clare MP, said Tony Abbott and the Coalition continued to ignore warnings  that more lives could be lost at sea, as another asylum seeker boat was intercepted today.   

 Mr Bowen said the latest boat was the 35th since Tony Abbott rejected the expert advice,  rejected the warnings of more boat and rejected compromise to deliver offshore processing.    

 “As the Government has said countless times, without a genuine deterrent such as the  Malaysia Arrangement, boats will continue arrive. Without legislation, there is no legal basis  for offshore processing, whether it be in Malaysia or Nauru,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “Tony Abbott’s refusal to support the Government’s offshore processing legislation is  encouraging the people smuggling trade and more people onto dangerous boats.”   

 Mr Clare said it was time for Tony Abbott to stop saying no and vote to allow offshore  processing in Malaysia and Nauru.   

 “Remember what this is all about - 200 people died off the coast of Indonesia last year.  Another 11 died off the coast of Malaysia,” Mr Clare said.   

 “We can stop this but it requires legislation. That means it requires us to work together.   

 “It is time for Tony Abbott to vote to  allow offshore processing in Malaysia and Nauru.” 

 

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 (Bowen) / Korena Flanagan 0418 251  316 (Clare)   

