---
title: "High Commissioner to Malta"
date: "2012-10-11"
creators:
  - "Carr, Bob"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211383367
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1972709%22
---

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  Senator the Hon. Bob Carr  October 11 2012    

 HIGH COMMISSIONER TO MALTA 

 

 Foreign Minister Bob Carr today announced Jane Lambert as Australia’s next High  Commissioner to Malta, with non-resident accreditation to Tunisia. Ms Lambert is  expected to take up her appointment in December 2012, replacing Ms Anne Quinane.    

 Ms Lambert is a career officer with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and has  previously served as Deputy High Commissioner to South Africa, Counsellor at the  Australian High Commission in Nigeria, and First Secretary at the Australian Embassy to  the European Union, Belgium and Luxembourg. She was most recently Director of the  Department’s Pakistan Section.    

 Ms Lambert holds a Master of Arts degree in Public Policy from the Australian National  University, and a Bachelor of Arts degree from Flinders University. She speaks French.  Australia’s 164,000-strong Maltese community is the world’s largest outside Malta.  Recent diplomatic engagement between the two countries includes a state visit to  Australia by Malta’s President Abela and Foreign Minister Borg in 2011 and a visit to  Malta by Minister Carr in April 2012.    

 Australia and Malta share an interest in developments in North Africa and the Middle  East and have provided humanitarian assistance and resettlement to refugees fleeing  conflict and instability in the Horn of Africa.   

 Australia and Tunisia co-operate on agricultural productivity and food security through  the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research’s conservation agriculture  project based in Tunis.  Recent diplomatic engagement includes a visit to Tunis by the  Prime Minister’s Special Envoy Bill Fisher in August 2012.    

 Two-way trade between Australia and Malta totalled $A115 million in 2010-11, principally  comprising Australian exports of margarine, cheese, machinery parts and ships and  boats. Imports from Malta include medical equipment and plastics.   

 Two-way trade between Australia and Tunisia total approximately $20 million a year,  principally comprising exports of Australian beef and other meats, and imports of  Tunisian clothing and electrical equipment.    

 Minister’s office: 0435 658 623   

