---
title: "Anther boat as Labor's boat budget under severe pressure"
date: "2012-05-10"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372902
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2742685%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ANOTHER BOAT AS LABOR’S BOAT  BUDGET UNDER SEVERE PRESSURE May 10, 2012

 The  arrival  of  the  fifth  boat  this  week,  with  101  people  on  board,  will  put  further  pressure  on  the  Gillard  Government’s   spending on illegal boat arrivals just three days after the budget was handed down, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “The federal budget is just three days old but already it’s under severe pressure as more boats and more people arrive illegally under Labor’s failed border protection policies,” Mr Morrison said.

 “This latest boat means more than 10,000 people have arrived by illegal boat since the election. Julia Gillard promised to ‘smash’  people  smugglers  but  because  of  her  ineptitude  and  capitulation  to  the  Greens  on  community  release,  she  is setting new records for boat arrivals,” he said.

 “The government based its budget on 450 people arriving a month by illegal boat but just 11 days into May more than 470 people have arrived. This follows almost 1,000 people arriving in April and 887 people who arrived in February.

 “This  year  is  currently  trending  as  the  biggest  ever  for  boat  arrivals  as  Julia  Gillard  sets  new  standards  for  border protection failure. This financial year is already the largest on record with over 5,800 people arriving, with seven weeks still to go.

 “Rather than using the budget to announce it would reinstate the Coalition’s proven border protection policies to stop the  boats and get Labor’s wasteful spending on our borders under control, the government ran away from having a vote on their failed Malaysia Solution when they refused to bring on a vote on Rob Oakeshott’s proxy Malaysia bill.

 “Just  like  they  can  see  through  the  Prime  Minister’s  attempts  to  divide  them  with  class  warfare,  Australians  can  see through the Prime Minister’s lame excuses on border protection. Blaming the Opposition isn’t a policy and so long as Ms  Gillard continues this charade more boats and more budget blow outs will be the inevitable result,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “Another boat arrival, another indication that Labor’s Budget did nothing to combat the people smuggling  business model that is currently profiting from the Gillard Government’s inaction on border protection.

 “When you rip $25.9 million in funding and 190 personnel out of our frontline border protection agency you send a clear message to the people smugglers that Australia’s borders are open for business.

 “These latest cuts have consequently made Australia’s porous borders even more susceptible to smuggling people, guns, drugs and other contraband.

 “It is impossible for Customs to effectively do their job and protect our borders when Labor continues to take an axe to their resources and funding,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 ANOTHER BOAT AS LABOR’S BOAT BUDGET UNDER SEVERE PRESSURE ...

 23/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

