---
title: "Report of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers released"
date: "2012-08-13"
creators:
  - "Houston, Angus"
source: "EXPERT PANEL ON ASYLUM SEEKERS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211379528
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1845687%22
---

  EXPERT PANEL ON   ASYLUM SEEKERS     

 13th August 2012 

 

 Report of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers Released   

 The Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers today released its Report containing 22 key recommendations  to Government on the policy options available to prevent asylum seekers risking their lives on  dangerous boat journeys to Australia. (See recommendations attached).   

 The independent Panel was appointed by the Prime Minister on 28 June and comprises Air Chief  Marshal Angus Houston AC, AFC (Ret’d), Professor Michael L’Estrange AO and Mr Paris Aristotle  AM.    

 Air Chief Marshal Houston (Ret’d) said the Panel had proposed a way forward that it believed would  address the challenges that Australia faced over the short, medium and longer term.   

 “The Panel has made 22 key recommendations to Government. These are an integrated set of  proposals,” Air Chief Marshal Houston (Ret’d) said.   

 “We recommend a policy approach that is hard-headed but not hard-hearted. That is realistic not  idealistic. That is driven by a sense of humanity as well as fairness.”    

 Professor L’Estrange said the Panel believed that Australian policy settings and regional  arrangements needed to be adjusted.    

 “It is the Panel’s view that the balance of risk and incentive must be shifted in favour of regular  migration pathways and established international protections, and against dangerous maritime  migration,” Professor L’Estrange said.   

 “We also believe that a ‘no advantage’ principle should apply whereby irregular migrants gain no  benefit by choosing to circumvent regular migration mechanisms.”   

 From late 2001 to June this year, 964 asylum seekers and crew have been lost at sea on boats  carrying asylum seekers to Australia. Of these, 604 people have lost their lives since October 2009.     

 Mr Aristotle said the Panel was deeply concerned about the tragic loss of life at sea.   

 “To do nothing is unacceptable - so we have proposed a new approach. One that is comprehensive,  integrated and equitable,” Mr Aristotle said.   

 “We believe our recommendations meet the tests of reasonableness, fairness and humanitarian  need.”   

 Air Chief Marshal Houston (Ret’d) said the Panel believed the prospect of further losses of life at  sea was one that demanded urgent and decisive action on the part of the Australian Parliament.    

 “The current impasse must be resolved. The Panel hopes our recommendations can contribute to a  productive outcome,” Air Chief Marshal Houston (Ret’d) said.    

 The Panel’s Report is available on online at: http://expertpanelonasylumseekers.dpmc.gov.au   

 Media contact:  Tanya Cleary. M: 0418 615 280. 

  Report of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers, August 2012 

 su MMar Y of  re Co MMendat Ions

 Principles

 Recommendation 1 The panel recommends that the following principles  shou ld shape austral ian policymaking  on asylum seeker issues (paragraphs 2.6-2.22):

  y The imp



 lementation of a strategic, comprehensive and integrated approach that  establishes short, medium and long-term priorities for managing asylum and mixed  migration flows across the region.

  y The pro



 vision of incentives for asylum seekers to seek protection through a managed  regional system.

  y The fac



 ilitation of a regional cooperation and protection framework that is consistent  in the processing of asylum claims, the provision of assistance while those claims  are being assessed and the achievement of durable outcomes.

  y The app



 lication of a ‘no advantage’ principle to ensure that no benefit is gained  through circumventing regular migration arrangements.

  y promoti



 on of a credible, fair and managed austral



 ian humani



 tarian progra



 m.

  y adher



 ence by austral



 ia to its international obligations.

 Australia’s Humanitarian Program

 Recommendation 2 The panel recommends that austral ia’s humani tarian p rogram  be i ncreased   and refocused:

  y The humani



 tarian progra



 m be immediately increased to 20,000 places per annum  (paragraphs 3.3-3.8).

  y of the 20,0



 00 places recommended for the humani



 tarian progra



 m, a minimum of 

 12,000 places should be allocated for the refugee component which would double  the current allocation (paragraphs 3.3-3.8).

  y s ubjec



 t to prevailing economic circumstances, the impact of the progra



 m increase 

 (recommended above) and progress in achieving more effective regional cooperation  arrangements, consideration be given to increasing the number of places in the  humani



 tarian progra



 m to around 27,000 within five years (paragraphs 3.3-3.8). 

  y The humani



 tarian progra



 m be more focused on asylum-seeker flows moving from  source countries into s outh- east asia (pa



 ragraphs 3.3-3.9).

  Report of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers, August 2012 

 Regional engagement

 Recommendation 3 The panel recommends that in support of the further development of a regional cooperation  fra 

 mework on protection and asylum systems, the austra  lian gover 

 nment expand its relevant 

 capacity-building initiatives  in the region and significantly increase the allocation of  resources for this purpose (paragraphs 3.26-3.28).

 Recommendation 4 The panel recommends that bilateral cooperation on asylum seeker issues with  Indone 

 sia  be advanced as a matter of urgency, particularly in relation to:

  y The al



 location of an increased number of human



 itarian progr



 am resettlement places 

 for Indonesia (paragraphs 3.20-3.22).

  y enhan



 ced cooperation on joint surveillance and response patrols, law enforcement  and search and rescue coordination (paragraphs 3.20-3.22).

  y chang



 es to austra



 lian law in relation to Indonesian minors and others crewing  unlawful boat voyages from Indonesia to austr



 alia (paragraphs 3.20-3.22).

 Recommendation 5 The panel recommends that austra lia continue to develop its vitally important  cooperation with Malaysia on asylum issues , including the management of a substantial 

 number of refugees to be taken annually from malay



 sia (paragraphs 3.23-3.24).

 Recommendation 6 The panel recommends a more effective whole-of-government strategy be developed  for 

  engaging with source countries  for asylum seekers to austra

  lia, with a focus on a 

 significant increase in resettlement places provided by austra



 lia to the middl



 e east an



 d asia 

 re



 gions (paragraphs 3.29-3.33).

 Regional processing

 Recommendation 7 The panel recommends that legislation to support the transfer of people to regional  pro

  cessing arrangements be introduced into the austr

  alian p arli

  ament as a matter 

 of urgency (paragraphs 3.54 and 3.57). This legislation should require that any future  designation of a country as an appropriate place for processing be achieved through a  further legislative instrument that would provide the opportunity for the austr



 alian 

 p arli



 ament to allow or disallow the instrument (paragraph 3.43).

  Report of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers, August 2012 

 Recommendation 8 The panel recommends that a capacity be established in n auru  as s oon as practical to  process the claims of I mas transfer 

 red from australi

  a in ways consistent with australi

  an and 

 nauruan r



 esponsibilities under international law (paragraphs 3.44-3.55).

 Recommendation 9 The panel recommends that a capacity be established in png  as soon as p ossible  to process the claims of I mas transfer 

 red from australi

  a in ways consistent with the 

 responsibilities of australi



 a and png under i



 nternational law (paragraphs 3.56-3.57).

 Recommendation 10 t he p anel recommends that the 2011 Arrangement between the Government of  Austr 

 alia and the Government of Malaysia on Transfer and Resettlement (Malaysia  agreement)  



 be built on further, rather than being discarded or neglected , and 

 that this be achieved through high-level bilateral engagement focused on strengthening  safeguards and accountability as a positive basis for the australi



 an parliam



 ent’s 

 reconsideration of new legislation that would be necessary (paragraphs 3.58-3.70).

 Family reunion

 Recommendation 11 The panel recommends that the current backlog in the shp  be addr essed as a means  of reducing the demand for family reunion through irregular and dangerous  maritime voyages to austral



 ia, and that this be achieved through removing family 

 reunion concessions for proposers who arrive through irregular maritime voyages - with  these proposers to instead seek reunion through the family stream of the migration program  (parag 

 raphs



  3.13-3.18).

 Recommendation 12 The panel recommends that in the future those who arrive in austral ia through 

 irregular maritime means should not be eligible to sponsor family under the shp  but 

 sho



 uld seek to do so within the family stream of the migratio



 n program (



 paragraph 3.71).

  Report of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers, August 2012 

 Other recommendations

 Recommendation 13 The panel recommends that austra lia promote more actively coordinated strategies  among traditional and emerging resettlement countries  to create more opportunities 

 for resettlement as a part of new regional cooperation arrangements (paragraphs 3.35-3.37).

 Recommendation 14 The panel recommends that the Migration Act 1958 be amended so tha t arrival anywhere  on austra 

 lia by irregular maritime means will not provide individuals with a different lawful  status than those who arrive in an excised offshore place (paragraphs 3.72-3.73).

 Recommendation 15 The panel recommends that a thorough review of refugee status determination ( rsd ) 

 wo 

 uld be timely and useful (paragraphs 3.74-3.76).

 Recommendation 16 The panel recommends that a more effective whole-of-government strategy be developed   to ne 

 gotiate better outcomes on removals and returns  on failed asylum seekers 

 (paragraphs 3.81-3.83).

 Recommendation 17 The panel recommends that disruption strategies  be co ntinued as part of any  comprehensive approach to the challenges posed by people smuggling and that relevant  austra



 lian agencies be resourced with appropriate funding on a continuing basis for this  purpose (paragraphs 3.84-3.86).

 Recommendation 18 The panel recommends that law enforcement  age ncies in austra lia continue their activities  in countering involvement of austra 

 lian residents who are engaged in funding or facilitating 

 people smuggling operations (paragraph 3.87).

 Recommendation 19 The panel notes that the conditions necessary for effective, lawful and safe turnback  of i 

 rregular vessels carrying asylum seekers to austr

  alia are not currently met, but 

 that this situation could change in the future, in particular if appropriate regional and bilateral  arrangements are in place (paragraphs 3.77-3.80).

  report of the exper t panel o n asylu m s eeke rs, augus t 2012 

 Recommendation 20 The panel recommends that austra lia continue to work with regional countries in a  focused way to develop joint operational guidelines for managing s earc 

 h and r escu

  e 

 (sar ) activ



 ities in the region and to address the need for any further regional and national  codification of arrangements across sar  jur



 isdictions (paragraphs 3.88-3.90).

 Recommendation 21 The panel recommends that, in the context of a review of the efficacy of the recommendations  put f 

 orward in this repor  t, the linkage between the onshore and offshore components  of the human



 itarian p rogr



 am be reviewed within two years. 

 Recommendation 22 The panel recommends that the incompleteness of the current evidence base on asylum  iss 

 ues be addressed through a well-managed and adequately funded research program  engaging government and non-government expertise  (paragraphs 3.38-3.40).

