---
title: "Bowen recites from excuse book as boats continue to arrive"
date: "2012-09-03"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211381319
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1891727%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Scott Morrison 

 Bowen recites from excuse book as boats continue to arrive 

 03/09/12  

 The arrival of yet another illegal boat, with 56 people on board, appearing yet again  to have originated from Sri Lanka, shows people continue to make the perilous boat  journey to Australia while Chris Bowen continues to use any excuse to avoid  deterring them, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said  today. 

 “Minister Bowen doesn’t get it. Rather than talk to the Sri Lankan Government about  returning people intercepted on illegal boats outside Australia’s waters, he instead  reaches for his well worn excuse book to explain why he continues to rollover to  people smugglers,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “The Sri Lankan government is already pulling its weight, actively preventing people  leaving for Australia on illegal boats however it is incumbent upon Labor to send a  strong message of deterrence and enter into an agreement with Sri Lanka to return  those intercepted,” he said. 

 “Despite Minister Bowen’s shrill claims, landmark legal decisions by both the US  Supreme Court and the UK House of Lords, found that it was not a breach of the UN  Convention to return people who had not yet entered our waters and were outside  our borders. 

 “Minister Bowen’s straw man arguments are just more tired excuses, the likes of  which he trotted out about Nauru for years. 

 “Minister Bowen also ignores the fact that as part of the response to the Indochinese  refugee crisis, Vietnamese were returned to Vietnam with UNHCR observers put in  place. Similar arrangements could be put in place as a result of discussion with the  Sri Lankan government.  

 “Foreign Minister Bob Carr has said that unless we take a strong stand against  people smuggling then our entire immigration programme could be filled by asylum  seekers.   

 “Bob Carr may have diagnosed the problem of Labor’s border protection failures  over the last four and a half years but Labor will not fill the prescription. What is  needed is the full suite of proven policies to stop the boats including temporary  protection visas and turning boats back where it is safe to do so - whether to  Indonesia or Sri Lanka - and the will to enforce our borders,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

