---
title: "99 illegal boats in 99 days as Labor near new record of border failure"
date: "2012-09-25"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382599
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2733039%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling 99 ILLEGAL BOATS IN 99 DAYS AS LABOR  NEARS NEW RECORD OF BORDER FAILURE September 25, 2012

 The arrival of another illegal boat, with 12 people on board, is the 99th to arrive in the last 99 days, Shadow Minister for Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice,  Customs  and  Border  Protection,  Michael Keenan said today. 

 "Julia Gillard and Chris Bowen’s unprecedented failure on our borders is edging towards another milestone with 99 illegal boats arriving in the last 99 days including 88 in the 87 days of this financial year, with over 5,400 people on board," Mr Morrison said. 

 "Having already busted their budget on boats this financial year, less than a quarter of the way through, Labor’s continued  denial over restoring the full suite of Howard Government policies to stop the boats will result in more cost and chaos on our borders. 

 "This  Labor  Government  has  become  the  biggest  pull  factor  on  illegal  boats,  with  people  smugglers  knowing  that  their heart is just not in it when it comes to border protection. 

 "The Coalition welcomes  the  latest development with another  person  choosing to  go  home,  rather than  stay  on  Nauru. Under  the  Coalition  30%  of  those  who  went  through  the  Pacific  Solution  went  home.  Just  imagine  how  much  more effective Nauru would be if Labor adopted all of the Howard Government’s proven border policies. 

 "Once  again  this  decision  underscores  the  Coalition's  concerns  about  the  integrity  of  claims  being  made  by  the  latest wave of people illegally entering Australia by boat from Sri Lanka, and why the Australian Government should be coming to terms for the safe return of people intercepted outside our waters to Sri Lanka," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr  Keenan  said:  "Over  160  boats  have  arrived  illegally  in  Australia  this  year  placing  immense  pressure  on  the  hard working men and women of our Border Protection Command (BPC). 

 "So far for the month of September there have already been 26 boats arrive illegally, averaging out to more than one boat every day - as well as this they have had to conduct numerous rescues of asylum seeker boats at sea that place our BPC officers’ lives at risk. 

 "When you have boats still arriving at such a rapid rate it places great strain on the limited resources of our BPC- a job  made even harder buy the drastic funding cuts that Labor has continually stripped from Customs budgets since they came to office. 

 "A Coalition Government will make sure that our frontline border protection agencies have the adequate resources and  personnel that they require to do their job," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 99 ILLEGAL BOATS IN 99 DAYS AS LABOR NEARS NEW RECORD OF BORD...

 18/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

