---
title: "Labor rejects Temporary Protection Visas again on eve of monsoon season"
date: "2012-11-29"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211386432
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2078369%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison 

 Labor rejects Temporary Protection Visas again on eve of  monsoon season 

 29/11/12 

 Labor has today voted in the Parliament to reject reinstating Temporary Protection Visas, denying  them the crucial ability to rip the product of Australian permanent residency from the people  smugglers’ shelf at the onset of the dangerous monsoon season, Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today. 

 “Under Labor’s failed border protection policies more people have come to Australia on illegal boats  than have been connected to the National Broadband Network, and more than 2,000 are arriving  every month,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “It’s the most dangerous time of the year for boat journeys to Australia and the Coalition’s bill would  put the crucial policy of Temporary Protection Visas back in the toolkit in the fight against people  smugglers to deter them. 

 “Despite the necessity of this measure the Government opposed the bill before they even saw it. It’s  an inexplicable refusal, a refusal that cannot be based on principle given their adoption of the  Howard Government’s excision legislation this week nor because TPVs didn’t work when the truth is  that when combined with the full suite of Howard Government measures, TPVs stopped the boats. 

 “The only reason Labor today opposed the reintroduction of Temporary Protection Visas in the  House of Representatives on the eve of the dangerous monsoon season, was because of stubborn  pride. 

 “The Coalition’s bill would reverse the decision of the Rudd/Gillard Government to abolish  Temporary Protection Visas that started the diabolical mess on our borders. 

 “The Coalition’s bill would create two classes of temporary visas and is based on two important  principles - that there is no right to permanent residence in the refugee convention and therefore  no right for someone arriving on an illegal boat to a permanent visa, and that the overwhelming  majority of people arriving on illegal boats have not fled problems in our region and instead have  arrived in Australia, after transiting through other countries  as secondary movers, shopping for their  preferred country of asylum. 

 “Under a Coalition Government people who arrive on illegal boats will not be granted a permanent  visa. The best they can hope for is a Temporary Protection Visa. 

 “In line with our commitment to quarantine places in Australia’s refugee and humanitarian program  from people arriving illegally on boats, not one Temporary Protection Visa issued by a Coalition  Government to a person on a boat will deny a permanent protection visa to someone waiting in a  camp or elsewhere in the world, who applied offshore. Temporary protection visas will be issued in  addition to the permanent refugee and humanitarian intake of 13,750 per year.  This should free up 

 around 6,000 additional places per year, within the 13,750 quota, that Labor have been giving to  people who arrived on boats. 

 “Under the Government’s policy, the unfairness will continue. Every permanent visa provided to a  person illegally arriving by boat, will displace another who has applied offshore.  The Government’s  increase in the quota to 20,000 a year or 25,000 extra places over four years will simply be taken up  by people coming on boats. It’s a con. 

 “The Coalition’s TPV bill was circulated to the Government and Independents yesterday and despite  the Government’s outright refusal today, it remains on the notice paper and ready for adoption. It  just requires the Government to get over their stubborn pride,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

