---
title: "Coalition turns its back on Refugee Convention"
date: "2012-09-02"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211381245
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1891655%22
---

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 2 September 2012 

 

 COALITION TURNS ITS BACK ON REFUGEE CONVENTION    

 In an extraordinary announcement, the Liberal Party today effectively called for Australia to  abandon the Refugee Convention by deporting asylum seekers before their claims have  been considered, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, said. 

 

 “Ms Bishop and Mr Morrison’s suggestion today that Australian authorities should send back  asylum seekers to their country of origin, Sri Lanka, before assessing their claims would put  Australia clearly in breach of its international obligations under the Refugee Convention,” Mr  Bowen said.   

 “Tony Abbott needs to come clean with the Australian people and say whether he would  refuse to assess asylum seekers’ claims, return potential refugees to Sri Lanka and ignore  Australia’s obligations under the Refugee Convention.”   

 Mr Bowen said Australia has and will return failed asylum seekers to Sri Lanka, but does not  return asylum seekers to their country of origin without fully assessing any claims for  protection.   

 “Under the Convention, Australia cannot return people found to be genuine refugees to a  country from which they are fleeing persecution.”   

 Mr Bowen also pointed out the Coalition’s hypocrisy and flip-flopping on the issue.   

 “It is the height of hypocrisy for the Coalition to call for a transfer agreement with Sri Lanka  which is not a signatory to the Convention, yet oppose a transfer agreement with Malaysia  on those very grounds,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “Despite their claims that the Refugee Convention is essential to the Malaysia arrangement,  they would disregard it when it suits them politically by turning back boats to non-signatory  Indonesia and sending potential refugees back to their home country.”   

 The minister called on the Coalition to stop its chest beating on the issue of asylum seekers  and work with the Government to find durable solutions.   

 “The Government’s focus is on implementing the recommendations of the Expert Panel’s  report, as it should be,” Mr Bowen said.    

 “As the Expert Panel made clear, a suite of measures is needed to prevent people from  risking their lives on dangerous boat journeys to Australia.”   

 The Government has accepted all 22 of the Expert Panel’s recommendations in principle and  is working through the details of the report and its implementation.   

 Media Contact: Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

