---
title: "More boats and more boats and more blow outs arriving for taxpayers"
date: "2012-06-21"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375356
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736703%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling MORE BOATS AND MORE BLOW OUTS  ARRIVING FOR TAXPAYERS June 21, 2012

 The arrival of the third illegal boat in 24 hours, with 117 people on board, means more than 2,000 people on 29 illegal boats have arrived in the last six weeks since the budget, blowing another hole in Labor’s shaky budget, Shadow Minister  for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “When Labor delivered its mythical surplus budget it estimated that 450 people would arrive on illegal boats each month. People have been arriving on illegal boats at more than three times this rate since, with illegal boats turning up more than every other day, blowing more holes in Labor’s failed budget and meaning more pain for taxpayers,” Mr Morrison said.

 “This is a government whose budget has blown out because our borders have blown out under their failed policies. This government’s budget is crumbling before their eyes just six weeks after it was handed down,” he said.

 “Labor have given up on border protection and given in to the Greens and people smugglers, so the least they can do is be up front with the Australian people about how much their failures are going to cost them in further budget blowouts. 

 “The farce over Captain Emad, followed by the confirmation that we now have a ‘Captain Ewaz’ at Inverbrackie Detention  Centre  and  combined  with  an  accelerated  rate  of  arrivals,  shows  this  government  should  admit  they  got  it  wrong  when they abolished the proven policies of the Howard Government and that they are a pull factor in their own right for illegal boats.

 “I have no confidence Labor will do anything to end this farce, other than offer more excuses, blame others for their own failings and do nothing.

 “Any  policy  this  government  wants  to  produce  will  fail  because  it  will  be  outweighed  by  the  enormous  pull  factor  of  the government itself,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest boat has seen 238 people arrive illegally in Australia over the last 24 hours - reinforcing that  June is set to be the biggest boat arrival month for both boats and people under this Labor Government.

 “The  logistical  challenges  associated  with  dealing  with  this  huge  influx  of  people  will  see  Border  Protection  Command pushed to breaking point.

 “Our patrol boats are virtually cracking up under the strain of this operation tempo as revealed in estimates and there are enormous question marks over the ability of BPC to keep a suitable number of them at sea.

 “Boats  are  being  manned  by  reservists  as  our  forces  struggle  to  cope  with  the  demands  placed  on  them  because  of Labor’s failures.

 “More of the same brings great dangers for our forces and for the illegal arrivals.

 “If  the  boats  keep  arriving  at  this  rate  it  will  not  be  possible  for  BPC  to  continue  to  do  their  job  with  the  diminishing resources at their disposal.

 Page 1 of 2 MORE BOATS AND MORE BLOW OUTS ARRIVING FOR TAXPAYERS > Mich...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

 “Labor created this problem and they cannot just accept what is currently going on now as the status quo,” Mr Keenan  said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 2 of 2 MORE BOATS AND MORE BLOW OUTS ARRIVING FOR TAXPAYERS > Mich...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

