---
title: "Morrison exposes Coalition hypocrisy on Refugee Convention"
date: "2012-07-16"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211428516
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1784362%22
---

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 16 July 2012 

 

 MORRISON EXPOSES COALITION HYPOCRISY ON  REFUGEE CONVENTION   

 The Opposition’s flip-flop on the Refugee Convention yet again exposes Tony Abbott’s  relentless negativity on asylum seeker issues, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Chris Bowen MP, said today.   

 Opposition spokesman Scott Morrison said in The Australian today that the Refugee  Convention “no longer reflects the practical reality” - clearly questioning the validity of the  international agreement that is the pillar of the Coalition’s offshore processing legislation.   

 “This is astounding hypocrisy from Scott Morrison and Tony Abbott,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “One the one hand the Opposition vote down legislation because they only want offshore  processing in Refugee Convention signatory countries, while on the other Mr Morrison  questions the practicality and relevance of that same agreement.   

 “And all this comes while more boats arrive and people are risking their lives and dying at  sea.   

 “Unfortunately this is the way Tony Abbott’s Opposition works - they are saying 'no'  because that's what they always do, and certainly not because of the Refugee Convention.  The real reason for opposing the Malaysia Arrangement is because they know it will work.”   

 Mr Bowen said the Opposition’s policies were hypocritical and contradictory.   

 “Australians have had quite enough of the Coalition’s cheap politics,” he said.   

 “Tony Abbott needs to drop his destructive negativity, work with the expert panel, the  Government and the Parliament to come up with a genuine solution that will stop people  making these dangerous journeys to Australia.”   

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769 

