---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Parliament House, Canberra: 30 October 2012: asylum seekers; Nauru; superbugs; alcohol tax reform"
date: "2012-10-30"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Nauru"
  - "superbugs"
  - "alcohol tax reform"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384354
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2014304%22
---

 1 

 

 

 

 

 Christine Milne   Australian Greens Leader   

 And    

 Richard Di Natale  Greens health spokesperson    

 

 Tuesday 30 October 2012   

 Press conference    

 Transcript   

 Subjects: Asylum seekers, Nauru, superbugs, alcohol tax reform. 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: It’s time the Government abandoned its political surplus. People have been  talking about this around kitchen tables right around the nation and the Newspoll is just the most  recent to confirm that the community is saying it’s time to prioritise what we need for nation-building in this country. What we need to do in the face of an economy weakening is to actually  recognise it’s a very, very bad strategy to drive more people into poverty. The decision by the  Government to cut single-parent support was bad enough but now its failure to recognise that so  many people are in casual work, there is a big churn between people being put out of casual work  and going on to Newstart and Newstart being way too low and confining people to poverty. In this  country we ought to be looking at what we can do to reduce the gap between the rich and the poor  not actually entrench it. For all Wayne Swan’s talk about taking on the big miners, the billionaires, it  has come to nothing in terms of actually redistributing income. What has happened though is it’s on  the back of and at the expense of our poorest and most vulnerable people. Today I’ve met with the  Catholic Social Justice providers, their concerns are about what’s happening to people in the  community through homelessness, what’s happening as a result of the mental health issues in rural  and regional Australia, poverty is actually stalking the country and we need to actually say let’s  abandon this political surplus let’s return to the surplus over the economic cycle but let’s actually  invest in what we need to do for a fair and decent country and also get ourselves on to the front foot  in terms of education and training. Now is not the time to be cutting research and development  budgets, nor is it the time to be delaying and delaying the investment in education that we need  because it is that investment in education which will see this country better positioned in the Asian  century.  

 2 

 

 Speaking of our position in the Asian century Prime Minister Gillard has done what even John  Howard couldn’t do and that is Prime Minister Gillard has wiped Australia off the map when it comes  to our global obligations under the Refugee Convention. John Howard tried this but even he couldn’t  get away with it. His own backbench revolted and people around Australia back in 2002 just stood  up to him and said that is just way too far you can’t take away Australia, pretend it doesn’t exist as  far as the UN Refugee Convention is concerned and our obligations under international law. This is  even more critical now not just because of the appalling treatment of people on Nauru and Manus  Island but Australia has just been elected to the UN Security Council, we’re going to be under  scrutiny as we have never been in terms of our human rights record and now is not the time for the  Gillard Government to humiliate Australians, to wipe us of the global map when it comes to issues of  responsibility under international law and responsibility for refugees. Having said that the  Government should also now actually do as we ask them to do when this went through the  Parliament and that is make transparent the contracts associated with Transfield and the running of  the detention centres outside Australia. How is it that the Australian Government is allowing people  on Nauru to be paid $4 an hour when an equivalent job in Australia exactly for the Australian  government will be paid $40 an hour? What’s going on here, who is making the profit? Is it the  Federal Government making the cost savings or are we allowing a global, a multinational company  to make even greater profits at the expense of the most vulnerable people in the world? Critical  issue. Everyone thought John Howard was the most extreme you could possibly get in cruelty and in  embarrassing Australia in global fora. Well Julia Gillard has gone further. At least John Howard's  backbench stood up and said no. The Labor Party it seems has rolled over.  

 Speaking of nation-building, we need to invest not only in education, in research and training, in a  more equitable level of opportunity for Australians, but we also need to invest heavily in health and  Richard is going to make some comments in relation to that. 

 RICHARD DI NATALE: I’ll be brief.  Christine’s absolutely right. The Government has got to put aside  the short-term politics of surplus, of boat people, and it’s got to start looking to our long-term  future. And one area where there has been huge concern amongst the medical community has been  the issue of superbugs and antibiotic resistance. This is an issue that’s been of concern for me for  some time. Prior to taking this job I was a medical practitioner myself and it’s been very clear for  many, many decades that the problem of antibiotic resistance and superbugs has been growing  apace, and we recognised this 10 years ago. 10 years ago we set up an expert committee. The expert  committee looked at the issue, set up a terrific strategy for how to deal with it and it was completely  ignored. Completely ignored. So I’m going to be calling for a Senate enquiry into the issue of  superbugs and antibiotic resistance so that we don’t make the same mistakes again. We’ve got to  ensure that we take a long-term view, put aside this short-term politics that’s (inaudible)… alcohol  research and education where they make it very clear that the Henry tax review was absolutely  right, we do need to reform the way we tax and price alcohol, that it’s a no-brainer both in terms of  the savings in healthcare, the savings to the community at large in terms of the prevention of harm  to others. It makes perfect sense to have a much more rational approach to the way we price  alcohol. At the moment the taxation system -  it’s a dog's breakfast. Henry recognised that and that’s  why he proposed that we change the way we price alcohol. It’s not just good for public health, it’s  also good for the industry. At the moment we have these perverse incentives that drive the  production of really cheap wine and this damages our international reputation. What we should be  doing is supporting the production of quality products, supporting those small businesses, the small 

 3 

 

 wineries that produce really quality Australian wines, that have given us this international reputation  overseas but it’s been slowly tarnished because of this irrational taxation system, so we want to see  the work done by the preventative health agency which will be calling for pricing reforms and we  look forward with interest to seeing this debate progressed by the Government. 

 JOURNALIST: Senator Milne, just in regards to the migration zone, Labor argues that it’s just  following the recommendations from the Houston review and to discourage asylum seekers from  travelling to Australia, a longer distance than say Christmas Island, do they have a point? 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Deterrence doesn’t work, it should be clear to the Gillard Government now and to  the whole Australian community that all this talk about Draconian measures, punitive measures  deterring people is just that, it’s talk, it’s political spin, it is not what actually happens. We’ve had  more people arriving in Australia seeking asylum since the introduction of these draconian measures  than before. So it makes no sense. What we need to be doing is, as the Greens have been saying,  and supported by the United Nations and international law and that is let’s invest in Indonesia in  assisting the UNHCR to process people and assess them as refugees more quickly, let’s provide a safe  pathway, let’s increase the humanitarian intake and let’s actually address what needs to happen to  make people's lives safer. All that we’re seeing here is a response to the politics. This is about the  Government trying to outdo the Coalition in how punitive you can be. How cruel is it to be able to  send an unaccompanied child to an offshore detention centre indefinitely. How cruel is that? We’ve  already seen the early footage of the consequences of the big rain events as they’ve been occurring  on Nauru and the unhappiness and the mental health issues that are going to emerge from this  treatment of people who ultimately overwhelmingly are found to be refugees in end up coming to  Australia in the longer term. So let’s have some rational discussion, let’s think about what sort of  people we are and surely Australians think of themselves as pretty decent, and yet I don’t think  many people could be very proud of the way we are treating people who are seeking to make a new  life in our country. 

 JOURNALIST: If you describe it as more extreme than John Howard what Julia Gillard is now  proposing to do, would it ever prompt you to rethink your agreement with the Government?  

 CHRISTINE MILNE: The problem we have is that Julia Gillard is going even further than John Howard  and Tony Abbott is happy to go with her. It seems like Julia Gillard and Tony Abbott do not have any  barrier as far as they go to the right. It seems that Genghis Khan is a pretty moderate figure when it  comes to how far Julia Gillard and Tony Abbott will go. So they’re interchangeable on their policy on  asylum seekers and that’s where the Greens have stood up very strongly for the right thing, for  helping the most vulnerable people and for international law and our obligations under the human  rights convention and I think increasingly globally people are going to start asking some very serious  questions about the level of disrepute that both Julia Gillard and Tony Abbott are putting Australia in  in a global context. 

 JOURNALIST: Would this cause you to rethink your alliance with Labor? 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: When you talk about agreements to form government, they are there in order to  deliver on the outcomes. We’ve done that in most cases but are you saying that the Greens ought to  exchange the extreme position of Julia Gillard for the even more extreme position of Tony Abbott?  It’s not as if there is a choice between them, the choice in Australia at the moment is between 

 4 

 

 Abbott and Gillard and no barrier to how far they’ll go on the right, and the Greens have an  alternative view. 

 

