---
title: "Refugee program increased to 20,000 places"
date: "2012-08-23"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211380690
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1867223%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION    

 REFUGEE PROGRAM INCREASED TO 20,000 PLACES   

 Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Chris  Bowen today announced that the Government will increase Australia’s humanitarian  program to 20,000 places in 2012-13, in line with the recommendation of the Expert  Panel on Asylum Seekers.   

 The Government will also immediately allocate $10 million for regional capacity  building projects with a special emphasis on United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees (UNHCR).   

 As outlined in the recommendations of the panel chaired by former Chief of the  Defence Force, Angus Houston, we will be increasing our annual refugee intake from  13,750 to 20,000 places in this financial year.   

 This is a more than a 40 per cent increase to our humanitarian intake and the  biggest boost to Australia’s refugee intake in 30 years.    

 This increase is targeted to those in most need: those vulnerable people offshore,  not those getting on boats.   

 People who arrive by boat will get no advantage. It’s not worth the risk to life and it’s  not worth the money, because there is absolutely no benefit to getting on that people  smuggler’s boat.   

 As an immediate measure, the Government will resettle an additional 400 refugees  from Indonesia to underscore our commitment to offering safe alternatives to  dangerous boat journeys.     

 We will consult with the UNHCR and regional partners to determine the allocation of  the remaining resettlement places, and we expect to make further announcements  on additional resettlement options from within our immediate region over the coming  months.   

 This increase shows that people can pursue regular options and be safely referred to  resettlement countries such as Australia as part of an orderly humanitarian program.  Taking a dangerous boat journey is no advantage.   

 The $10 million boost to regional capacity building will also assist the UNHCR and  non-government organisations in the region, particularly operations in Malaysia and  Indonesia - a further commitment from this Government to safer and more orderly  migration pathways.   

 The humanitarian program and capacity building increases follow the recent passage  of legislation in the Australian Parliament to allow for regional processing of asylum  seekers’ applications.   

 Australia, along with the United States and Canada, has ranked consistently among  the world’s top three resettlement countries.  Australia is the UNHCR’s largest  resettlement country on a per capita basis.   

 We remain strongly committed to our humanitarian program as an engaged and  leading international partner in sharing refugee protection responsibilities, assisting  those most in humanitarian need.   

 

 CANBERRA  23 AUGUST 2012   

 PRESS OFFICE: (02) 6277 7744  MINISTER BOWEN’S OFFICE: (02) 6277 7860   

