---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney Town Hall: 5 June 2012: Homelessness Bill; people smuggling"
date: "2012-06-05"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOMELESSNESS"
subjects:
  - "Homelessness Bill"
  - "people smuggling"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374449
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1854250%22
---

 

 

 

 Homelessness Bill, People Smuggling - Doorstop, Sydney Town Hall  

 5 June 2012  Location:   Sydney Town Hall 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: It's really good to be here today at this very important event -  Homeless Connect. This is a great example of the corporate sector engaging in what is a very  challenging issue for Australia. 

 We have 100,000 Australians homeless. And the Government has dedicated itself to ensure  that we halve the rate of homelessness by 2020. That is a commitment we've made, and  we’ve dedicated $5 billion to provide to States and Territory governments to ensure that we  fulfil this very important goal. 

 But today's event really is fantastic. It's a one-stop shop, if you like, for those people that are  homeless or at risk of being homeless. They can come here. They can get professional  advice. They can get clothes. They get fed today, and they're provided other types of  services. 

 And I want to thank the agencies, the not-for-profit organisations and, most particularly, the  volunteers who've taken time - their own time - to provide help for their fellow Australians. I  think that's a wonderful thing. 

 And, finally, I'd like to say today that we are releasing the draft legislation on homelessness.  We gave a commitment that we would legislate to ensure that we put a spotlight on this  challenging issue, this blight for such a wealthy nation. We'll be releasing the draft  legislation for consultation for two months, and I hope then we'll be enacting that, we'll be  introducing it into the House in the Spring sessions. 

 JOURNALIST: What do you hope to gain by changing the definition of homelessness? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, look, I think, firstly, it's important that we have legislation  because it allows for debate in the Parliament. It allows for the Parliament - the House of  Representatives and the Senate - to discuss what is, I think, a challenging issue. 

 And I do believe the chance of enacting legislation properly recognising all of those people  that are homeless in this country is important. 

 Of course, we have, currently, the Supported Accommodation Assistance Act, but this will  supersede that. This is a contemporary piece of legislation and it broadens the definition of  homelessness, recognising all the different facets there are about this social challenge. 

 JOURNALIST: What will the definition [inaudible]? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: The definition will be broadened to include, under the legislation, if  accepted - it is out for consultation - but it will include caravan parks and it will include  boarding houses. There's no specific definition of those two matters in the Supported  Accommodation Assistance Act, but this is out for consultation. We expect there to be some  contributions by the not-for-profit sector and from the corporate sector and others about  this legislation. 

 Again, it's an important piece of legislation. It's a fulfilment of a goal that we set ourselves,  and I'm looking forward to engaging with the community about this important issue. 

 JOURNALIST: How many extra new people are expected to be covered by that new  definition? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: How many? 

 JOURNALIST: Extra new people, extra new homeless people. 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, insofar as the way in which the calculation of the population of  homelessness is concerned, that has historically been determined by the ABS. We're waiting  on the ABS data on the last Census so we can look at how we have travelled since our  commitments to reduce homelessness in this country. So we're still awaiting that data. 

 But I think it's very important for the legislation to have a definition so people fully  understand the nature and the complexity of this social issue. There are people who are not  even aware of their own state of homelessness. They might think, for example, that they  might couch surf from home to home to home and think that's not homelessness. 

 But if they have not a place that they can say they belong without the invitation of another;  if they're constantly moving from one place to the next, not being able to access education,  not being able to access and sustain employment, then there is a real challenge. And  without fixing homelessness we cannot attend to their other issues, like getting an  education, being fully employed. These other issues need to work hand in hand with dealing  with homelessness. 

 JOURNALIST: Is $5 billion enough? One homeless person I spoke to said I mean we send  money into space but we're not looking after the people here on Earth. 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I'm not sure Australia's sending anyone into space but certainly  we've increased the resources for this area. We work very closely with State and Territory  governments. I think there are better ways of dealing with this challenge and I think we've  found some innovative ways. 

 And only today we're seeing the corporate sector being involved; people volunteering their  time; people taking time off work to work and help their fellow Australians. So I think it's not  just about Government expenditure, it's about a philanthropic approach as well, getting  resources from other areas of society. This is a challenge for all Australians, not just for  State, Territory and Federal Governments. 

 JOURNALIST: When it comes to homelessness though, it is a matter of Government  expenditure. We're talking about the need for thousands more homes, not just in Sydney,  but tens of thousands more homes around Australia. And every charity group in there has  spoken of the need for that. What can the Federal Government do, realistically? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, as I say, we've actually dedicated more resources than ever  before to deal with this issue. We've actually invested more than $5 billion in social housing.  We've actually constructed more dwellings as a Federal Government than any previous  Federal Government. And we're spending money dedicated to providing services for  homeless people. And we're working very close with States and Territories. 

 This is a partnership, if you like, amongst governments and, indeed, other organisations to  ensure that we reduce the rate of homelessness by half by 2020. That's our commitment.  We have seen some very good positive signs. We do await the ABS data to see how we've  travelled, because it's that indicator that provides us the answers to how well we've gone to  date. 

 But I know, from getting around the country, talking to people, that there's certainly been  some innovative approaches which have meant people who were once homeless are now  productive members of society again, and that's a wonderful thing. 

 JOURNALIST: What other parts of the legislation, other than changing the definition of  homelessness, are you bringing in, and the funding? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, the actual draft itself goes to a number of areas to deal with  homelessness. We are looking at ensuring that there are sufficient strategies in place to deal  with homelessness. This has not been prescribed before in legislation. This does allow  community debate and parliamentary debate on these issues. 

 I think what we have failed to do in the past is fully debate the issues, or the strategies we  require, to resolve this difficult issue. What we haven’t done before is set down the best  approaches, the integrated approaches required to deal with homeless Australians. 

 This legislation, in draft form, will allow for community consultation for two months, and  then we'll have a parliamentary debate. I think this brings the issue under the spotlight, if  you like - focused on that issue. And I think that's a good thing because if we do not do this,  then it's quite easy for it to be forgotten. Now, we want to put this at the centre of public  debate, and I think we can do that using the vehicle of this legislation. 

 JOURNALIST: So what concrete things are you doing though? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, the concrete things that we're doing, even without the  legislation, is engaging in a National Quality Framework with State and Territory 

 governments about a national approach to homelessness, dedicating more resources than  ever before for homelessness services, providing more dwellings for people who are  homeless.  

 So they're the concrete things. The resources on the ground, provided to not-for-profit  providers and other agencies to provide support for people who are at risk of being  homeless, or, indeed, are homeless. 

 They're the things we're doing. But I think the legislation also allows a greater public debate  about this issue we're putting at the centre, if you like, of public discourse so that we can  focus on this issue so all Australians can be aware that this is a challenge that we're serious  about and it's a challenge that they can assist their governments in resolving. And I think  that's the thing.  

 And the one thing I got from today was you see today, people volunteering their time. It's  not just government agencies. It's not just not-for-profit organisations. There are volunteers  here helping their fellow Australians, a great example about how you fix a societal problem. 

 JOURNALIST: Minister, how... 

 JOURNALIST: But doesn't it show a huge failing, even in just something as simple as our  health system, that you would have to have a special day like this where people can come in  and people I’ve spoken to, people coming in with health ailments that they need to get  addressed? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I think that there are issues. You know, Australia has to confront  these challenges. We are a wealthy nation. We're very well placed, despite all of the global  challenges there are, we have low unemployment, we have low inflation. We have the  lowest official cash rate than at any time under the Howard Government. We have a strong  economy.  

 But, even with all of those good things, we have some challenges that have been around for  decades. And this government has committed itself to resolving or solving many of those  issues. And we do that in partnership with State and Territory Governments and other  sectors of our country.  

 That's what we need to do, work in partnership, make sure that this issue is not forgotten,  not pushed under the carpet like I think it once was, but focused on. And if we do that, if we  do that as a country, and if we do that as governments in partnership with other parts of  our society, I think you will see some wonderful results. 

 JOURNALIST: How responsible do you feel for the processing of six people smugglers as  asylum seekers during your time as Minister for Home Affairs? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I'm sorry, I didn't get the question. 

 JOURNALIST: How responsible do you feel you are for the processing of six people smugglers  as asylum seekers in 2010, as your time as Home Affairs Minister? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, the first thing is, these are allegations that might be made  about people and until they're determined by a court of law I think it would be hypothetical  to answer that particular question.  

 I might say this though. I was aware, as Minister for Justice, that the person that was facing  the most charges, over 80 charges for people smuggling, was determined to be a refugee  under the Howard Government. So it's easy for people to start picking out isolated  instances. But the person who has actually been charged and, indeed, has been charged for  the organising of the vessel that sank off the coast of Christmas Island was made a refugee  under the Howard years.  

 What we call upon the Opposition to do is to embrace the Malaysian solution. It is the one  arrangement that's been advised by our agencies as being the most effective way to break  the people smuggling model.  

 But the problem is we have, in the leader of the Opposition, the most negative Opposition  leader in our history, a person who wants to see more vessels come to this country. He's  happy when more vessels arrive and he does that because he does it for his own personal  political motives rather than the interests of this nation. 

 So, you know, it's easy to actually argue one thing or another. Under the Howard  Government they determined a person to be a refugee. That person is now currently facing  85 charges for people smuggling and he is facing our courts in due course. 

 JOURNALIST: But how do you justify a people smuggler getting public housing and his family  in Canberra and there's people here who can't even get housing? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, firstly, these matters are yet to be determined by a court and I  think it would be wrong for people to determine an allegation until those matters have been  resolved by a court of law. 

 But can I say this, that of course we will continue to do what we can to bring people to  justice, for any particular federal crime. We have toughened up the penalties for people  smuggling.  

 We introduced into the parliament and, indeed, enacted the law that has meant that people  who provide support for people smugglers domestically can actually face up to 10 years jail.  That was done under this Government and we've done that to ensure that we make it very  clear to people that live in Australia that if they engage in this criminal activity and if they  are prosecuted for the charges against them they will go to jail. 

 JOURNALIST: Will you be doing an investigation in the Housing Department of how that  came about? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, in terms of ACT Government I don't actually engage in - I don't  have a housing department. The Departments of Housing are run by State and Territory  governments. But again, can I say this, of course, if people are committing offences, if that is  the case and if that's proven by a court of law, then of course they will face justice as they 

 should. But that has to be determined, not by a politician, not by the media, but by a court  of law. 

 ENDS 

