---
title: "Two boats a day under Labor's half hearted policies"
date: "2012-11-07"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384838
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731256%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling TWO BOATS A DAY UNDER LABOR'S HALF  HEARTED POLICIES November 07, 2012

 Two boats are arriving every day under Labor's half hearted border protection policies, as their border failures reach new 

 heights, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and 

 Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Two boats are arriving every day and more than 29,000 people have come illegally by boat since Labor came to office in 

 2007," Mr Morrison said.

 “14 boats and over 700 people have arrived in the first week of November, almost double the number that have been sent 

 to Nauru.

 “Labor's failure to introduce the full suite of Howard Government measures and their failure of resolve have ensured that 

 people smugglers continue to win big under Julia Gillard.

 “Every new day under this failed government brings more boats, more profits for people smugglers and more cost and 

 chaos for taxpayers," Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “One of the primary roles of the Commonwealth is to protect Australia’s borders - with over 29,000 

 people arriving illegally on almost 500 boats, Labor has completely and utterly failed this duty.

 “Despite only being 4 months into this financial year there have already been over 9,000 people arriving on our shores 

 illegally.

 “In the last six years of the Howard Government there were a total of 16 illegal boat arrivals - in the last week under the 

 Gillard Government there have been 14 boat arrivals.

 “Labor cannot hide from these figures - they prove the complete demise of Australia’s border protection regime under this 

 incompetent Government,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 TWO BOATS A DAY UNDER LABOR'S HALF HEARTED POLICIES > Michael ...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

