---
title: "Three boats in 24 hours as Labor continues their attack on our navy"
date: "2012-07-16"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211428514
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736685%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling THREE BOATS IN 24 HOURS AS LABOR  CONTINUES THEIR ATTACK ON OUR NAVY July 16, 2012

 The  arrival  of  three  boats  in  the  last  24  hours,  with  a  total  of  more  than  100  people  on  board,  comes  as  the  Labor Government  continues  to  malign  our  Navy  as  being  incapable  of  doing  anything  but  ferrying  illegal  boat  arrivals  to Christmas  Island,  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "Not content with turning our Navy into a water taxi service, Labor is now using the Navy as an excuse for their lack of resolve by failing to restore the proven policies of the Howard Government that stopped the boats," Mr Morrison said. 

 "Our  Navy  has  the  capacity,  skills  and  professionalism  to  do  the  job.  Labor  should  stop  insulting  the  capacity  and professionalism of our Navy and take responsibilities for their own failure. 

 "Some 14,000 Australians serve in our Navy, the Armidale class vessels we have are much better than their equivalent when boats were turned around under the Howard Government. All that is missing is the will from this government to turn boats around where it is safe to do so. 

 "Boats have been turned around in the past, they are being turned around off Sri Lanka but all the government can do is malign the Navy and refuse to reintroduce a policy that Julia Gillard herself has supported," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "Three boats in 24 hours, carrying 127 people, is a sure sign that that the people smugglers will continue to exploit the weak policies of this directionless Government. 

 "The Sri Lankan Government is turning the boats back around and making hundreds of arrests in their efforts to stop the people smuggling trade - something that this Government could learn from. 

 "The  Labor  Party  has  lost  all  resolve  to  put  an  end  to  the  crisis  at  our  borders  with  their  continual  failure  to  stop  the booming people smuggling trade. 

 "This  constant  wave  of  boat  arrivals  is  a  taxing  strain  on  the  hard  working  men  and  women  of  our  Border  Protection Command, who have no time to recuperate from this exhausting and constant workload. 

 "Australia’s Border Protection Command has not been adequately resourced, by this Labor Government, to cope with this  unsustainable rate of boat arrivals," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 THREE BOATS IN 24 HOURS AS LABOR CONTINUES THEIR ATTACK ON O...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

