---
title: "Bowen forced to admit violence by boat arrivals on Nauru"
date: "2012-10-02"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382913
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1954138%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison 

 Bowen forced to admit violence by boat arrivals on Nauru 

 02/10/12 

 Minister Bowen has been caught out keeping the details of an outbreak of violence by people being  processed on Nauru on the weekend under wraps, with his Department only confirming the incident  after the Coalition alerted journalists last night, said today. 

 “Having now been forced to admit the incident took place, the Minister must now give a full  explanation of the violence that took place on Nauru and confirm whether those who engaged in the  violence were armed with knives or other items used as weapons,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “If asylum seekers were in possession of knives, how did they get them? The reference by the  Department of Immigration to ‘utensils’ is vague and evasive. It's unlikely that asylum seekers ran  amok on Nauru wielding salad spoons. 

 “The Coalition recently received unconfirmed reports of failure to follow procedures for reconciling  the inventory of knives at the Nauru facility. I would welcome the Minister’s unqualified rejection of  these reports and his advice that formal procedures are in place regarding the management of  utensils that could be used as weapons at the facility, that all relevant contractors are familiar with  these procedures and that these procedures have been vigorously adhered to, without exception,  since the facility received their first residents.   

 “Minister Bowen must also answer what action he is taking to ensure that asylum seekers do not  have access to other potential weapons. The same Minister who presided over the riots and chaos in  Christmas Island and Villawood detention centres and then commissioned a report designed to avoid  blaming the government for their failures can’t be trusted not to sweep this under the carpet. 

 “I note that Minister Bowen has not issued any threats about denying visas to those involved in the  violence, as he did after the Christmas Island and Villawood riots. Such threats from this Minister  would be completely hollow, as the rioters from Christmas Island and Villawood know only too well. 

 “Minister Bowen must also explain why he only revealed the violence after the Opposition contacted  the media about it. These incidents occurred several days ago and yet the Minister had said nothing. 

 “The violence on Nauru is a further example of Labor’s hapless implementation of offshore  processing on Nauru, consistent with their tradition of failure on our borders. 

 “Labor’s ongoing failure is seeing an asylum lottery over those sent to Nauru that is overwhelmingly  slanted in the people smugglers’ favour with every new boat that arrives. The government have  failed to meet their own milestone on having 500 people on Nauru by the end of last month and  now violence has occurred on Nauru. 

 “This is just more of the same from a government that Australians don’t trust when it comes to  protecting our borders,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

