---
title: "Tasmania celebrates Refugee Week 2012"
date: "2012-06-16"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375010
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2134802%22
---

 

 

 Tasmania celebrates Refugee Week 2012  June 16, 2012  

 People inTasmaniawill celebrate the valuable contribution of refugees to the community  during Refugee Week 2012, Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Chris Bowen, and  Minister for Multicultural Affairs Senator Kate Lundy, said today. 

 Refugee Week is being celebrated from 17-23 June, with World Refugee Day on Wednesday,  20 June. As part of the celebrations, there will be more than 100 events across the nation in  recognition of the plight of refugees and the new lives they have established in Australia. 

 “Australia welcomes people from many lands and has a generous humanitarian tradition,” Mr  Bowen said. 

 “Australians can be rightly proud of the fact that Australia resettles more refugees per capita  than any other nation and provides much needed protection to people who have suffered  persecution.” 

 Senator Lundy said Australia’s settlement support services are among the best in the world,  helping refugees to rebuild their lives here. 

 “Resettlement in Australia provides a chance for refugees to enjoy all the freedom and  opportunities this nation has to offer,” Senator Lundy said. 

 “Refugees in Australia have overcome hardship to live, study and work here, and Refugee  Week is a time to reflect on the contribution they have made to our community, economy and  culture.” 

 At 1pm on 23 June, thousands of people across Australia, including Melbourne, will walk in  unity to celebrate different paths people have taken to become Australian, as part of the Walk  Together initiative. Each walk will finish with a festival celebrating cultural diversity. 

 On 21 June in Hobart, the Multicultural Council of Tasmania will hold a youth consultation  for 16 to 24-year-olds from Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Bhutan, Burma and Nepal at the Migrant  Resource Centre. 

 On 22 June, the Migrant Resource Centre Hobart will host an art exhibition around the theme  ‘Identity, Translation and Transformation’ at the Moonah Arts Centre. 

 From 17 June, the Royal Hobart Hospital will feature a poster display to raise awareness of  the plight of refugees and will also educate visitors about the services it provides to refugees. 

 On 26 June at Glenorchy Civic Centre, the Young Women’s Multicultural Leadership  Program will host an event to connect people of all ages and share stories. Funded through  the Australian Government’s Diversity and Social Cohesion Program, ‘Looking Back  Looking Forward ‘, aims to promote better understanding between generations from diverse  cultures. 

 Australia’s contribution to international protection and humanitarian efforts continues this  year, with 13,750 places offered under the humanitarian program in 2012-13. 

 Australia has resettled around 775,000 refugees and other people in humanitarian need since  the end of World War II. 

 

