---
title: "40 boats as Abbott votes against offshore processing"
date: "2012-06-01"
creators:
  - "Clare, Jason"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374217
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1682059%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 JASON CLARE MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE  MINISTER FOR DEFENCE MATERIEL 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 1 June 2012 

 

 40 BOATS AS ABBOTT VOTES AGAINST OFFSHORE  PROCESSING   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Home  Affairs, Jason Clare MP, said the latest boat arrival today was a direct consequence of Tony  Abbott and the Coalition’s destructive negativity.   

 The boat is the 40th to arrive since Tony Abbott said ‘no’ to working with the Government to  implement offshore processing and instead chose to play petty politics on the issue of boat  arrivals.    

 “Tony Abbott’s destructive negativity knows no bounds. He criticises the Government for  boat arrivals, and yet yesterday he voted ‘no’ in the House of Representatives to block  offshore processing legislation,” Mr Bowen said.    

 “But despite Mr Abbott’s ‘no’ vote, the offshore processing legislation did pass through to  the next stage of consideration. He needs to stop running away from doing anything  constructive on boat arrivals and reverse his vote when the bill returns to Parliament.”   

 Mr Clare said it was time for Mr Abbott to act in the national interest and stop saying ‘no’ to  Nauru and Malaysia.   

 “Working together we can help stop people dying at sea. We can pass legislation to  introduce offshore processing,” Mr Clare said.   

 “If Mr Abbott is serious about stopping the boats he must stop saying no and pass our  legislation to allow asylum seekers to be processed offshore.”   

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769 (Bowen)  Korena Flanagan 0418 251 316 (Clare)     

