---
title: "Greens urge Bowen to stop moving Vietnamese children around like cargo and release them"
date: "2012-04-24"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211371780
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1587497%22
---

 Tuesday, 24 April 2012 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Greens urge Bowen to stop moving Vietnamese children around like cargo and release them into  community 

 The Australian Greens have today urged the Immigration Minister to instruct his department to stop  transferring 26 Vietnamese children around detention centres like cargo and instead release them  into the community. 

 

 "These children, some as young as seven, have been moved between three detention centres since  they arrived in Australia in March last year, Greens' immigration spokesperson, Sen. Sarah Hanson-Young, said. 

 

 "Just at the point they develop ties with ordinary Australians who visit detention centres in their  own time to offer support, the children are moved on again as if they were mere objects. We know  of advocates in Adelaide who have offered to sponsor and house these children.  

 

 "The Immigration Minister must relinquish his responsibilities as the legal guardian of these children.  A desperate plea in a letter today from a 10-year-old child shows he is not acting in their best  interest.  

 

 "No child belongs in detention and keeping around 50 of them locked up across Australia is  hindering their development and causing them mental harm, as the Australian Medical Association  and other experts have repeatedly said. 

 

 "I've raised the welfare of the Vietnamese children with the Immigration Minister before and have  today asked if his department can brief me about them next month. 

 

 "The Greens repeat their call for the Immigration Minister to release every child as a priority and let  them live in the community while their claims for protection are assessed. 

 

 "As parliament's recent immigration detention inquiry report recommended, the government must  also replace the Immigration Minister as the legal guardian of unaccompanied children. The minister  must no longer have the conflict of interest by being their legal guardian as well as their jailer. 

 

 "The Gillard government must cease its shameful practice of locking up children and their  indefinitely, such as a Sri Lankan family in Sydney, because we are causing preventable damage to  another generation of asylum seekers. 

 

 "Enough excuses, Minister Bowen. Every child must be moved out of detention today." 

 

 MEDIA CONTACT: PARIS LORD 0427 604 760  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Paris Lord 

 Media adviser 

 Office of Sen. Sarah Hanson-Young 

 Greens' Senator for South Australia 

 M. 0427 604 760 

 

 Twitter: @sarahinthesen8 

 https://www.facebook.com/Senator.Sarah.Hanson.Young 

 http://www.sarahinthesenate.com 

 

 

 

