---
title: "Canberra celebrates Refugee Week 2012"
date: "2012-06-16"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375028
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2264850%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Canberra celebrates Refugee Week 2012  Saturday, 16 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Senator Kate Lundy - Minister for Sport, Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation. 

 People in the Australian Capital Territory will celebrate the valuable contribution of  refugees to the community during Refugee Week 2012, the Minister for Immigration  and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate  Lundy, said today. 

 Refugee Week is being celebrated from 17-23 June, with World Refugee Day on  Wednesday, 20 June. As part of the celebrations, there will be more than 100 events  across the nation in recognition of the plight of refugees and the new lives they have  established in Australia. 

 'Australia welcomes people from many lands and has a generous humanitarian  tradition,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'Australians can be rightly proud of the fact that Australia resettles more refugees per  capita than any other nation and provides much needed protection to people who  have suffered persecution.' 

 Senator Lundy said Australia's settlement support services are among the best in the  world, helping refugees to rebuild their lives here. 

 'Resettlement in Australia provides a chance for refugees to enjoy all the freedom  and opportunities this nation has to offer,' Senator Lundy said. 

 'Refugees in Australia have overcome hardship to live, study and work here, and  Refugee Week is a time to reflect on the contribution they have made to our  community, economy and culture.' 

 At 1pm on 23 June, thousands of people across Australia, including Canberra, will  walk in unity to celebrate the different paths people have taken to become  Australian, as part of the Walk Together initiative. Each walk will finish with a festival  celebrating cultural diversity. 

 To kick off the celebrations, the World Refugee Day annual soccer tournament will  be held today, 16 June, at Cook Oval. Teams from the Liberian, South Sudan and  Sierra Leone, Karen and Mon (Burma) communities will compete in a friendly soccer  match. The Capital Football Team will warm up with players before the match, and a  barbecue and family activities will be provided in the Cook Hub's Hall. 

 On 19 June, the presentation ceremony for the annual Canberra Refugee Support  scholarship program for students with a refugee background will be held at the Theo  Nataras Multicultural Centre. The scholarships are funded from donations from the  community and organisations, including Department of Immigration and Citizenship  staff, to recognise meritorious performance and support outstanding refugee  students in the pursuit of their personal goals. 

 Australia's contribution to international protection and humanitarian efforts continues  this year, with 13 750 places offered under the humanitarian program in 2012-13. 

 Australia has resettled around 775 000 refugees and other people in humanitarian  need since the end of World War II. 

 

 

