---
title: "TPVs needed before onset of monsoon season"
date: "2012-11-28"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211386345
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731230%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling TPVs NEEDED BEFORE ONSET OF MONSOON  SEASON

 November 28, 2012

 The latest two illegal boat arrivals, with a total of almost 100 people on board, comes as Labor will be given the chance before the monsoon  season  sets  in  to  reverse  their  decision  to  oppose  the  Coalition’s  bill  to  reintroduce  Temporary  Protection  Visas  and   deny people smugglers the product to sell, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister

 for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Yet more illegal boats follow the 250th arrival yesterday, another milestone of failure under Julia Gillard. With more than 30,500 arrivals,  more  people  have  now  turned  up  on  boats  than  have  been  connected  to  the  Government’s  National  Broadband   Network,” Mr Morrison said.

 “The record rate of arrivals and the looming monsoon season should force Labor to swallow their pride and use this last week of Parliament  for  the  year  to  support  the  Coalition’s  bill  for  the  reintroduction  of  Temporary  Protection  Visas,  circulated  to  the Government and key cross benchers this evening.

 “Last weekend the Government vowed to oppose the Coalition’s bill to restore Temporary Protection Visas without even seeing it. Labor’s opposition to TPVs that deny family reunion and provide the opportunity for people to be returned home when they are no longer refugees, is unsustainable, just like their longstanding opposition to offshore processing, that they were forced to recant.

 “Labor can clearly no longer claim any  objection to TPVs on principle, as in the Parliament this week Labor jettisoned all pretence of principle by introducing and voting for a law to effectively remove the Australian mainland from our migration zone, which when introduced by the Howard Government they said was a stain on our national character. All that is left is stubborn pride.  

 “Temporary  Protection  Visas  will  end  the  lure  of  permanent  residency  that  people  smugglers  use  to  get  people  on  dangerous illegal boat journeys to Australia. TPVs must be restored to the armoury needed in the fight against people smugglers, particularly as we come into the most dangerous time of the year for boat journeys to be undertaken. It will be too late after Parliament rises to consider this bill.

 “The Coalition will move to reintroduce TPVs before parliament rises. Labor must end their stubborn opposition and the farce of their  bridge  to  permanent  residence  visa  and  finally  agree  with  the  Coalition’s  bill  to  take  the  people  smugglers’  product  of  permanent residence off the table,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest arrival is the 252nd boat for 2012 - by the Prime Minister’s own standard, this is the 252nd Labor  policy failure on border protection for this year alone.

 “After 524 boats carrying over 30,500 people, this Government should be apologising to the Australian people for the chaos they created at our borders and for the complete breakdown of our immigration system.

 “Five years ago Australia had a robust border protection system and only four people in detention - now after five years of a Labor  Government  we  have  people  smuggling  syndicates  using  Australian  patrol  vessels  as  their  daily  water  taxi  service  and  over 12,000 people in detention.

 “After  these  myriad  policy  failures  under  Labor,  it  will  take  a  Coalition  Government  to  put  an  end  to  the  people  smuggling syndicates that have flourished under this Government’s watch,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 TPVs NEEDED BEFORE ONSET OF MONSOON SEASON > Michael Keenan MP

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

