---
title: "22 boats and negative Tony Abbott unmoved"
date: "2012-04-26"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372018
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1591515%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 JASON CLARE MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE  MINISTER FOR DEFENCE MATERIEL 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 26 April 2012 

 

 22 BOATS AND NEGATIVE TONY ABBOTT UNMOVED   

 Despite an increase in boat arrivals since Tony Abbott rejected offshore processing and a  chance to implement his own Nauru policy, the Coalition leader continues to stand in the  way of action to stop the flow of boats, the Government said today.   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Home  Affairs, Jason Clare MP, said another asylum seeker boat was intercepted overnight - the  22nd since Mr Abbott chose negativity over the national interest.   

 “Tony Abbott is standing in the way of offshore processing, standing in the way of stopping  people risking their lives at sea,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “The Australian people have had enough of negative politics and they look to their leaders to  be able to deliver solutions in the national interest. The Government has offered to  cooperate - we offered Nauru - but the Coalition is not prepared to accept any compromise  at all.   

 “People can have no choice but to conclude that Mr Abbott prefers to see more boats arrive  because he believes it’s in his political interest.”   

 Mr Clare said the boats would keep coming while Tony Abbott continued to stop the  Government’s legislation to introduce offshore processing.   

 “Working together we can help stop people dying at sea. We can pass legislation to  introduce offshore processing,” Mr Clare said.   

 “If Mr Abbott is serious about stopping the boats he must stop saying no and pass our  legislation to allow asylum seekers to be processed offshore in Malaysia and Nauru.”   

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769 (Bowen)   Korena Flanagan 0418 251 316 (Clare)   

