---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 26 January 2012: Australia Day, citizenship, Anthony Albanese speech, offshore processing"
date: "2012-01-26"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211368695
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1691187%22
---

 Search this site 

  Go  

 Home

 Biographical details

 Media Centre

 Contact details

 Department

 Minister for Multicultural  Affairs

 Links

 

 

 Australia Day, citizenship, Anthony  Albanese speech, offshore processing Thursday, 26 January 2012

 Doorstop interview, Sydney

 Chris Bowen: Today is a great day: 13 700 people taking the step  to Australian citizenship today on our national day. It's always a  very emotional day for those taking that pledge, often done with a  tear in their eye as they complete their journey, often over many  years, to become Australian citizens. It's a great pleasure to be  sharing that day with the people taking the Australian citizenship  pledge here today in Sydney.  Journalist: Alright. Are you a serious man solving serious  problems?  Bowen: It was a very good speech by Minister Albanese  yesterday. I think it very clearly outlined the differences in the  approach to the big issues in Australia between the Government  and the Opposition and the Greens on the other hand.  Journalist: And plagiarism's okay?  Bowen: Look, Minister Albanese's been man enough to admit that  there was a mistake. I think people should acknowledge that he's  admitted the error. It takes a lot to admit an error and Minister  Albanese is a big man.  Journalist: The speechwriter, can you guarantee their job  security?  Bowen: Anthony has admitted there was a mistake. He's admitted  so in a way which I think people would acknowledge as being  appropriate. I don't really see that there's much more to say about  it.  Journalist: Have you ever fancied yourself an American  President?  Bowen: It's a good movie. But I think the point is that there was an  error, Anthony has acknowledged that error and that's as 

 appropriate.  Journalist: Minister Bowen, if you [inaudible] Hollywood hero, who  would you choose?  Bowen: [laughs] My heroes tend to not be Hollywood.  Journalist: Just on another issue, I guess related to Australia Day  and the continuing debate about boat people, how would you  characterise the Opposition's stand, particularly on a day when we  are welcoming so many new Australian citizens?  Bowen: Well, look, being Australia Day, I don't particularly want to  get into politics. There's plenty of days where the Opposition and I  have made our views particularly strong. I think you can and we do  support a strong multicultural Australia. Multiculturalism and  immigration have contributed so much to our country.  We believe in an orderly process to do so. The Opposition and we  have a very different approach to getting that orderly process. I'd  like to see us come together to reach a bipartisan approach. That's  what we've been attempting to do over recent weeks and months.  Over and above that, on Australia Day I don't intend to engage in  the debate.  Journalist: Now talks have broken down, what will the  Government do to manage boat arrivals?  Bowen: Well, as I've said, we'll continue to work with countries in  our region as part of the Bali Framework to provide as much  discouragement to that dangerous boat journey as possible. I've  also said that without offshore processing that won't be as effective  as it otherwise could be. That's why we worked so hard to get a  bipartisan agreement with the Opposition.  Journalist: What sort of budgetary implications will this have? 

 Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 1 of 2 Australia Day, citizenship, Anthony Albanese speech, offshore processing

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182139.htm

 What sort of costs will this incur?  Bowen: We update those figures regularly through the annual  Budget updates. They would be reflective. Of course, in the last  Budget and in the Mid-Year Economic Forecast we updated those  figures, which reflected the ongoing costs.

 Good on you, cheers.

 See: Index of Speeches

 URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182139.htm  Last update: Friday, 27 January 2012 at 09:25 AEST 

 Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 2 of 2 Australia Day, citizenship, Anthony Albanese speech, offshore processing

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182139.htm

