---
title: "Second boat since Tony Abbott said 'no'"
date: "2012-02-15"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211369667
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1423130%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 JASON CLARE MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 15 February 2012 

 SECOND BOAT SINCE TONY ABBOTT SAID ‘NO’   

 The asylum seeker boat intercepted this afternoon is the second since Tony Abbott ended talks  to allow for offshore processing and chose negativity and his personal political interest over the  national interest. 

 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Home Affairs,  Jason Clare MP, said the latest boat arrival highlighted the intransigence of the Coalition,  who  walked away from talks designed to find a way forward to deliver offshore processing.   

 “This is a sad reminder of Mr Abbott’s political calculation that more boat arrivals are in his best  political interest - despite the national interest, despite the risk to life,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “This Government wants to deliver a genuine deterrent to people taking these dangerous boat  journeys. Failure to do this will see more asylum seekers risking their lives, more people arriving  by boat.   

 “We have been prepared to work with the Coalition to see offshore processing legislation pass  through the Parliament. We initiated negotiations, we offered to establish a centre on Nauru to  complement the Malaysian Arrangement - but all we got was negativity.   

 “The Australian people have every right to expect their political leaders to come together to  agree on matters in the national interest. So why is Tony Abbott saying no to Nauru? Why did he  say no to an independent review into the effectiveness of Temporary Protection Visas?”   

 Mr Clare said the Government and the Coalition could work together to stop people risking their  lives, but it required Tony Abbott to stop saying no.   

 “We should not forget what this is all about - 200 people died in December when their boat sank  off the coast of Indonesia and 11 people died two weeks ago off the coast of Malaysia,” Mr Clare  said. 

 

 “By working together we can help to stop this happening. But it requires Tony Abbott to stop  saying no.    

 “The people of Australia want us to work together. They can’t understand why Tony Abbott is  refusing to pass legislation to implement his own policy - Nauru.”   

 Until the Coalition is prepared to put the national interest first and vote for offshore processing, 

 the Australian people will have no choice but to conclude that Mr Abbott prefers to see more  boats arrive because he believes it’s in his political interest.  Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769 (Bowen),  Korena Flanagan 0418 251 316 (Clare)   

