---
title: "31 boats due to Abbott's obstinacy (FED)"
date: "2012-05-12"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211373057
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1634274%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 JASON CLARE MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE  MINISTER FOR DEFENCE MATERIEL 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 12 May 2012 

 

 31 Boats Due To Abbott’s Obstinacy   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Home  Affairs, Jason Clare MP, said another asylum seeker boat was intercepted today - a  consequence of the Coalition’s refusal to act in the national interest and work with the  Government to implement offshore processing.   

 Mr Bowen said it was the 31st boat to arrive since Tony Abbott dismissed his own policy and  the Government’s offer to re-establish the offshore processing centre on Nauru because he  prefers to see more asylum seekers arrive by boat.   

 “Late last year, the Government approached the Opposition in good faith to sit down and  discuss what we could do to prevent people from risking their lives at sea,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “We were willing to compromise, to negotiate, to put politics aside for the national interest.  But Tony Abbott said no. He said no to offshore processing, no to Nauru, no to Malaysia, no  to a review of temporary protection visas.    

 “Tony Abbott’s negativity means there is no deterrent to stop people taking these dangerous  boat journeys and prevent more deaths at sea.”   

 Mr Clare said the time had come for the Coalition to allow for offshore processing to  proceed.   

 “Working together we can help stop people dying at sea. We can pass legislation to  introduce offshore processing,” Mr Clare said.   

 “If Mr Abbott is serious about stopping the boats he must stop saying no and pass our  legislation to allow asylum seekers to be processed offshore in Malaysia and Nauru.”   

 Media Contacts: Laura Stevens 0432 833 769 (Bowen)   Korena Flanagan 0418 251 316 (Clare)   

