---
title: "28 boats due to Coalition negativity"
date: "2012-05-07"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372571
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2275393%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 28 boats due to Coalition negativity  Monday, 07 May 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Jason Clare MP - Minister for Home Affairs, Minister for  Justice and Minister for Defence Materiel. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Home Affairs, Jason Clare MP, said the latest asylum seeker boat intercepted  overnight—carrying 64 passengers—is the 28th since Tony Abbott said 'no' to  offshore processing. 

 Mr Bowen said a genuine deterrent was needed to address the problem of irregular  migration to Australia, or the boats would keep on coming, as the expert advice  Government warned. 

 'Both parties believe offshore processing is the best way to prevent dangerous boat  journeys, but all Tony Abbott is concerned about is negativity and scoring cheap  political points,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'Asylum seekers coming to Australia by boat face very real risks on these dangerous  boat journeys and we need to work together now to prevent another tragedy from  occurring.' 

 Mr Clare said it was time for Tony Abbott to stop standing in the way of offshore  processing. 

 'Working together we can help stop people dying at sea. We can pass legislation to  introduce offshore processing,' Mr Clare said. 

 'Remember what this is all about—200 people died last year off the coast of  Indonesia. Another 11 people died off the coast of Malaysia in February. 

 'If Mr Abbott is serious about stopping the boats he must stop saying no and pass  our legislation to allow asylum seekers to be processed offshore in Malaysia and  Nauru.' 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb186447.htm  Last update: Monday, 07 May 2012 at 14:32 AEST  

 ay 2012 at 19:30 AEST  

