---
title: "Another illegal boat as Labor runs up white flag on our border"
date: "2012-11-22"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211385726
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731235%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ANOTHER ILLEGAL BOAT AS LABOR RUNS UP  WHITE FLAG ON OUR BORDERS

 November 22, 2012

 Another illegal boat has arrived, with 39 people on board, fresh from Labor running up the white flag on their half hearted policies by  announcing  700  new  detention  beds  in  Australia  and  their  new  policy  of  releasing  thousands  of  boat  arrivals  into  the community  on  welfare,  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “The arrival of another illegal boat, with 39 people on board is the 33rd to arrive in just three weeks and comes fresh from Labor’s  admission that its half hearted policies and half hearted resolve on our borders have failed after announcing more detention beds in Australia and releasing thousands of people into the community on bridging visas,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Labor’s  surrender  on  our  borders  demonstrates  they  can’t  stop  the  boats  and  never  will.  Over  30,000  people  have  arrived  on illegal boats under this failed government and more than 2,000 people are now turning up every month.

 “Julia Gillard and Chris Bowen have been overwhelmed by their failure and are now moving thousands of boat arrivals into the community on welfare and building more detention beds at a cost they won’t reveal.

 “There is nothing temporary about Labor’s border failure. Their heart is not in stopping the boats and they lack the resolve and the full suite of proven policies.

 “Labor MP Andrew Leigh this morning confirmed again what Labor really thinks when it comes to boat arrivals when he, like his colleagues before him, accused proponents of strong border policies of racism.

 “Only an election will give the Australian people the chance to stop the boats by voting for a Coalition government which believes in strong borders and has the full suite of proven policies and resolve to stop the boats,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr  Keenan  said:  “The  arrival  of  the  33rd  boat  for  November  comes  amid  the  complete  breakdown  of  Labor’s  latest  attempt  at   border protection - with on average more than 2,000 people arriving by boat on Australia’s shores every month.

 “Yesterday’s  announcement  by  the  Government  was  just  the  latest  in  a  series  of  backflips  and  policy  positions  that  have characterised Labor’s approach to border protection.

 “Labor just  doesn’t have the credibility  left to  implement policy  changes  and be  taken  seriously by people  smugglers  or people who might use their services.

 “Just  yesterday  the  Minister  for  Immigration  was  bragging  that  his  Government  was  sending  a  strong  message  to  the  people smugglers  by  sending  500  people  back  home  in  the  last  few  months  - what  he  failed  to  mention  was  the  fact  that  over  7,700   people have arrived in that time.

 “This is yet another example of a Government that is making it up as they go along.

 “Only an election and a Coalition Government will be able to fix this catastrophe at our borders,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 ANOTHER ILLEGAL BOAT AS LABOR RUNS UP WHITE FLAG ON OUR BOR...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

