---
title: "Pontville Detention Centre decommissioned"
date: "2012-03-06"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211434507
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1479742%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 6 March 2012   

 PONTVILLE DETENTION CENTRE DECOMMISSIONED   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today announced the  decommissioning of the Pontville Immigration Detention Centre (IDC), following the transfer  of the final group of detainees this morning.     

 The great majority of men who have been detained at Pontville IDC have since moved into  the community either on permanent protection visas, in community detention or under  bridging visa arrangements, having cleared health, identity and security requirements.     

 A number of other asylum seekers have been transferred to mainland facilities, including to  the recently opened second stage compound of Wickham Point IDC, which provides 500  additional beds and takes the centre’s capacity to 1,000 single adult males.   

 Mr Bowen said Pontville was always intended to be a temporary facility until additional  accommodation at centres such as Wickham Point came online.   

 “I thank the Tasmanian community for the positive feedback the Government has received  about Pontville IDC and the benefits it has provided to the local community,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “However, the need for such temporary detention accommodation has been reduced with  new detention accommodation now available.”   

 Works around the decommissioning of the Pontville facility continue, with some elements of  the centre such as the perimeter fence to be retained for use by the Department of Defence.   

 Mr Bowen said the people of Tasmania had provided valuable support to Pontville IDC  throughout its six months of operation.   

 “I would hope other communities around Australia follow Tasmania’s lead in demonstrating  how positive community support and interaction can have direct benefits for both people in  detention and the local community,” he said.   

 

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

 

 

 

