---
title: "200 illegal boat arrivals this financial year alone"
date: "2012-12-30"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211387592
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2723317%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling 200 illegal boat arrivals this financial year  alone December 30, 2012

 The latest illegal boat arrival, carrying 37 passengers and three crew, is the 200th to be successfully smuggled into  Australia in the first six months of this financial year alone, Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection  Michael Keenan said.

 “With almost 12,000 people arriving on 200 boats, this financial year is gearing up to be the biggest year ever for illegal  boat arrivals yet we are still waiting to see any real resolve from the Labor Party to squash the people smuggling trade  that they have allowed to flourish, Mr Keenan said.

 “Labor have been in power for over five years and during that time that have created a crisis of monumental proportions at  our borders - they must be held accountable.

 “The Government’s half-hearted attempts to take a tougher stance on illegal boat arrivals has resulted in the people  smugglers challenging them at every opportunity and every time this Government has opted for the path of least  resistance.

 “When you vilify a policy for years and then turn around and try to implement it yourself there is an issue of credibility and  the people smugglers know this.

 “Labor are their own road block in finding a solution to this crisis - in five years they have had so many different policy  positions on this issue and made so many broken promises to stop the boats from coming that the people smugglers will  continue to call their bluff every time.

 “The Australian people are fed up with a Government that cannot fulfil one of the main roles of the Commonwealth - protecting our borders.

 “An election and a Coalition Government is the only thing that will restore order to Australia’s borders and remove the  control of our immigration system from the hands of criminals,” Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 200 illegal boat arrivals this financial year alone > Michael Keenan MP

 13/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

