---
title: "New services to help migrants and refugees in New South Wales"
date: "2012-06-20"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375232
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2264698%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 New services to help migrants and refugees in  New South Wales  Wednesday, 20 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Senator Kate Lundy - Minister for Sport, Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today announced 34 new projects in New  South Wales will be funded in 2012-13 under the Settlement Grants Program (SGP)  to assist newly arrived migrants and refugees settle in New South Wales. 

 From 1 July 2012, New South Wales settlement agencies will receive a total of $6.55  million in additional funding to deliver new services that will help new arrivals  become self-reliant and acquire skills and knowledge to fully participate in the  community.  

 As part of the funding allocated to New South Wales this coming financial year, the  Service for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Torture and Trauma Survivors  (STARTTS) will receive a grant to help refugees in the Fairfield and Auburn areas  overcome and recover from their experiences and build a new life in Australia. 

 'As part of this service STARTTS will provide unique one-on-one consultancy  services across the Fairfield and Auburn areas of Sydney to provide intensive  assistance,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'These activities will promote self-reliance within newly arrived communities which  will help to build a greater sense of belonging.' 

 Announcing the New South Wales grants, Senator Lundy said the Australian  Government reaffirmed its commitment to helping refugees and migrants settle into  their new communities through the Settlement Grants Program. 

 'These grants help people to make the transition into Australian life by building on  their existing skills and, at the same time, help them to learn valuable new ones,'  Senator Lundy said. 

 'These services provide practical support which assists the settlement process,  building confidence and support networks. Whether it is improving people's ability to  gain access to mainstream services, housing assistance or the community legal  education support, these services are all activities that empower new arrivals by  helping them connect with local communities, develop greater independence and  improve their life skills. 

 'The community sector plays a vital role in supporting newly arrived refugees and I  commend all organisations in New South Wales for their contribution to the  successful settlement of migrants and humanitarian entrants.' 

 The Australian Government will spend $39 million in 2012-13 to deliver services to  humanitarian entrants and new migrants to acquire skills and knowledge to fully  participate in the community as soon as possible after arrival.  

 A list of successful applicants in the 2012-13 funding round is available on the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 2012-13 Grant Recipients 

 

