---
title: "Muddled Morrison just can't get figures right"
date: "2012-05-21"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211373491
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2275340%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 Skilled visa reform targets investors and  entrepreneurs  Friday, 25 May 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Bill Shorten MP - Minister for Financial Services and  Superannuation. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and the Minister for  Financial Services and Superannuation, Bill Shorten MP, today announced new  Federal Government reforms to attract successful investors and entrepreneurs to  Australia. 

 Mr Bowen said the government would introduce a new visa program, the Significant  Investor visa, targeting migrants who could make an investment of at least $5 million  in the Australian economy. 

 'The Significant Investor visa will provide a boost to our economy and help Australia  to compete effectively for high net worth individuals seeking investment immigration,'  Mr Bowen said. 

 'Our migration program is important to our economy, not only in the area of skills but  also innovation and capital investment. 

 'This new visa will make it easier for investors coming to Australia by offering some  concessions on visa requirements - such as not having to meet a points test and  reduced residence requirements - in recognition of their meaningful investment  contribution.' 

 Investor options under consideration include state and territory bonds, Australian  Security Investment Commission (ASIC) regulated managed funds and direct  investment into Australian companies. 

 'This creates a new source of investment capital and increases the pool of funds  managed locally. This is good for jobs and growth in areas such as financial  planning, fund administration, stockbroking, accounting and funds management,' Mr  Shorten said. 

 The changes will bring Australia into line with other countries, such as the United  Kingdom, Canada, Singapore and New Zealand, which provide for migration on the  basis of investment of a specified size and conditions. 

 Mr Bowen said the government was also reforming the Business Skills visa program  to attract more entrepreneurial talent and diverse business expertise to Australia. 

 'This is an important part of Australia's skilled migration program because it targets  migrants who have a demonstrated history of innovation and success in business,'  he said. 

 'Such individuals make a strong contribution to the Australian economy, innovation  and job opportunities for Australians. 

 'We are implementing several measures to increase the volume and quality of  applicants for this program, which will be renamed the Business Innovation and  Investment program.' 

 The measures include: 

  facilitating permanent entry of entrepreneurs who have sourced venture capital  funding in Australia    cutting red tape by reducing the visa subclasses from 13 to three    introducing a points test for provisional visa applicants giving weight to people with a 

 history of business innovation    allowing business migrants to extend their provisional visa should they need  additional time to establish their business in Australia before applying for permanent 

 residence    increasing asset thresholds to better align with the Australian business community.  

 'The government is also considering further changes to the program to attract  significant investment to Australia,' Mr Bowen said. 

 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship grants between 7000 and 7800  Business Skills visas per year. There have been 7200 places allocated to the  program in 2011-12. 

 The Significant Investor visa will be introduced in the 2012-13 program year, while  the new Business Innovation and Investment visas will be integrated with the skilled  migrant selection model, SkillSelect,commencing on 1 July 2012. 

 More information on the changes is available.  See: Business Skills Program Reforms - 1 July 2012  

 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb187042.htm  Last update: Friday, 25 May 2012 at 16:14 AEST  

