---
title: "Over 10,000 arrivals yet Labor cling to failed Malaysian people swap"
date: "2012-07-27"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211433293
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736646%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling OVER 10,000 ARRIVALS YET LABOR CLING  TO FAILED MALAYSIAN PEOPLE SWAP July 27, 2012

 More  than  10,000  people  have  arrived  on  illegal  boats  since  Labor  announced  their  abominable  and  failed  Malaysian people swap, yet they still cling to this failed and illegal proposal rather than restoring the Howard Government policies that worked, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "The arrival of the latest illegal boat, with 54 people on board, is the sixth to arrive in six days and the 25th this month as boats  continue  to  arrive  daily  under  Labor’s  failed  policies  and  excuses  for  not  reinstating  the  Howard  Government’s   proven policies including turning boats back where it is safe to do so," Mr Morrison said. 

 "The latest farce of asylum seekers demanding to an ABC journalist that they be taken to Australia as a condition of their rescue in Indonesian waters, shows just how ridiculous things have become with Julia Gillard using our Navy as a water taxi service for people smugglers, and that even the ABC can turn boats back," he said. 

 "Labor’s Malaysia people swap was not only a failed policy from the start, it was ruled illegal by the High Court and our parliament. Instead of abandoning this failure and reinstating the proven policies of the Howard Government to stop the boats, they have chosen to do nothing but watch boats continue to arrive in record numbers. 

 "In  just  the  last  three  months  over  4,550  people  have  arrived,  or  almost  1,600  people  every  month,  meanwhile  the government stands by its budget which was based on 450 people arriving a month. 

 "Rather  than  stop  the  boats  and  budget  blow  outs,  Labor  has  falsely  claimed  a  deadlock  that  is  entirely  of  their  own making. They could act to restore the polices that worked today but refuse to do so," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr  Keenan said: "Six  boats  have  arrived  in  five  days  as  the  Labor  Government  refuses  to  restore  any  semblance  of  a border protection system. 

 "In this financial year it has become the norm for boats to arrive illegally in Australia every single day. 

 "This Government cannot stop the boats, cannot stop the Budget blowouts and cannot protect Australia’s borders. 

 "It appears that the only thing this Government can do is continue to break all records for illegal boat arrivals," Mr Keenan  said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 OVER 10,000 ARRIVALS YET LABOR CLING TO FAILED MALAYSIAN PEOP...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

