---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Canberra: 22 November 2012 Murray Darling Basin Plan; asylum seekers and temporary protection visas; Tasmanian forest talks; and inflammatory comments from Michael Danby."
date: "2012-11-22"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211385663
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2062881%22
---

 1 

 

 

 

 

 Christine Milne   Australian Greens Leader   

 And    

 Sarah Hanson-Young  Greens immigration spokesperson    

 

 Thursday 22 November 2012   

 Press conference    

 Transcript   

 Subjects:  Murray Darling Basin Plan, asylum seekers and temporary protection visas, Tasmanian  forest talks, Michael Danby. 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: well today, far from being an historic day for the Murray River, is in fact business  as usual in this Parliament. And what that means is that all the promise about saving the river, all the  promise about looking after the red gums, making sure that we restore the Coorong, that we  actually look after the environment, are no more than promises. Today is the day that the Federal  Government has done what they always do, and that is work with the Coalition to give what the big  irrigators want for the river system, and deny to the environment what it needs. The Minister was  right when he said you cannot compromise on the fundamentals. Well the science, the evidence is  there. The scientists have come out and said, if you are serious about saving the Murray, you have to  actually guarantee a minimum level of 4000 gigalitres, you have to actually provide what the river  needs. And that’s not happening with this plan, and that’s why the Greens are going to work with  the Government to improve the plan. To date, the Government is just suggesting it’ll work with the  Coalition, and in fact undermine the environmental outcomes. We’re prepared to work with the  Government to make it a lot better and we’re going to do that. It’s essential and as to the talk about  this is no more delays well it certainly is a delay. This plan will not come into effect until 2019 and  that’s only for the 2750 gigalitres. It’s actually then another several years on - 2024 before any  additional water would be added to that. Now that isn’t instant, that isn’t an immediate looking  after the Murray. And the fact that they’ve actually brought out a plan which does not take into  account climate change and especially in a week where even the World Bank has come out and said  we’re on track for four degrees of warming. It just doesn’t make sense to bring out a Murray plan  that hasn’t taken climate change into account. So we are going to work with the Government to  make this better because the Greens are serious about saving the Murray. We are serious about the 

 2 

 

 red gums, we’re serious about the Coorong, and we want a Murray Darling plan that actually  delivers. 

 SARAH HANSON-YOUNG: The Greens will be moving to amend the Water Act itself to strengthen any  plan that is put forward. The plan as announced and signed off by the Prime Minister and Minister  Burke today is a plan for big irrigators, it’s not a plan for the Coorong, it’s not a plant for South  Australia, it’s not a plan for the river red gums, who desperately need a drink. This is a plan that is  meant to be setting the blueprint for how we manage the Murray Darling Basin over the next 20  years, yet it doesn’t include the impacts on climate change, it won’t deliver enough water to flush  out the 2 million tonnes of salt each year that is needed to keep the water quality healthy and  drinkable. This plan is a plan for big irrigators, not to make sure that Adelaidians, that people in  Adelaide, have clean good quality drinking water. This plan won’t save the citrus growers in the river  land in my home state, it won’t restore the Lower Lakes, and it won’t keep the Coorong, Storm Boy  country, flourishing, and listed as it should be as an international Ramsar wetland. It risks all of that.  It won’t save the river and rather than taking the opportunity to put in place a blueprint to protect  the river for future generations to ensure that river communities right throughout the basin have  certainty, not just for the next five years or the next ten years, but for the next 20 years. This plan as  unveiled by the Minister today will fail to do that. But of course who is happiest? The big irrigators in  the upstream states who have been ripping too much water out of the system for decades. They’re  happy and as a result and of course the Coalition is happy. It is extremely disappointing to see the  Labor Government working to deliver a plan that satisfies Barnaby Joyce and his big irrigators  friends.  

 JOURNALIST: Isn’t it better to have some plan than no plan at all?  

 SARAH HANSON-YOUNG: Well we know that this plan is not going to take effect until 2019. By that  stage many parts, much of the basin is going to be back in drought. This plan is not (inaudible) as has  the Authority. This plan is for the average years, it is not for the drought years, so when the chips are  down, when there is less water in the system, this plan will not help the communities, and it won’t  be helping my home state in South Australia, at the end of the system, which only gets a trickle.  When there is less water in the system there is far less water downstream in South Australia. And it  means that next time there’s a drought that water just simply is not going to be available. This plan  is not better than nothing because it hasn’t done what it’s meant to do which is to set up a system to  be resilient in the drier years, to tackle the massive over allocation. The whole reason that parties  across the chamber in this place passed and debated the Water Act back in 2007 was because there  was finally an acknowledgement that too much water was being ripped out of the system. We have  to put that water back, that’s the only way to keep the river alive and yet the plan as revealed by the  Minister today fails to do that, fails the river, and fails South Australia. 

 JOURNALIST: Tony Burke has said he’s promised to have this through the Parliament by the end of  the year. If you don’t get what you want are you going to vote against this bill? 

 SARAH HANSON-YOUNG: The Greens will move a disallowance to the plan and send it back to the  Minister to get it right. This is an opportunity for the Minister to work with the Greens to ensure that  we actually save the river from environmental collapse. That’s what we need to do and we will  amend the Water Act so there is no question that the plan that needs to be delivered to Parliament, 

 3 

 

 signed off by the Minister, must be strong enough to protect the river, its communities and its  ecology for years to come. 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: I just wanted to comment quickly on Tas forests. In Tasmania it’s been announced  that an agreement has been reached in relation to the long-standing conflict over saving Tasmania's  high conservation and fantastic forests. It’s an opportunity but there are some very big gaps in what  has been announced so far. I haven’t yet seen the details and of course the devil is always in the  details. Much has been said about 504,000 hectares being protected, but there is a question as to  whether logging is going to continue to be allowed in any of those 504,000 hectares and for how  long a transition might take place. There are also a serious questions about the management of  forests into the future and particularly Forestry Tasmania's role and how the Commonwealth might  become involved in funding and also, thirdly, how the forests will be managed in terms of the forest  practices that are allowed. There are a lot of things we want to do but the key thing for the Greens is  to get these areas into permanent protection, and one thing we will be absolutely prioritising is  getting a world heritage nomination for our precious forests. I have been campaigning for the  eastern boundary of the world heritage area to go into the world heritage nomination and into  permanent protection for many many years since the mid-1980s. So it would be fantastic to finally  see those brilliant forests in world heritage and that’s going to be a priority as this is negotiated in  coming weeks. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) as the Minister says the recipients of bridging visas go back into detention  

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Well if I could just begin by saying the Minister announced a whole change to the  completely failed policy that he’s gotten place yesterday with no consultation with us, without any  of the detail, and it was very unclear as to how his new policy would be implemented, and if the  Minister doesn’t have the courtesy to talk to people about how he is going to have it implemented,  then we cannot risk things going through the Senate that would facilitate even more cruel and  appalling treatment of the most vulnerable people who are seeking our protection. 

 SARAH HANSON-YOUNG: Of course the Greens have always wanted people to be able to have their  claims assessed in the community if it’s safe to do so. We pushed for that community release  program in the beginning. Yesterday's regulation, I asked the Government, the Minister's office  several times, does this impact in any way on the bridging visas for those who have already been  assessed as refugees, as per the announcement that the Minister made. They were unable to give an  answer. They gave confused answers, they gave contradictory answers, and in light of that, until the  Minister can sort out his own office what in fact the correct information is, then the Greens were  never going to risk keeping genuine refugees on temporary visas as announced by the Minister  yesterday. So I’ve gone back to the Minister's office and I’ve said you clear this up, ensure that it  does not affect people who have already been found to be genuine refugees, and we will pass it.  

 JOURNALIST: Senator Milne, just on a different issue, I’m not sure if you saw Michael Danby's  comments regarding your motion about Israel and Gaza yesterday, he has accused you of being in  bed with ‘women hating gay hanging Islamic fundamentalists’. Do you have any response to that? 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Well it hardly bears comment, to be truthful. Michael Danby has behaved in a  really disgraceful manner, is it any wonder people are losing confidence in politicians when people  engage in that kind of inflammatory language? What the Greens have said all along is that we 

 4 

 

 support a ceasefire but we have also said clearly that since Australia has been elected to the Security  Council we have an obligation to be even-handed and honest in the way we deal with conflict. Yes  we acknowledge and condemn the rockets being fired from Gaza into Israel but equally we condemn  the blockade of Gaza, the bombing by Israel and what is happening to Palestinian people. And we  support the rights of Israelis but we support the rights of Palestinians too. I think it’s time that  Michael Danby recognised that if you want to be a good parliamentarian, that requires having some  statespersonship when it comes to foreign affairs. And I think he should stay where it deserves to be  on the back bench on this matter. 

 

