---
title: "Greens stand firm on onshore processing and obligations under Refugee Convention"
date: "2012-03-12"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211434860
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1495008%22
---

 Monday, 12 March 2012  MEDIA RELEASE   

 Greens stand firm on onshore processing and obligations under Refugee  Convention   

 The Greens say the High Court last year was clear in its ruling that offshore processing is illegal and  Australia has obligations to those who seek asylum here.   

 “The Greens will not support any moves to strip away any of these protections from some of the  world’s most vulnerable people,” Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Sen. Sarah Hanson-Young, said  today.   

 “Australia should keep doing what is legally and morally right and that is assessing claims for asylum  here in Australia and increase our humanitarian intake to resettle more people directly from transit  countries, giving people safer options.   

 “We should not be dumping our obligations or people out of sight, out of mind, whether it’s in  Nauru, Malaysia or anywhere else.   

 “Only a few countries which are part of the Bali Process have signed the Refugee Convention. The  Bali Process alone is not enough to ensure the safety and rights of refugees. People will continue  running from fear until they feel safe. Until these countries lift their protection standards, we will  continue to see asylum seekers arriving in Australia.   

 “Onshore assessments work and have been shown to be a cheaper and more humane alternative to  offshore processing, which does not deter desperate people from seeking protection in Australia.    

 “We are disappointed Mr Oakeshott has bought in to the government’s ‘get tough’ rhetoric. The  Greens will not be supporting this bill which has the potential of adding to the unsustainable  expense of offshore processing.   

 “Australia must continue assessing claims on shore because it’s the cheapest and only legally-sound  means of fulfilling our international obligations to guarantee the wellbeing and safety of people  fleeing persecution.”   

 MEDIA CONTACT:  Paris Lord 0427 604 760   

 

