---
title: "One year on but no progress made"
date: "2012-06-22"
creators:
  - "Madigan, John"
source: "Office of MADIGAN, SEN JOHN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375484
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1729359%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Media release 

 One year on but no progress made  ***For immediate release*** 

 Friday, June 22, 2012  Saturday, June 23, 2012 marks the one year anniversary of the Government’s continued neglect to  help families and communities suffering because of wind turbines placed too close to their homes.   

 One year ago the Senate Inquiry into the Social and Economic Impact of Rural Wind farms handed  down its seven recommendations which called for further testing of health effects from wind farms,   as well as measuring the impact of low frequency noise on dwellings and inhabitants.    

 July 23 also marks more than four months since Senator Madigan and Xenophon’s motion calling for  the recommendations to be acted upon passed through the federal senate.   

 Senator Madigan said the governments stalling to implement its own recommendations showed just  how seriously it took the issue.    

 “The seven important recommendations have not been introduced, yet wind farms are popping up all  over the country,” Senator Madigan said.    

 “There is considerable evidence suggesting that wind farms are not only a major health concern, but  are a possible economic disaster. The industry is surviving because of government handouts including  money received from the trade of  Renewable Energy Certificates as well as money from Australian  Super funds.”   

 “Next week I will be introducing a bill on behalf of Senator Xenophon and myself to amend the  Renewable Energy Act.  “This bill will amend the act to ensure that only wind farms that are compliant with appropriate noise  standards will be eligible for Renewable Energy Certificates.”  “There are a growing number of wind farm refugees in this country. People are abandoning their  family homes and farms because they are suffering adverse health effects that they attribute to turbines  operating too close to their homes.”   

 “We need independent research done on Australian soil, under Australian conditions and using an  agreed methodology and experts in the various disciplines required to determine the impact of wind  turbines on heath and communities.   “The inquiry said more research must be done. Many Australians are crying out for more research to  be done.”   “Whether you are for, against or neutral on wind farms, everyone I meet understands the need to  ensure health impacts are thoroughly investigated.”  “It is time the Government took care of the interests of its electors rather than those of the wind farm  industry and implemented the recommendations it handed down one year ago.”    

 

