---
title: "More than 240 people in one day push boat arrivals over 17,000"
date: "2012-05-07"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372601
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1622268%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection Michael Keenan 

 More than 240 people in one day push boat arrivals over 17,000 

 07/05/12  

 The arrival of two illegal boats, with over 240 people on board, has pushed the total  number of arrivals under Labor to more than 17,000 people, adding further pressure  to Labor's already weakened budget, Shadow Minister for Immigration and 

 Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border  Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “The arrival of more than 240 people in one night is more than half the 450 people  the Department of Immigration budgeted would arrive every month under Labor’s  community release policies and follows almost 1,000 people arriving during April,” Mr  Morrison said. 

 “Since 2009/10 Labor has blown their budget for asylum seekers by $3.9 billion and  currently more than 7,000 asylum seekers are being supported by Australian  taxpayers in detention centres or in the community,” he said. 

 “The arrival of more than 240 people in one day will only add further pressure on  Labor’s budget, already weakened by the cost to date of their chronic border failures. 

 “Boat arrivals are surging, with over 2,500 people having arrived in 2012 and over  5,500 this financial year. 

 “These numbers show that the only budget Labor have been able to put into surplus  has been for the people smugglers. 

 “Labor's only answer is to blame others for their failure. Blaming the Opposition is not  a policy, just another lame excuse from a Government that has given up on border  protection" Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “Another two more boat arrivals will add further pressure to the  already overstretched and underfunded resources of our Border Protection  Command. 

 “With Labor’s new Budget looming, this latest arrival is another example of why the  cuts to Customs and the Australian Border Protection Service need to be restored  immediately. 

 “This is an opportunity for new Home Affairs Minister, Jason Clare, to restore the  funding that Labor has previously stripped from Australia’s border protection  agencies. 

 “I am concerned for the dire state that our borders would be left in if the Gillard  Government once again takes an axe to Customs and Border Protection funding," Mr  Keenan said. 

  

