---
title: "A better life in a new country - Refugee Week"
date: "2012-06-18"
creators:
  - "Carr, Kim"
source: "MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375073
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2876779%22
---

 Media Release:

 A better life in a new country -Refugee Week

 18 June 2012

 Senator the Hon Kim Carr Minister for Human Services

 International Refugee Week is a time to recognise the contribution 

 refugees make to building a better country and the dedication of the  people who help them. 

 Minister for Human Services Senator Kim Carr said the Australian  Government Department of Human Services Refugee Servicing Network  works hard to help refugees settle and participate in Australian society.

 “Refugees make an enormous contribution to this country, despite the  immense challenges they face,” Senator Kim Carr said.

 “For many refugees, a new start is made possible by the hard work of  Human Services staff who provide immediate and ongoing support.

 “We also have over 770 bilingual and 70 Multicultural Service Officers who  provide cultural and language support, many of whom come from refugee  or immigrant backgrounds themselves.”

 One of them is Multicultural Services Officer Sarjoh Bah.  Sarjoh knows  what it is like to leave a war-torn country with no possessions and begin 

 again in a new country with a different language and culture.

 “I remember how overwhelming it was in the beginning. I find it  immensely satisfying to be able to assist other refugees settle in the  Australian community, help them develop new skills and find work,” Mr  Bah said.

 “I work closely with Humanitarian Settlement Service providers to connect  newly arrived refugees with appropriate Government programs and  support. This support is crucial in helping refugees settle and successfully 

 rebuild their lives in Australia.”

 Senator Kim Carr said Human Services staff will participate in a range of 

 events nationwide throughout Refugee Week.

 To find out more about support services for refugees visit  humanservices.gov.au or call the Department of Human Services 

 Page 1 of 2 A better life in a new country - Refugee Week | Minister for Human Ser...

 3/12/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/65939/20130322-1615/www.mhs.gov.au/...

 multilingual call centre on 131 202 between 8.30am-4.45pm Monday to  Friday (except public holidays).

 Page 2 of 2 A better life in a new country - Refugee Week | Minister for Human Ser...

 3/12/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/65939/20130322-1615/www.mhs.gov.au/...

