---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 26 January 2012: Australia Day; Anthony Albanese speech; offshore processing"
date: "2012-01-26"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Australia Day"
  - "Anthony Albanese speech"
  - "offshore processing"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211368689
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1373507%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT* 

 

 DOORSTOP, SYDNEY  

 THURSDAY, 26 JANUARY 2012 

 SUBJECTS: Australia Day, citizenship, Anthony Albanese speech, offshore  processing.   

 CHRIS BOWEN: Today is a great day: 13,700 people taking the step to Australian  citizenship today on our national day. It’s always a very emotional day for those  taking that pledge, often done with a tear in their eye as they complete their  journey, often over many years, to become Australian citizens. It’s a great pleasure  to be sharing that day with the people taking the Australian citizenship pledge here  today in Sydney.  

 JOURNALIST: Alright. Are you a serious man solving serious problems?  

 BOWEN: It was a very good speech by Minister Albanese yesterday. I think it very  clearly outlined the differences in the approach to the big issues in Australia between  the Government and the Opposition and the Greens on the other hand.  

 JOURNALIST: And plagiarism’s okay?  

 BOWEN: Look, Minister Albanese’s been man enough to admit that there was a  mistake. I think people should acknowledge that he’s admitted the error. It takes a  lot to admit an error and Minister Albanese is a big man.  

 JOURNALIST: The speechwriter, can you guarantee their job security?  

 BOWEN: Anthony has admitted there was a mistake. He’s admitted so in a way  which I think people would acknowledge as being appropriate. I don’t really see that  there’s much more to say about it.  

 JOURNALIST: Have you ever fancied yourself an American President?  

 BOWEN: It’s a good movie. But I think the point is that there was an error, Anthony  has acknowledged that error and that’s as appropriate.  

 JOURNALIST: Minister Bowen, if you [inaudible] Hollywood hero, who would you  choose?  

 BOWEN: [laughs] My heroes tend to not be Hollywood.  

 JOURNALIST: Just on another issue, I guess related to Australia Day and the  continuing debate about boat people, how would you characterise the Opposition’s  stand, particularly on a day when we are welcoming so many new Australian  citizens?  

 BOWEN: Well, look, being Australia Day, I don’t particularly want to get into  politics. There’s plenty of days where the Opposition and I have made our views  particularly strong. I think you can and we do support a strong multicultural  Australia. Multiculturalism and immigration have contributed so much to our country.  

 We believe in an orderly process to do so. The Opposition and we have a very  different approach to getting that orderly process. I’d like to see us come together to  reach a bipartisan approach. That’s what we’ve been attempting to do over recent  weeks and months. Over and above that, on Australia Day I don’t intend to engage  in the debate.  

 JOURNALIST: Now talks have broken down, what will the Government do to  manage boat arrivals?  

 BOWEN: Well, as I’ve said, we’ll continue to work with countries in our region as  part of the Bali Framework to provide as much discouragement to that dangerous  boat journey as possible. I’ve also said that without offshore processing that won’t  be as effective as it otherwise could be. That’s why we worked so hard to get a  bipartisan agreement with the Opposition.  

 JOURNALIST: What sort of budgetary implications will this have? What sort of  costs will this incur?  

 BOWEN: We update those figures regularly through the annual Budget updates.  They would be reflective. Of course, in the last Budget and in the Mid-Year Economic  Forecast we updated those figures, which reflected the ongoing costs.  

 Good on you, cheers.  

 Ends  

 

