---
title: "Speech to the local solutions fund grant announcement, Global Learning Centre - Hume"
date: "2012-07-04"
creators:
  - "Carr, Kim"
source: "MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211376192
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2889991%22
---

 Speech:

 Local solutions fund grant  announcement

 4 July 2012

 Senator the Hon Kim Carr Minister for Human Services

 E&OE - Check against delivery

 Global Learning Centre - Hume

 It is a great pleasure to be back in Broadmeadows to announce the 

 recipients of the first Local Solutions Fund grants.

 This is a region I know well. I was a teacher at Glenroy Tech for almost 

 ten years, and I live locally.

 I see in the people here today the living proof of what this national project  can deliver.

 Right across the country, the Government is investing over $3 million in  thirty-five local projects.

 This is an investment in Bankstown, Playford and Kwinana.

 It is an investment in Shellharbour, Burnie, and Wyong.

 It is an investment in Rockhampton, Logan and Shepparton.

 These are all places that are facing acute pressure. They know the real  meaning of hard times.

 But no-one knows them better than Broadie.

 According to the latest Census, the typical household wage in this area is  close on half the national average.

 There are kids growing up in poverty. There are people who can't find  work. There are people still facing the problems their parents faced two 

 decades back.

 Just as some people inherit wealth, others inherit poverty.

 And that is unacceptable in a civilised, progressive society.

 Page 1 of 2 Local solutions fund grant announcement | Minister for Human Services

 10/12/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/65939/20130322-1615/www.mhs.gov.au/...

 This community understands that. They want to do something about it.  And the projects we support here today are outstanding examples of what 

 we're about. 

 We are backing ten projects in this region, with total funding in the order 

 of half a million dollars.

 It's not just that you have a very active local Member in Maria  Vamvakinou, or a highly engaged Mayor in Ros Spence, or an effective  Local Advisory Group.

 You do have all that.

 But in fairness, I have to point out that this program will provide about  the same amount of money to each of the 10 Local Government areas  across the life of the program.

 Now I don't pretend you can solve all the problems at this price.

 There are certainly no magic wands in Canberra.

 What we do have is people with the courage to back themselves.

 And if they have that courage, I say Government should stand shoulder to  shoulder with them.

 We want to take a chance on people with passion and ideas.

 There are lots of those people in Hume.

 Take the Holy Child Primary School, which will help kids in around 800 

 families see their way to a university.

 Or take the Victorian Cooperative on Children's Services for Ethnic 

 Groups, which will help refugees and migrants join the Family Day Care  Program.

 These are projects built on human potential.

 And there are just some of the ideas we support today.

 They will keep students in school. They will launch them into good 

 careers. They will help young parents build meaningful lives for their kids.

 I trust all these will be an object lesson to the rest of the nation.

 We can be richer, we can be fairer and we can be greener, if we are  prepared to work together.

 And I thank you for sharing that mission today.

 Page 2 of 2 Local solutions fund grant announcement | Minister for Human Services

 10/12/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/65939/20130322-1615/www.mhs.gov.au/...

