---
title: "Address to the Institute of Economic Affairs: "The end of age of entitlement", London"
date: "2012-04-17"
creators:
  - "Hockey, Joe"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "Welfare dependence"
  - "Welfare measures"
  - "Visits from Australia"
  - "Great Britain"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211371412
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2058979%22
---

 

 “THE END OF THE AGE OF ENTITLEMENT”  ADDRESS TO THE INSTITUTE OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS  LONDON  17 APRIL 2012 

 

 JOE HOCKEY MP 

 THE END OF THE AGE OF ENTITLEMENT 

 INSTITUTE of ECONOMIC AFFAIRS 

 LONDON 

 Introduction 

 I wish to thank my friends at the Institute of Economic Affairs for the opportunity to 

 discuss  an  issue  that  has  been  the  source  of  much  debate  in  this  forum  for  

 sometime….that is, the end of an era of popular universal entitlement.  

 There is nothing much new in the debate other than the fact that action has now been 

 forced  on  governments  as  a  result  of  the  recent  financial  crisis.  Years  of  warnings  

 have been ignored but the reality can no longer be avoided.  

 Despite an ageing population and a higher standard of living than that enjoyed by our 

 children, western democracies in particular have been reluctant to wind back universal 

 access to payments and entitlements from the state.  

 As  we  have  already  witnessed,  it  is  not  popular  to  take  entitlements  away  from  

 millions of voters in countries with frequent elections. 

 It  is  ironic  that  the  entitlement  system  seems  to  be  most  obvious  and  prevalent  in  

 some of the most democratic societies. Most undemocratic nations are simply unable 

 to afford the largesse of universal entitlement systems. 

 1 

 

 So,  ultimately  the  fiscal  impact  of  popular  programs  must  be  brought  to account  no 

 matter  what  the  political  values  of  the  government  are  or  how  popular  a  spending  

 program may be. 

 Let me put it to you this way: The Age of Entitlement is over. 

 We should not take this as cause for despair.  It is our market based economies which 

 have forced this change on unwilling participants. 

 What we have seen is that the market is mandating policy changes that common sense 

 and years of lectures from small government advocates have failed to achieve.  

 And  we  have  subsequently  witnessed  over  the  last  twelve  months  a  raging  battle.   

 This  has  been  a  battle  between  the  fiscal  reality  of  paying  for  what  you  spend,  set  

 against  the  expectation  of  majority  public  opinion  that  each  generation  will  receive  

 the same or increased support from the state than their forebears. 

 The entitlements bestowed on tens of millions of people by successive governments, 

 fuelled by short-term electoral cycles and the politics of outbidding your opponents is, 

 in  essence,  undermining  our  ability  to  ensure  democracy,  fair  representation  and  

 economic sustainability for future generations. 

 Perhaps we could re-apply noted British philosopher, AC Grayling’s words on liberty 

 to our debate by declaring that we may record that the age of entitlement might have 

 passed its best point, “after so brief a period of flourishing…”1    

 And flourish it did.  

 Government  spending  on  a  range  of  social  programs  including  education,  health,  

 housing,  subsidised  transport,  social  safety  nets  and  retirement  benefits  has  reached  

 extraordinary levels as a percentage of GDP. 

 However an inadequate level of revenue has forced nations into levels of indebtedness 

 that, in an age of slowing growth and ageing population, are simply unsustainable.  

 

  

 2 

 

 The  social  contract  between  government  and  its  citizens  needs  to  be  urgently  and  

 significantly redefined. The reality is that we cannot have greater government services 

 and  more  government  involvement  in  our  lives  coupled  with  significantly  lower  

 taxation.  

 As a community we need to redefine the responsibility of government and its citizens 

 to provide for themselves, both during their working lives and into retirement.  

 As  part  of  this  process,  we  must  emphasise  that  government  spending  should  be  

 funded  from  revenue  rather  than  by  borrowing  from  future  generations  in  whatever  

 form that may take. 

 The Problem 

 Entitlement is a concept that corrodes the very heart of the process of free enterprise 

 that drives our economies. 

 All  of  us  would  agree  that  there  are  some  basic  community  entitlements.   For  

 generations we have all sought to define those basic rights. 

 For  example,  in  the  United  States  constitution  the  founding  fathers  determined  that  

 citizens are entitled to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.  

 You  will  remember  it  was  Margaret  Thatcher  who  interpreted  community  

 entitlements as the right for our children to “grow tall and some taller than others if 

 they have the ability in them to do so”.2  

 This  broader  and  timeless  conservative  definition  of  our  end  game  lays  down  some  

 foundations for the role of government. 

 Equality  of  opportunity  rather  than  equality  of  outcome  is  my  preferred  model  for  

 contemporary society. 

 Thankfully  the  modern  capitalist  economy  is  centred  around  the  satisfaction  of  

 personal wants and needs. Commercial transactions are at the core of the system.  And 

 it is a simple and proven formula for willing buyers to engage with willing sellers. If 

 

 2  Speech to the Institute of Socio Economic Studies “Let Our Children Grow Tall” September 15, 1975 

 3 

 

 we want a product or service we go and buy it with the dividend from the fruits of our 

 own labour.  The producer is happy and the customer is satisfied. 

 The  problem  arises  however  when  there  is  a  belief  that  one  person  has  a  right  to  a  

 good  or  service  that  someone  else  will  pay  for.   It  is  this  sense  of  entitlement  that  

 afflicts not only individuals but also entire societies. And governments are to blame 

 for  portraying  taxpayer’s  money  as  something  removed  from  the  labour  of  another  

 person. 

 In  our  collective  effort  to  win  votes,  political  leaders  deliberately  portray  a  new  

 spending  commitment  as  if  it  is  coming  out  of  their  own  personal  bank  account.  

 Political leaders rarely thank taxpayers for their funding of the policy. 

 To pay for all these good policy initiatives, governments have taken the easy option 

 and  borrowed  money  from  that  mysterious  and  amorphous  group  defined  as  

 “bondholders”. 

 We  all  know  this  is  simply  a  case  of  borrowing  money  from  the  taxpayers  of  

 tomorrow  for  spending  initiatives  of  today.  Of  course  I  say  with  irony,  it  gets  even  

 better when some governments borrow more money to pay the interest on current debt 

 so existing taxpayers and voters will never notice the pain. This is the public sector  

 equivalent of those much maligned ponzi schemes. 

 The  sovereign  debt  problems  we  are  seeing  in  Europe  and  the  US  today  are  the  

 outcome  of  countries  wanting  a  lifestyle  they  cannot  afford  but  are  quite  happy  to  

 borrow from others to pay for.   

 Of course in recent months in some countries in Europe the “borrowings” have turned 

 into  permanent  transfers  of  wealth  as  those  countries  have  become  unable  -  or  

 unwilling - to repay the loans. 

 Richer  countries  are  either  writing  off  the  debt  of  poorer  countries  or  they  are  

 subsidising the debt repayments with sophisticated transfer payments. 

 As a parent I want to give my children everything they wish for. 

 4 

 

 As a democratically elected legislator I want to give my constituents everything they 

 wish for. 

 The hardest task in life is to say NO to someone you care about. 

 So perhaps what we are witnessing is a chronic failure of the democratic process. 

 A  weak  government  tends  to  give  its  citizens  everything  they  wish  for.  A  strong  

 government has the will to say NO! 

 Being profligate is easy and politically popular in the short term, particularly when the 

 political cost of raising sufficient revenue is avoided by resorting to debt.  

 But painless revenue makes for reckless spending. 

 Whether it is defence, law and order, income support, social programs and so on, the 

 outcome is the same.  Eventually the piper has to be paid.  

 Since World War 2 western communities have enjoyed prosperity that has exceeded 

 all expectations. This has been fuelled by innovation, materialism, globalisation, free 

 trade and debt. 

 Of course these are not malevolent developments. Rather they are the lauded natural 

 outcomes of a free and successful society. 

 Moreover  these  initiatives,  which  have  fuelled  a  massive  improvement  in  global  

 economic productivity, have driven the age of prosperity. Arguably this has delivered 

 the most dramatic improvement in the material quality of life since the beginning of 

 humanity. 

 In  effect  the  rapid  rise  in  private  prosperity  has  been  matched  with  demands  for  an  

 equal improvement in state provided prosperity. 

 This is understandable. We all want the best available health care, the best education, 

 the best pharmaceuticals and so on. 

 The difference is that the handbrake on private demand is income. 

 5 

 

 Unless a consumer can borrow money, it is their income and wealth which determines 

 whether they can buy a new television or renovate the family home.  

 But  for  governments  with  seemingly  unlimited  capacity  to  borrow  money,  that  

 handbrake on expenditure is not real. 

 While  the  Keynesian  model  of  Government-led  stimulus  during  the  inevitable  

 downturns in the economic cycle is well documented, governments who have turned 

 on  the  fiscal  tap  seem  completely  incapable  of  turning  it  off  when  the  cycle  turns  

 upwards.  

 So we have witnessed a continual over-commitment in many countries, funded by the 

 lure of cheap and easily obtainable debt. 

 It is a problem which is not new. We might think by now we would have learnt the 

 lessons.  But clearly that is not the case. 

 A Tale of Two Systems 

 In September last year I travelled to Hong Kong - a city of 7 million3 - which sits at 

 the edge of the Pearl River Delta - home to over 100 million additional residents. As a 

 Special  Administrative  Region,  Hong  Kong  is  now  serving  as  a  conduit  between  

 China and its global trading partners, particularly those with business directly to the 

 north.  

 So  even  though  its  destiny  has  changed,  Hong  Kong  continues  to  maintain  its  own  

 currency, laws and Parliament but is now totally wed at the hip to Beijing. 

 Without a social safety net, Hong Kong offers its citizens a top personal income tax 

 rate  of  17%  and  corporate  tax  rates  of  16.5%.  Unemployment  is  a  low  3.4%4, 

 inflation 4.7%5 and the growth rate still respectable at over 4%6. Government debt is 

 moderate7 and although there is still poverty, the family unit is very much intact and 

 social welfare is largely unknown.  

 

 3  World Bank  4  February 2012  5

  ibid  6  GDP year to Q3 2011  7

  Gross debt of 33.8% GDP in 2011, IMF World Economic Outlook Database, September 2011 

 6 

 

 The  system  there  is  that  you  work  hard,  your  parents  look  after  the  kids,  you  look  

 after your grandkids and you save as you work for 40 years to fund your retirement. 

 The society is focussed on making sure people can look after themselves well into old 

 age. 

 The  concept  of  filial  piety,  from  the  Confucian  classic  Xiao  Jing,  is  thriving  today  

 right across Asia. It is also the very best and most enduring guide for community and 

 social infrastructure.    

 The  Hong  Kong  experience  is  not  unusual  in  Asia.  Characteristics  such  as  low  

 inflation,  low  unemployment,  modest  government  debt,  minimal  unfunded  benefits  

 and  entitlements,  and  significant  growth  are  powering  a  whole  range  of  emerging  

 markets and developing an Asian middle class that will grow to some two and a half 

 billion people by 20308. 

 The  sense  of  government  entitlement  in  these  countries  is  low.  You  get  what  you  

 work for. Your tax payments are not excessive and there is an enormous incentive to 

 work harder and earn more if you want to. 

 By  western  standards  this  highly  constrained  public  safety  net  may,  at  times,  seem  

 brutal.  But it works and it is financially sustainable.  

 Contrast this with what we find in Europe, the UK and the USA. 

 All  of  them  have  enormous  entitlement  systems  spanning  education,  health,  income  

 support,  retirement  benefits,  unemployment  benefits  and  so  on.   Some  countries  are  

 more generous than others and in many instances the recipients of the largest amount 

 of unfunded entitlements are former employees of the Government.   

 In all these areas people are enjoying benefits which are not paid for by them, but paid 

 for  by  someone  else  -  either  the  taxes  of  those  who  are  working  and  producing  

 income, or future generations who are going to be left to pay the debt used to pay for 

 these services. 

 Despite  tax  rates  much  higher  than  in  Hong  Kong,  government  revenue  in  these  

 economies still falls well short of meeting current government spending initiatives.                                                   

 8  Can the Asian Middle Class Come of Age?, Homi Kharas, The Brookings Institution, 12 June 2011 

 7 

 

 The  difference  is  made  up  by  the  public  sector  borrowing  money.   And  more  often  

 than not we are borrowing money from people such as the citizens of Hong Kong. 

 You  would  have  to  say  that  this  is  a  flawed  formula.  For  western  democracies  the  

 party is over. 

 Our  most  deeply  exposed  western  economies  can  no  longer  continue  to  accumulate  

 debt  without  constraint.  The  ongoing  credit  crisis  in  Europe  seems  a  very  long  way  

 from  resolution.  Ultimately,  spending  on  entitlements  becomes  a  structural  problem  

 for fiscal policy. 

 In the United States for example, the excess of government expenditure over receipts 

 is enormous. The Government has $15 trillion of Federal gross debt and it’s going up 

 by  $1.5  trillion  a  year  because  expenditure  is  $6.2  trillion  a  year  and  receipts  $4.8  

 trillion9.  Obviously with interest rates at near zero levels the cost of debt is limited 

 but sooner or later it must end in tears. 

 So  why  is  it  that  western  nations  are  so  deeply  indebted  and  so  tragically  unfunded  

 when  it  comes  to  meeting  their  future  obligations  in  the  face  of  an  ageing  

 demographic and longer life expectancies? 

 Both sides of the western political spectrum are to blame. 

 As  the  electoral  pendulum  has  swung  between  socialist  and  conservative  sides  of  

 politics,  the  socialist  governments,  often  winning  electoral  success  thanks  to  the  

 funding from unions, have created a huge array of entitlements for selected classes of 

 individuals,  particularly  and  ironically  employees  of  government  and  members  of  

 unions.  

 These  entitlements  have  now  begun  to  hang  like  a  millstone  around  the  neck  of  

 governments,  mortgaging  the  economic  future  of  many  Western  nations  and  their  

 enterprises for generations to come.  

 I  will  give  you  a  classic  example.   In  Boston  USA,  there’s  a  certain  former  police  

 captain  who  retired  aged  55  some  20  years  ago  after  a  32  year  career  on  the  force.  

 During  that  period  he  managed  to  contribute  some  $73,000  to  his  defined  benefit                                                    

 9  IMF, World Economic Outlook, September 2011 

 8 

 

 pension  plan,  a  plan  which  gives  you  a  percentage  of  your  salary  for  life  when  you  

 retire.   On  retirement  he  started  receiving  100%  of  his  retirement  salary,  namely  

 $55,000.  

 He  is  now  75,  which  means  he  has  collected some  $1.1  million  in  benefits.   And  it  

 looks like he’ll live until he’s at least 90 or even older, so that’s almost another $1.0 

 million  over  15  years.  It’s  more  than  he  earned  in  32  years  and  he  contributed  just  

 $73,000  to  help  pay  for  it.  Either  taxpayers  pay  the  bill  or  the  government  has  to  

 borrow to pay for the entitlement. 

 When  the  electoral  pendulum  swings,  conservative  governments  have  come  in  

 promising  to  fix  the  problem  but  in  most  instances  have  just  trimmed  around  the  

 edges without addressing the real problem of the growing entitlement burden. 

 And the greatest Catch 22 of modern democratic politics is that socialist governments 

 are  blindly  wedded  to  increases  in  expenditure  while  conservative  governments  are  

 blindly wedded to not increasing taxes. So once the cycle of economic growth comes 

 to its inevitable end, the problem is exacerbated.  

 Perhaps the real problem is the exuberant excesses of politicians who do not seem to 

 understand or care about the fact that like a household, a nation needs to balance its 

 budget over time and needs to make sure it can cover its future commitments. 

 This  has  already  reached  dangerous  levels  with  some  OECD  countries  like  France  

 spending close to 30% of their GDP on public social expenditure. 

 Other  countries  get  by  with  much  less.   Korea  only  spends  10%  of  GDP  on  public  

 social  expenditure  with  Australia  at  16%  of  GDP,  the  USA  at  20%  and  the  United  

 Kingdom at 23%.10 

 The bottom line is that our communities need to make a tough decision. We  cannot 

 choose both higher entitlements and lower taxes. We must make a decision one way 

 or  the  other.  We  can  take  more  and  more  of  our  citizen’s  money  and  spend  it  for  

 them, or we can take less of it and rationalise government services. 

 

 10   OECD Social Expenditure Database, estimates for 2012   

 9 

 

 But it is a decision that must be made …and soon.  

 This  challenge  is  compounding  in  scale  as  an  ageing  population  in  many  

 industrialised countries is making even further demands on the entitlement system. 

 Europe for example, has the highest proportion of over 60s of any region in the world. 

 And  while  22%  of  the  population  in  Europe  is  currently  over  60,  this  number  is  

 forecast to rise to 35% by 2050.  

 Plans for the future of Europe have assumed strong economic growth, but it is highly 

 uncertain  how  growth  will  be  achieved  as  the  fiscal  burden  associated  with  rising  

 health and aged care costs, as well as a generous pension scheme, continues to grow.  

 According to a study commissioned by the European Central Bank11, 19 EU countries 

 had  almost  30  trillion  Euros  of  unfunded  entitlement  obligations  for  their  existing 

 populations.  Of  this  30  trillion  Euros,  France  has  liabilities  of  6.7  trillion  and  

 Germany 7.6 trillion.  

 These liabilities will continue to grow without significant reform. And, by the way, I 

 don’t see how a debate in France about lowering the retirement age from 62 to 60 will 

 help address these challenges. 

 A  lower  level  of  entitlement  means  countries  are  free  to  allow  business  and  

 individuals  to  be  successful.  It  reduces  taxation,  meaning  individuals  spend  less  of  

 their  time  working  for  the  state, and  more  of  their  time  working  for  themselves  and  

 their family.  

 An economy that impedes individual ambition - whether through higher taxation, the 

 lack of opportunity in employment, or restricted social mobility - is one that enforces 

 the barriers of class, rather than reduces them.  

 Governments should ensure that the actions they take will leave their citizens better 

 off  because,  naturally,  that  will  reduce  the  desire  for  ‘entitlements’.  The  role  of  

 government must be to help people to the starting line, while accepting that some will 

 then run faster than others. 

 

 11  Pension obligations of government employer pension schemes and social security pension schemes  established in EU countries, Final Report, European Central Bank, January 2009 

 10 

 

 Everyone  should  know  that  they  grow  up  in  a  country  where  it  is  possible,  through  

 hard work and diligence, to achieve their dreams. 

 Naturally the Americans call this the American Dream, but it is similarly played out 

 across the globe, including in emerging economies in Asia. 

 The Australian Experience 

 As the child of a father who came to Australia in 1948 as a refugee from Palestine and 

 built himself into a successful businessman, I know that being successful in Australia 

 is not the product of belonging to rich and prosperous families, but rather is the result 

 of hard work and diligence.  

 In  fact  those  stories  are  most  often  repeated  in  countries  without  extreme  

 interventionist governments. For example, over 80 per cent of the millionaires in the 

 United States are the first generation in their family to be millionaires. 

 But  Australia  has  had  its  fair  share  of  irresponsible  governments.   In  1996  the  

 incoming  conservative  government  inherited  a  budget  in  a  weakened  state.   The  

 previous  Labor  administration  had  racked  up  a  succession  of  budget  deficits  and  

 $96bn of net debt, about 17% of GDP.  (I know that figure is not large by the current 

 experience  of  most  countries  in  Europe,  but  trust  me,  the  repayment  task  was  a  

 challenge.)   

 It took nine years of budget surpluses and asset sales to repay the debt.  That is three 

 election cycles in Australia.   

 It  took  another  two  years  of  hard  fiscal  rectitude  to  build  up  a  stock  of  net  assets  

 equivalent to 4% of GDP.  In total that is a long period of sustained fiscal austerity. 

 Australia  has  not  completely  avoided  the  problems  of  other  western  democracies  

 because  it  still  has  a  lot  of  spending  by  government  which  many  voters  see  as  their  

 entitlement. 

 However,  over  the  years  there  have  been  a  number  of  key  decisions  to  reduce  

 spending to manageable levels. 

 11 

 

 Australia has sought to reduce the burden on government of providing aged pensions 

 through a compulsory system of savings for retirement.  Retirees must rely first on the 

 benefits  they  have  accumulated  rather  than  on  government  income  support.   And  

 retirement  benefits  to  government  employees  and  politicians  are  no  longer  provided  

 on  a  defined  benefit  basis  but  on  a  contributions  basis  so  they  only  get  back  the  

 principal and earnings on what they have put in. 

 The government is also gradually raising the age at which government benefits can be 

 accessed, from 60 to 67 for women and from 65 to 67 for men from 1 July 2023.  

 Most importantly, the net government assets of $45 billion arduously built up by the 

 previous  conservative  government  were  set  aside  into  a  Future  Fund.   The  funds  

 cannot be touched by the government for everyday expenditure.  Rather, the fund can 

 only  be  accessed  to  pay  for  the  previously  unfunded  entitlements  of  federal  public  

 servants so as to reduce the burden on taxpayers.   

 That was an initiative of great foresight.  It is, if you like, Australia’s sovereign wealth 

 fund  with  the  explicit  purpose  of  boosting  the  sustainability  of  the  budget  through  

 time. 

 The Road Back 

 So where do we go from here? 

 There  is  really  only  one  solution  in  the  long  term,  and  that  is  for  countries  to  live  

 within their means. 

 We must rebuild fiscal discipline.  Budget surpluses must be restored, ideally until the 

 debt is repaid.   

 This  can  only  be  achieved  by  cutting  spending  or  by  raising  taxes.   And  given  the  

 general  acceptance  that  the  increased  drag  from  higher  taxes  would  compromise  

 economic growth, the clear mandate is to lower expenditure. 

 This is lovely rhetoric but to actually do it needs some very harsh political and social 

 decisions.  

 To be bold, I have some suggestions. 

 12 

 

 The  first  is  that  people  need  to  work  longer  before  they  access  retirement  benefits.  

 When the age pension was introduced in Australia at age 65, life expectancy was 55. 

 Today life expectancy is in the 80’s. 

 So you can understand how I was shocked to hear that one of the policy promises of 

 one  of  the  main  French  Presidential  Election  candidates,  FranÃ§ois  Hollande,  is  to  

 bring the official retirement age back down to 60 from 62.  

 Second,  there  have  to  be  universal  compulsory  retirement  schemes  into  which  

 employees and employers must contribute so that after a man or woman has worked 

 for  40  or  more  years  they  have  set  aside  an  amount  that  can  provide  them  with  a  

 reasonable income for a further 15-20 years at least.  

 Defined  benefit  schemes  need  to  be  phased  out  worldwide,  including  in  Australia,  

 whether  they  are  for  public  servants  or  private  sector  employees.  In  addition,  all  

 government  funded  pensions  and  other  such  payments  must  be  means  tested  so  that  

 people who do not need them do not get them. 

 Third,  there  needs  to  be  clear  thinking  about  which  services  should  be  provided  by  

 governments and whether government funded services should be entirely free or have 

 some  affordable  co  payment.   Many  will  argue  that  certain  government  services  

 should  be  free  and  universal  but  the  problem  with  any  free  good  is  that  it  will  be  

 overconsumed and underappreciated. 

 For  example,  in  Australia,  health  services  are  partly  funded  through  compulsory  

 levies, paid either to the government or to private health insurers. 

 Across the Western world we have saddled our nations and our children with a debt 

 burden  that  is  simply  unsustainable.  It  is  time  for  strong  political  and  economic  

 leadership to clean up this mess properly, not with a series of band aids and political 

 spin but with genuine economic and social reform.  

 

 The  age  of  unlimited  and  unfunded  entitlement  to  government  services  and  income  

 support is over. It’s as over in Greece as it is in Italy, in Spain, and in the USA. 

 13 

 

 There also needs to be a rethinking of government borrowing.  Some might argue that 

 some low level of debt is not a bad thing.  I believe that is a dangerous proposition.   

 Once  some  level  of  debt  is  accepted  it  becomes  too  tempting  to  opt  for  just  a  little  

 more.  Pretty soon a little debt becomes a big problem.   

 Also, there is a significant cost to servicing debt.  Even in Australia, where net debt as 

 a  percentage  of  GDP  is  lower  than  in  Europe,  interest  costs  on  net  debt  are  

 approaching $7 billion a year.  That is enough to build 7 new teaching hospitals every 

 year. 

 The message is that every dollar of debt has an opportunity cost. 

 Another  aspect  of  the  problem  is  that  credit  is  no  longer  easily  accessible  for  the  

 private sector or the public sector. 

 And  the  credit  market  no  longer  automatically  favours  the  public  sector.  Ironically  

 more  and  more  sovereigns  are  seen  as  a  greater  credit  risk  than  many  international  

 companies. I would think the experience of the past few years has been something of 

 a reality check.  Lenders now know that even today advanced western economies can 

 default on their debts. 

 In  today’s  global  financial  system  it  is  the  financial  markets,  both  domestic  and  

 international, which impose fiscal discipline on countries.  A country which is viewed 

 as  approaching  its  safe  limit  for  debt  will  find  it  increasingly  difficult  to  borrow  

 additional funds at an affordable rate.  Eventually the capital markets will close.   

 We are now in an era where lenders are much more wary about credit risk.  I view this 

 as a healthy development. 

 Lenders  have  a  more  active  role  to  play  in  policing  public  policy  and  ensuring  that  

 countries do not exceed their capacity to service and repay debt. 

 This is playing out most dramatically in Europe where the European Commission and 

 the European Central Bank are either directly or indirectly heavily influencing public 

 policy in Greece, Italy, Spain and Portugal to name a few. 

 14 

 

 It is also worth noting that the system of regulation of banks and other deposit taking 

 institutions  is  artificially  boosting  demand  for  sovereign  credits  with  mandated  

 liquidity  requirements  generally  emphasising  a  prominent  role  for  government  

 securities.  

 Governments have been too prepared to exploit the resultant lower borrowing costs. 

 And whilst securities issued by sovereigns have traditionally been viewed as the safest 

 and  most  liquid  assets,  I  am  not  sure  that  it  is  still  the  view  of  investors  in  Europe  

 today.   

 Concluding Comments 

 The road back to fiscal sustainability will not be easy.   

 It will involve reducing the provision of so called “free” government services to those 

 who feel they are entitled to receive them.  

 It  will  involve  reducing  government  spending  to  be  lower  than  government  revenue  

 for a long time.  

 It is likely to result in a lowering of the standard of living for whole societies as they 

 learn to live within their means. 

 The  political  challenge  will  be  to  convince  the  electorate  of  the  need  for  fiscal  pain  

 and to ensure that the burden is equally shared. 

 Already in the UK and parts of Europe we have seen the social unrest that can result 

 when fiscal austerity bites. 

 But the alternative is unthinkable. 

 The  Western  world  cannot  continue  on  its  current  path  of  borrowing  to  fund  its  

 excessive lifestyle.  The problem of fiscal sustainability will only get worse. 

 Eventually lenders will cry enough is enough and turn off the credit tap.  And when 

 that happens the economic, financial, social and political dislocations are likely to be 

 catastrophic. 

 15 

 

 16 

 

 The  Western  world  is  at  the  most  important  economic  cross  road  in  its  history  -  

 Governments must accept their responsibilities to fiscal discipline and the prudent use 

 of their citizens hard earned monies, or they need to accept that the demise of western 

 economies will be forced upon them in a dramatic, unpredictable and possibly violent 

 way.  

 Adam Smith’s free hand is perfectly capable of forming a fist to punish nations who 

 ignore  the  fundamental  rules.   Unfortunately  I  think  Adam’s  down  at  the  gym right  

 now and in training for one almighty whack. 

 Restoring fiscal credibility will be hard.    But it is essential we learn to live within 

 our means.   

 The Age of Entitlement should never have been allowed to become a fiscal nightmare. 

 But now that it has, Governments around the world must reign in their excesses and 

 learn to live within their means. All of our futures depend on it.  

 

 

