---
title: "Another boat as more than 100 people arrive every week this year"
date: "2012-04-05"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211371012
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2078417%22
---

 Current Articles | Archives | Search

 ANOTHER BOAT AS MORE THAN 100 PEOPLE ARRIVE  EVERY WEEK THIS YEAR

 Posted on Thursday, 5 April, 2012

 The arrival of the third illegal boat this week, with 71 people on board, means more than 1,500 people  have arrived in little over three months, as people smugglers continue to take advantage of Labor’s ‘let  them in, let them out’ policy on boat arrivals, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott  Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “This year an average of over 100 people are arriving by illegal boat every week as people smugglers  continue to take advantage of Labor’s community release policy on boat arrivals which has effectively  supercharged the people smuggling trade,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Arrivals in 2012 are already up 87% on the same period last year thanks to Labor’s embrace of the  Greens and 200 people have arrived this week alone,” he said.

 Mr Keenan said: “It is a fundamental responsibility of the Commonwealth Government to protect  Australia’s borders yet Labor has presided over a complete collapse of our border security.

 “This has come about as a direct result of their deliberate policy decisions, when they came to  Government, which dismantled the successful regime put in place by the Howard Government.

 “At the time the Labor Party celebrated their “achievement” yet they failed to understand the  consequences of what they had done and that it would reinvigorate people smuggling.

 “Since that time Labor has had more policy positions than a reasonable person can remember and  their latest ploy is to bury their heads in the sand and try to deflect blame for their failure.

 “Creating the problem and then ignoring it whilst seeking to blame others is not governing - it is a  fundamental failure to accept the responsibility that Government requires,” Mr Keenan said.

 Page 1 of 1 ANOTHER BOAT AS MORE THAN 100 PEOPLE ARRIVE EVERY WEEK THIS ...

 30/11/2012 http://www.keenan.net.au/Media/PortfolioMediaReleases/tabid/80/articleType/Article...

