---
title: "Abbott's negativity putting lives at risk"
date: "2012-05-18"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211373396
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2275372%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Abbott's negativity putting lives at risk  Friday, 18 May 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Jason Clare MP - Minister for Home Affairs, Minister for  Justice and Minister for Defence Materiel. 

 Another asylum seeker boat was intercepted overnight, the 34th since Tony Abbott  chose negativity and his personal political interest over the national interest, rejecting  the government's offer to implement offshore processing. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Home Affairs, Jason Clare MP, said with more boats arriving, more lives were being  put at risk at sea on leaky vessels. 

 'This government has been very clear, we want to put in place a deterrent to prevent  people from getting on those dangerous boats - something offshore processing and  the Malaysia Arrangement can deliver,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'To stop the flow of boats and stop lives being put at risk we even offered to  implement Tony Abbott's own policy of a processing centre on Nauru - but Mr  Abbott's political calculation is that more boats are in his best interests. 

 'When will this relentless negativity come to an end?' 

 Mr Clare said it was time for Mr Abbott to vote to allow offshore processing. 

 'I urge Mr Abbott to remember what this is all about - 200 people died last year off  the coast of Indonesia and another 11 people died off the Malaysian coast in  February,' Mr Clare said. 

 'We can stop this happening, but it requires legislation. That means it requires us to  work together to pass it through the Parliament. 

 'If Mr Abbott really wants to 'stop the boats' he must stop saying 'no' and pass our  legislation to allow asylum seekers to be processed offshore in Malaysia and Nauru.' 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb186723.htm  Last update: Friday, 18 May 2012 at 14:03 AEST  

