---
title: "Irregular arrivals by sea anywhere in Australia now subject to regional processing"
date: "2013-05-16"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211394159
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2497045%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Thursday, 16 May 2013 

 Irregular arrivals by sea anywhere in Australia now subject to regional processing 

 The Gillard Government has now has implemented another recommendation of the Expert Panel on  Asylum Seekers, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Brendan O’Connor said today. 

 The Migration Amendment (Unauthorised Maritime Arrivals and Other Measures) Bill 2012,  including government amendments, passed through the Senate and the House. 

 “This Bill will ensure asylum seekers who unlawfully arrive anywhere in Australia by boat without a  visa will be subject to the same regional processing arrangements as asylum seekers who arrive at an  excised offshore place, such as Christmas Island,” Mr O’Connor said. 

 “It does not excise the Australian mainland from the migration zone, but provides that a person will  be subject to regional processing based on their status as an unauthorised maritime arrival rather  than based on the place of entry in Australia, as is currently the case. 

 “The Gillard Government is committed to implementing the recommendations of the Expert Panel  on Asylum Seekers, of which this legislative change is an important achievement. 

 “At the forefront of the panel’s reasoning in recommending this legislative change was the need to  strengthen disincentives to irregular maritime voyages, discouraging people from embarking on life-threatening journeys by boat. 

 The government amendments passed today - which address the recommendation by the Senate  Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee - will further build on existing mechanisms to ensure  transparency for regional processing arrangements.   

 The amendments require the minister to present, before both houses of Parliament, a report on  unauthorised maritime arrivals processed in regional processing countries, including arrangements  for assessing their refugee claims, accommodation, health care and education.   

 Mr O’Connor said the Bill was further evidence of the Gillard Government’s commitment to stopping  people taking dangerous journeys on unseaworthy vessels to Australia. 

 “The Government is the only party looking to implement all the Expert Panel’s recommendations to  prevent dangerous journeys and reduce the number of boat arrivals,” Mr O’Connor said. 

 

 Media contact:                                  Kylie Skotnicki 0408 823 604 

 

