---
title: "200 illegal boats this year as Tony Burke confirms dangerous new incentive for people smugglers"
date: "2013-07-04"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396692
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2630377%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 200 illegal boats this year as Tony Burke confirms dangerous new incentive  for people smugglers 

 Thursday 4th July 2013 

 The arrival of two more illegal boats on the people smugglers’ Rudd-carpet, with a total of 165 people on 

 board, takes to 200 the number of illegal boats to arrive this year, and comes as Labor confirmed their 

 dangerous new incentive for people smugglers to get women and children on boats by removing all 

 children off Manus Island, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow 

 Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “Two hundred boats have now arrived in Australia this year courtesy of the Rudd-carpet on our borders 

 which was created when Kevin Rudd came to office and recklessly abolished the Howard Government’s 

 border protection policies,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “On every occasion rather than restore the policies that worked, Labor has made a bad situation even 

 worse. 

 “Labor ignored the Coalition’s advice that families should have been placed on Nauru and instead sent 

 them to Manus. Now Tony Burke has confirmed Labor has created a dangerous new incentive for people 

 smugglers to send children on the dangerous boat journey to Australia, knowing they won’t be sent 

 offshore. 

 “This follows more empty rhetoric from Bob Carr about getting tough on people who arrive on illegal boats 

 without documentation. 

 “This is nothing more than catch up politics in an election year for Labor to pretend they will implement 

 policies that they don’t believe in, just like offshore processing which they are running into the ground. 

  “On every occasion the Coalition has had to drag this Labor Government kicking and screaming to realise 

 the obvious about their border failures. This is just another example. 

  “Labor have had the power to deny visas for those who throw away their documentation every day of the 

 last five and a half years they been in office. They haven’t done so. 

 “This was Coalition policy at the last election [excerpt attached below] and still is our policy. 

 “Labor have not only failed to use these powers they have openly rejected using them. Now on the eve of 

 an election they say they’ve had a change of heart. 

  “Labor simply don’t believe in stopping the boats or in the policies needed to achieve that outcome. That’s 

 why they can’t be trusted. 

 “This will always be the problem with the Labor Party on border protection, regardless of what Bob Carr, 

 Tony Burke or Kevin Rudd say - they just don’t believe it, because that is their record in Government,” Mr 

 Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “The boats keep on arriving under the Rudd Government, with another two illegal boats, 

 carrying 165 people, arriving in Australia courtesy of people smugglers. 

 “Yet again we see Labor playing catch-up when it comes to implementing effective policies to stop the 

 boats with the latest flagged by Foreign Affairs Minister Bob Carr who is now considering adopting Coalition 

 policy that was set out three years ago. 

 “The Coalition has been calling for a tougher approach for asylum seekers who arrive by boat without their 

 documentation and once again the Government is only considering it in the twelfth hour. 

 “Labor are always one step behind when it comes to effective border protection and immigration policy. 

 “This Government cannot be trusted on border protection because their track record is appalling and they 

 do not have the resolve to put an end to the people smuggling trade,” Mr Keenan said. 

 The Coalition’s real action plan for restoring integrity and fairness to refugee decision making 

 Tuesday 6 July 2010 

 Page 3 - 

 Proof of identity 

 The Coalition will establish greater objectivity in the determination of the refugee status of asylum seekers 

 who are unable to present identity documentation. 

 While the Coalition recognises some applicants may never have had such documentation, or may have 

 had their documentation destroyed or confiscated, there are also cases where such documentation is 

 deliberately discarded or destroyed by applicants. 

 Where an assessor makes a reasonable assessment that an applicant for asylum has discarded their 

 identity documentation deliberately, there will be a presumption against awarding refugee status under 

 Section 91W of the Migration Act. 

