---
title: "Remarks at Honorary Citzenship [Citizenship] Ceremony for Raoul Wallenberg: speech, Government House, Canberra"
date: "2013-05-06"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Citizenship"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435746
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2852073%22
---

 Remarks at Honorary Citzenship Ceremony for Raoul  Wallenberg, Government House, Canberra May 06, 2013

 EO&E...........................................................................................................................................

 Your Excellency, Prime Minister, ladies and gentlemen.

 It would have been so easy to have looked the other way. Millions did. They concluded that there was nothing that could be done  in the face of such evil, or that perhaps nothing much was really happening after all, or that some of the victims might have 

 somehow had it coming. But others did what they could to help.

 Of all the examples of resistance to Nazi tyranny, Raoul Wallenberg’s is perhaps the most flagrant. He remonstrated with death  squads; he distributed thousands of Swedish passports to people awaiting deportation to death camps. He badged whole 

 buildings as Swedish diplomatic institutions to help shelter the Jews within. In an era when executions were on an industrial scale,  his was an industrial scale rescue effort and it ultimately cost him his life.

 Raoul Wallenberg matters today, nearly 70 years after he disappeared into a Soviet camp because, in part, of the contribution 

 those he rescued from the Holocaust have made to Australia. Australia owes so much to Jewish people, especially to those who  came as refugees from war-torn Europe, some of whom Wallenberg himself saved, such as Frank Vajda, who is here today.

 Mostly though, Wallenberg matters because of the importance of good example. Passivity in the face of evil can so easily become 

 complicity. Wallenberg refused to accept that nothing could be done, that nothing could be done to help those who would be  victims.

 That’s why he now belongs to everyone. To Jews, to whom he was one righteous among nations. To Christians, for whom he 

 might be seen as the ultimate Good Samaritan. To all people of goodwill who accept the golden rule to do to others as you would  have them do to you, but often lack the courage to live by it.

 It’s a privilege to support this act of citizenship. Raoul Wallenberg should be a citizen of every country which respects human 

 dignity. He does not rest in our land, may he always rest in our hearts.

 [ends]

 © Tony Abbott MHR 2010 | Authorised by Tony Abbott MHR, Level 2, 17 Sydney Rd, Manly NSW 2095

 www.tonyabbott.com.au

 Tony Abbott Federal Member for Warringah | Leader of the Opposition

 Page 1 of 1 Remarks at Honorary Citzenship Ceremony for Raoul Wallenberg, Gov...

 20/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

