---
title: "Transcript of joint doorstop interview: Springwood, Queensland: July 19, 2013: Labor's FBT hit on cars; Kevin Rudd’s border protection failures"
date: "2013-07-19"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Labor's FBT hit on cars"
  - "Kevin Rudd’s border protection failures"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397371
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2837207%22
---

 Joint Doorstop Interview, Springwood, Queensland July 19, 2013

 Subjects: Labor’s FBT hit on cars; Kevin Rudd’s border protection failures.

 EO&E...........................................................................................................................................

 TONY ABBOTT:

 It's good to be here with Joe Hockey the Shadow Treasurer, with David Lin our candidate for Rankin, also with senior members of  the motoring industry led by Andrew McKellar who leads the Automotive Chambers of Commerce. Over of the last few days, since 

 the government suddenly out of the blue made this announcement of a $1.8 billion hit on motoring, the Coalition has been  consulting with a range of people in the industry. Joe has been consulting, the Shadow Minister Sophie Mirabella has been 

 consulting, I've been consulting. It's clear that this is a serious blow to an industry under pressure. This greedy grab from the  government is costing sales today. It's costing jobs today. To give this important industry for Australia's future the reassurance 

 that it needs and deserves Joe and I can announce today that the Coalition will oppose this in opposition, and will not proceed  with it in government.

 There are three essential problems with the government's proposal. The first there has been no consultation, no prior consultation 

 whatsoever. So, it is fundamentally bad process from a government which never gets the process right. Second, it means far  more paperwork for ordinary Australians from a government which has massively increased the paperwork burden on the people 

 of Australia, and third, it's another tax hit on people who have suffered enough when it comes to tax increases from this  government. It demonstrates that this government just doesn't get if when it comes to middle Australia. It just fundamentally fails 

 to understand middle Australia.

 The government of course has said that this is a tax hit that will only impact on rich people driving BMWs. Hang on a minute,  Kevin Rudd told us just three weeks ago that he wanted to stop the class war. As soon as they're under pressure, the class war 

 comes out again. I tell you who this is impacting. It's impacting on motor manufacturers. On dealers, on leasing business but  above all else it's impacting on ordinary Australians. On nurses who get a car to do home visits. On charity workers who get a car 

 to help the poor. On salespeople, on modest wages, who need a car to do their business. These are the people who are being  impacted by this proposal from the government. It must not go ahead and it won’t go ahead under the Coalition.

 Kevin Rudd likes to say he has changed. Well, he hasn't and this proves it. Three weeks into a recycled Kevin Rudd Prime 

 Ministership and we have recycled more Kevin Rudd mistakes. This is another version of the mining tax. A bad idea, badly  thought through, badly announced that will badly damage an important sector of our economy. It just shows that Kevin Rudd is still

 Kevin Rudd. You can't trust him, he never gets it right. If this is what he does in just three weeks, just think of the chaos and  pandemonium that he will cause if he gets another three years.

 I am going to ask Joe to say a few words then Andrew McKellar on behalf of the motoring industry and then obviously we'll take 

 some questions.

 JOE HOCKEY:

 Well thank you very much, Tony. Look, this is a significant announcement today, because it clearly illustrates the difference  between the Liberal National Parties and the Labor Party when it comes to business and consumers. The Labor Party have their 

 facts wrong, they have their narrative wrong and they don't understand the impact of their actions on everyday Australians.

 Firstly, it is quite clear, after speaking with the industry and they're going to say something now, that the people most affected by  this new tax from Labor, are in fact people earning less than $100,000 a year. Overwhelmingly there's people driving cars of a 

 value less than $50,000. So they're not the BMWs and the Mercedes and so on. These are every day Australians doing their  everyday job.

 Secondly, when it was announced by the government they said it was an integrity measure. That's why it had to apply 

 immediately. Today, Bill Shorten said no there is no rorting. We just think it's about the sustainability of the tax system. So, on the 

 Tony Abbott Federal Member for Warringah | Leader of the Opposition

 Page 1 of 4 Joint Doorstop Interview, Springwood, Queensland > Tony Abbott

 12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 one hand they're saying this is about rorting and on the other hand they say it's got nothing to do with rorting. That's not the way to  frame tax policy. It's not as if this is new to the Labor Party. As Tony said, Kevin Rudd did it on the mining tax, the alcopops tax, 

 the partnership of Rudd and Bowen did it on employee share schemes. This is the same old Labor, the same old Kevin Rudd.

 The third key fact is that it's going to have an immediate impact on the industry, on an industry that's already fragile, on business  and consumer confidence that's already fragile. When the Labor Premier of South Australia said today this is bad policy and he 

 was not, and many others were not, consulted about it. He was absolutely right. He was absolutely right. It is bad policy, the  Coalition will not support bad policy. After having spoken at length with the industry, we now know this is going to be like a 

 tsunami through the motor vehicle industry in Australia and the households, everyday Australian households are going to be hit.

 Andrew?

 ANDREW MCKELLAR:

 Thank you Tony and Joe. I’m Andrew McKellar, the executive director of the Australian Automobile Association, here today to  represent stakeholders who are affected by the announcement that was made by the Government earlier in the week and 

 certainly we welcome the Coalition’s commitment to oppose this measure, this tax hike. There is a very strong concern across all  groups, across industry, across dealerships, across affected businesses, across consumers, leasing companies, that this 

 measure is having a significant adverse impact and it’s having that impact right now.

 The industry, consumers who are looking to lease a new vehicle, have been put into a deep freeze by this announcement. It’s  created significant uncertainty. We would call on the Government now to rethink the policy announcement that it has made, to 

 understand the impact that it is having. I think there’s no harm in admitting a mistake, coming to the table and consulting with  those who’ve been affected and determining a different course of action.

 So we certainly welcome the strong signal today from the Coalition that they will oppose this measure and that they won’t pursue 

 it in government. I think that begins to restore some measure of certainty. We now need to safeguard those interests. We need to  stop the losses in jobs that are already occurring as a result of this and we need to restore some certainty. So that’s our call and I 

 certainly welcome the announcement today.

 Thank you.

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Thanks so much. Ok, are there any questions?

 QUESTION:

 What do you have to say to the people who have lost their jobs?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well I bleed for them. I bleed for them and I just deeply lament the fact that we have a government which doesn’t understand that  announcements have consequences and that if you suddenly change the rules under which an industry is operating, you can 

 convulse it in ways that destroy jobs from day one and this is a government which just doesn’t get it but it is so in character with  the sorts of things that Kevin Rudd did when he was Prime Minister the first time around.

 QUESTION:

 The Prime Minister’s expected to announce the Government’s asylum seeker policy this afternoon, in about an hour. They’ve 

 made a deal with PNG. 3,000 refugees could be processed on Manus Island. Do you support that?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well I certainly support offshore processing. The Coalition invented offshore processing. I just wish this government had been fair  dinkum about it. The trouble is this government has never been fair dinkum about offshore processing. They’ve never really meant 

 it when they said they were trying to stop the boats. In fact, they even mock the phrase ‘stopping the boats’. If the Government  was fair dinkum about offshore processing they would have been much faster to erect the Nauru centre. They would have got on 

 with it with the Manus centre. Let’s face it, they first announced Manus well over 12 months ago and at the moment there’s only  something like 200 people there. So fine, by all means, let’s expand the capacity of the Manus centre but from this government it’s 

 too little, too late. You need a whole range of measure if you’re going to stop the boats. This is just one of them. If Mr Rudd were  serious he could introduce temporary protection visas to deny the people smugglers a product to sell with the stroke of a pen 

 today and I challenge him to do it.

 Page 2 of 4 Joint Doorstop Interview, Springwood, Queensland > Tony Abbott

 12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 QUESTION:

 Do you believe that they’re just simply copying the Pacific Solution?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well again, this is something that Mr Rudd closed down in 2008. There could not be a clearer distinction between the Labor Party 

 and the Coalition on this. John Howard found a problem and crafted a solution. Kevin Rudd inherited a solution and created a  problem, only it’s much, much worse now than it ever was in the past. It looks like we could well have a record monthly number of 

 illegal arrivals in the first month of Kevin Rudd’s recycled prime ministership. The guy that started the problem is not the man to fix  it.

 QUESTION:

 Just one more on asylum seekers. Another idea that’s been floated is resettling genuine refugees in PNG. Would an Abbott 

 government support that?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well let’s wait and see. The point I make is that if the Government is serious about stopping the boats, it’s got to change policy  here in Australia. We can't expect the rest of the world to solve our problems for us and Mr Rudd can't internationalise our 

 problems as a way of distracting people from his failures and as an excuse for him to spend even more time overseas going to  international conferences rather than getting behind the desk and making the decisions that are needed to fix this problem. I call 

 on him to admit today to be man enough to admit today that he got this one fundamentally wrong. He should never have done  what we did back in 2008 and the only way to fix this is to embrace in full with a will, with enthusiasm, the policies that John 

 Howard put in place that worked.

 JOE HOCKEY:

 Just on the other issue, Andrew should give us some statistics that alarm both Tony and I about what's happened with the car  industry over the last three days.

 ANDREW MCKELLAR:

 Sure. In the discussions that we've had today we have tried to quantify some of the impacts that are occurring as a result of the 

 uncertainty around the FBT changes and certainly what we're hearing is that there has been a cessation of activity for a number of  leasing companies and we've already seen announcements in the marketplace in relation to job losses and that’s of significant 

 concern. I think the other area which is even more deeply concerning is the impact that it will have going forward on motor vehicle  sales. We're hearing that impact could be as much as eight to ten thousand vehicle sales already lost since the time of this 

 announcement. That's a significant immediate impact. It's certainly creating uncertainty for consumers, for motorists, for those that  are looking to package a new vehicle. It stopped them in their tracks and equally for those companies that are entering into those 

 contracts for employers, it's creating uncertainty. There's the red tape impact of course. That's of significant concern. It is having a  material impact. Until we clarify the situation going forward, that uncertainty will remain. So that's the reason why we do call on the 

 Government to rethink this position, rethink this measure and step back and change the decision.

 QUESTION:

 Is there anything wrong with keeping a logbook? Isn’t it about accountability?

 ANDREW MCKELLAR:

 It's about red tape. I think one of the points here is that those people that have been applying the statutory method - if you go and  look on the ATO website that is entirely within the law. They've been complying and doing what they needed to do under the law 

 as it stands and as it still stands today. The concern is that rather than refining or if they need to make a change then I think it's  open to a government of any persuasion to come forward and state that case. But to do it properly and to do it in an open and 

 consultative way and when you see the impacts that are already occurring as a result of that I think you need to take heed of that.

 LEIGH PENBERTHY:

 My name is Leigh Penberthy. I'm the President of the Australian Packaging Industry Association. So the statistics that have been  mentioned by Andrew and others today have come from my industry and the association. So we are deeply concerned about the 

 announcement that was made and the immediate impact that it has had on the industry so far. So we applaud the Opposition 

 Page 3 of 4 Joint Doorstop Interview, Springwood, Queensland > Tony Abbott

 12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 today to come out and state their position and I concur with Andrew, we now ask the federal Government to come back to the  table and have a conversation with us on this matter immediately.

 JOE HOCKEY: 

 Do you want to talk about the nature of the people that are taking out leases?

 LEIGH PENBERTHY:

 Yeah, that’s a very good point. It affects the people who take these cars are not your so-called high salary employees. These 

 people are not on $150,000. They’re on salaries which are pretty average wages - $70,000 a year and they’re not driving BMWs  or Mercedes. They’re driving your average car and the average price that we fund across the industry is roughly $35,000. So, and 

 of that portfolio, roughly 35 to 40 per cent of those vehicles are Australian made vehicles. In fact the total portfolio represents so  far and we are trawling through hundreds of thousands of records that only five per cent represented through the luxury cars.

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Ok, thanks everyone.

 [ends]

 © Tony Abbott MHR 2010 | Authorised by Tony Abbott MHR, Level 2, 17 Sydney Rd, Manly NSW 2095

 www.tonyabbott.com.au

 Page 4 of 4 Joint Doorstop Interview, Springwood, Queensland > Tony Abbott

 12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

