---
title: "Government not taxpayers to blame for new Budget black hole"
date: "2013-04-29"
creators:
  - "Hockey, Joe"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435239
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2406125%22
---

 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 THE HON JOE HOCKEY MP 

 SHADOW TREASURER 

 

 Monday, 29 April 2013   

 

 GOVERNMENT NOT TAXPAYERS TO BLAME FOR NEW BUDGET BLACK  HOLE    

 

 The Prime Minister is claiming today that a $12 billion revenue ‘writedown’ is the cause of  Labor’s fiscal woes.  

 But here are the facts.  

 MYEFO forecast a $37 billion increase in total receipts in 2012-13. Even after the $12 billion  ‘writedown’, total receipts will still increase by $25 billion or 7.6% on the previous year  - around three times the inflation rate.  

 Just six months ago in MYEFO the Government was promising a surge to surplus based on  the  $37 billion magic carpet ride increase in receipts.  

 The Government ‘guaranteed’ to deliver this surplus on over 500 occasions ‘come hell or  high water’. 

 But that promise has now been broken because modern Labor cannot stop spending.  Spending this year is forecast to be $363 billion - nearly $100 billion more than the last  Budget of John Howard and Peter Costello.  

 Yet still the Government is committing to major massive additional spending in education,  disability, infrastructure along with a blow out in asylum seeker costs. 

 Julia Gillard has ignored all the warnings from commentators, economists and business  leaders about the weak business environment.  

 Only  the  Coalition  can  offer  a  credible  and  believable  path  back  to  a  Budget  surplus.  The   Coalition will create a stable and certain environment under which business and families can  get on with doing what they do best. We will deliver on what we promise. 

 

 [ENDS] 

  

