---
title: "Over 2,000 boat arrivals in less than 20 days"
date: "2013-05-19"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211394326
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719419%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling OVER 2,000 BOAT ARRIVALS IN LESS THAN  20 DAYS May 19, 2013

 More than 2,000 people have arrived illegally by boat in less than 20 days this month, after the illegal arrival of two more  boats with a total of 130 people on board, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow  Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “By the time the Howard Government left office just two people were arriving by illegal boat a month but now under Julia  Gillard's border failures, more than 2,000 people have arrived in less than 20 days,” Mr Morrison said.

 “So far in 2012/13 there has been an average of more than 2,000 people illegally arriving on boats every month. Just like  the last two months this has been exceeded again in May, this time in just 18 days.

 “When the Howard Government left office spending on illegal boat arrivals was just $85 million, but under Julia Gillard's  border failure next financial year taxpayers will be hit with at least a $3 billion bill.

 “Australians have already seen more than $10 billion in budget blowouts due to Labor's border failures, including more  than $5 billion since last year's budget. 

 “Australia cannot afford three more years of Labor's border failures. 

 “The Coalition will stop the boats and end the cost, chaos and tragedy by reinstating proven border protection policies and  in doing so restore confidence in our immigration program,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “Over 41,000 people have arrived illegally by boat since Labor came to office and unwound the robust  border protection system they inherited from the Howard Government.

 “Despite this unprecedented rate of arrivals the Government has cut a further $14 million from border protection and  enforcement and another 120 staff from Customs - leaving the agency understaffed and under funded.

 “Over the last six years Labor has cut 870 staff from Customs, which has a total staffing of just 5,000 people - significantly  hindering the agency’s ability to do its job.

 “When Labor came to office this problem had been solved - now because of their poor decision to abolish the proven  policies of the Howard Government we have a $10 billion budget blow-out,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 OVER 2,000 BOAT ARRIVALS IN LESS THAN 20 DAYS > Michael Keenan MP

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

