---
title: "Greens will stop Tony Abbott's dangerous refugee cuts"
date: "2013-08-31"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211436632
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2701348%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Saturday, 31 August 2013    

 Greens will stop Tony Abbott’s dangerous  refugee cuts    

 The Coalition’s dangerous cuts to legal advice for refugees are unacceptable and the Australian  Greens have said they will stop the changes to the Migration Act after the election.   

 “Scraping assistance to asylum seekers locked up in prison camps is just Tony Abbott's latest attack  on refugees,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said today.   

 “Today's it's scrapping access to help and information, what will it be tomorrow? There seems no  limit to how low the old parties are willing to go in their race to cruelty.    

 “The Greens will move to stop these changes in Parliament if Tony Abbott becomes Prime Minister.    

 “Dismantling the system that reviews DIAC decisions to deny people protection is incredibly  dangerous.    

 “We know that a large proportion of DIAC’s refugee status denials are overturned when reviewed  through the Refugee Review Tribunal and the Australian courts.    

 “It’s clear that DIAC assessors make mistakes in their first assessments and if the Coalition’s cruel  cuts get up then we may be sending people back to their deaths.  

 “It seems that Tony Abbott has forgotten that in these cases we are dealing with people’s lives.    

 “Denying refugees their potentially life-saving day in court because they can’t afford legal  representation flies in the face of the Australian commitment to a fair-go for all.   

 “Another group of families have been sent to Australia’s tent-slum on Nauru today. There are now  14 more children senselessly languishing in an island prison. This is what the Labor Party’s hard-line  asylum policy looks like. 

 

 “The Greens are the only party standing up for the rights of refugees. Australia is a caring country,  but its generous is under attack as the Labor Party and Tony Abbott rush to the polls on the back of  refugee cruelty.”    

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

