---
title: "UN Security Council meets with Syrian Opposition"
date: "2013-07-27"
creators:
  - "Carr, Bob"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397715
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2626162%22
---

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 Senator the Hon. Bob Carr 

 July 27, 2013 

 UN Security Council meets with Syrian Opposition 

 Foreign Minister Bob Carr welcomed the first meeting on 26 July between UN  Security Council members and the National Coalition of Syrian Revolution and  Opposition Forces, led by its newly elected President Ahmad al-Jarba. 

 Senator Carr said the meeting reflected sustained efforts by Australia and other  Council members to maintain the Security Council’s focus on Syria. 

 “The situation in Syria is getting worse every day,” Senator Carr said. 

 “Over 100,000 people have now been killed in the conflict and millions of people are  homeless and without proper food or medical care.  About 2 million are now refugees  in neighbouring countries. 

 “Australia’s strong view is that the only solution to this conflict is a political  settlement, and we welcome the National Coalition’s confirmation at the meeting that  it is committed to such a settlement. 

 “It is vital that the proposed Geneva II conference is held as soon as possible, so  agreement can be reached on a political transition.’’ 

 Senator Carr said Australia acknowledged the National Coalition as the legitimate  representative of the Syrian people in December 2012. 

 “Australia welcomes the new leadership of the National Coalition and its expanded  political body as an indication of its commitment to broad representation,” Senator  Carr said. 

 “We commend the commitment of the National Coalition’s leadership to a democratic  and pluralistic Syria where all minorities have a place and for rejecting terrorism and  extremism.  

 “These are fundamental principles on which a new Syria needs to be built. 

 “Australia will continue to support the Syrian people, including through our  humanitarian contribution which has now reached $100 million.” 

 Media contact: 6277 7500  

 

