---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 16 August 2013: Coalition's policy to clear Labor's 30,000 illegal arrivals backlog"
date: "2013-08-16"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398974
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2672185%22
---

 TRANSCRIPT OF MINISTER TONY BURKE 

 PRESS CONFERENCE 

 SYDNEY 

 16 AUGUST 2013  

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY 

 BURKE: Good afternoon. Normally these updates have been updates on implementation, as  you'd appreciate there's a lot of interest around today about some announcements that the  Opposition have made with respect to asylum seeker policy, and I'll spend most of my time  dealing with that. 

 In terms of implementation itself, another plane load landed this morning in Manus Island, 40  people on this particular plane load, so where we've started with two planes a week, we're now  up to three planes a week, we're continuing to ramp that up as systems get in place, the capacity  of the additional site that Toll were implementing the latest I've been told is they expect that to be  fully up and ready on Sunday.  But even if it were later than that, the capacity will be there well  and truly before the current facilities are filled. 

 We continue to have the situation that I've described before, where whatever capacity is required  will be provided and we're keeping well in front of developments on Manus Island. 

 With respect to Nauru, I'm getting some final indications given to me about the precise standards  that we need to be able to send families across. Obviously we're checking in the wake of what's  happened with the Nauruan hospital to make sure that we've got appropriate health standards for  any families that are sent across. 

 As you may be aware, health care for people who are transferred is primarily done by a different  organisation, not by the Nauruan health service. But that has been the extent to which there has  been a reliance on that. 

 So that's it in terms of update on implementation, and implementation continues to be exactly as  we said it would be, which is we're in a situation where anybody who arrives by boat without a  visa will not be settled in Australia, and the regional resettlement arrangements with Papua New  Guinea and with Nauru are guaranteeing that we can implement that. 

 Today's announcements from the Opposition have taken the discussion up onto a new tangent. 

 I'm not sure if it's because they worked their policy out some months ago and decided even  though it wasn't quite as relevant now that the regional resettlement arrangements were in place,  they were going to just put it out there anyway, or whether they just haven't thought it through,  but effectively even under their own admission, the policies announced today are irrelevant to  anybody deciding whether or not they would get on a boat. 

 Because of the regional resettlement arrangements, if you arrive by boat now without a visa, you  won't be settled in Australia. Therefore the question of what visa class would apply to you is  completely irrelevant. Be it a permanent visa, be it a temporary visa, irrelevant to the people who  are making a decision now as to whether or not they will get on a boat. 

 Similarly, legal appeals to the refugee review tribunal or going through the various court systems  become irrelevant when your application is being determined under the law of a different country. 

 So effectively what we've got with today's announcements from the Coalition is a determination  that even though it's irrelevant to whether or not people smugglers have a viable business,  they've decided to effectively just be mean for the hell of it. 

 If you're a people smuggler and you saw the announcements from the Coalition today, they  would say, well it's not about them. They know that this does not make a scintilla of difference to  anybody who is currently running a people smuggling operation. 

 All we have from the Coalition today is a situation where they have made an announcement to  show how tough they are, they've made an announcement to show that they can be mean just  for the hell of it, knowing full well even under their own description that it's irrelevant to whether  or not people how are going to get on a boat. 

 The whole way through I've said we need to have a sensible conversation here, and we need to  be clear about what it is we're aiming to do. It is good public policy to want to stop people from  drowning on the high sea. 

 The announcements from the Coalition today are irrelevant to anyone making that decision,  absolutely irrelevant. Similarly the myth that you can completely obliterate an appeals  mechanism is one of those 'careful for what you wish for' moments. If the only appeals  mechanism available because you've abolished everything else is the High Court, we end up  with a legal situation which I think no one would wish for, which is where each and every appeal  has one place and one place only to go to, and that becomes the High Court. 

 There have previously been attempts by each side of politics to try to minimise the extent of  appeals and there are good reasons why Parliaments have tried to do that. Without exception,  the courts have always found a way back in, and I'm sure whether it's naivety or whether it's just  spin, but certainly what the Coalition have announced today doesn't stack up in terms of policy to  do something about people smuggling operations across the Indian Ocean. 

 JOURNALIST: In your debate with Scott Morrison on Wednesday night, he was boasting about  how he at every turn had spotted problems with the Government's own policies, including a legal  problem with the Malaysia solution.  Has he now got a blind spot for his own policy? 

 BURKE: Scott Morrison, I think we can be quite frank here. Scott Morrison right now wants the  boats to keep coming, that's what he wants and we all know it. You look even at their media  release today, now they know full well that the Government has made no decision about going  ahead with the site at Singleton. 

 We've reserved the money in case it's needed, we expect it won't be because of what's  happening with the regional resettlement arrangements, so there's no work being done at  Singleton, we don't expect any work being done. So they put out a media release about that,  where effectively the outcome of their policy is no different to where we think things are going to  end up, and then in their final line, just putting in the line in the final statement that they believe  the agreement with PNG is unravelling, without any references to how because they know it's  not, but they want to create a semblance that it's unravelling because they want people to keep 

 getting on boats, they want that for a political reason, which is really pretty unfortunate. It says a  lot about their character, it says a lot about them. 

 But effectively, if you're an asylum seeker and you're fishing around for who's going to give you a  message that says if you get on a boat you'll get sent and settled in Australia, there's only three  sorts of people who will give you that message: people smugglers, Tony Abbott and Scott  Morrison, they're the only places you'll get it. 

 And for Scott Morrison, I don't think he has a blind spot with respect to defects in his own policy, I  think he has a blind spot in seeing beyond politics. I think enjoys the politics of this issue far too  much. My view has always been you need to identify accurately what the problem is. 

 That's why today's announcements are silly because they're irrelevant to the actual problem,  they don't apply to a single person who's considering getting on a boat at the moment. 

 JOURNALIST: Does that then follow that you think the Coalition doesn't care about lives being  lost at sea? 

 BURKE: No, no, I don't believe that, I don't believe that. When cornered, they've even  acknowledged that that's the limitation of their turn back boats policy. They've acknowledged that  the capacity, and the reason that John Howard stopped turning around boats as well, the  capacity for the new operators to get the vessels that will sink, and some vessel arriving ready,  sabotage ready effectively, means that we're not the sort of country that will leave people  drowning in the ocean, and when cornered, Scott Morison admits that. 

 So I'm not pretending that they want the drownings to happen, but I do believe they are feeding  the exact arguments that people smugglers are trying to get through the pipeline. 

 JOURNALIST: They had a pot shot at your policy as well, about what you would do with the  30,000 people if you were to win government (inaudible). What were your plans or what are your  plans (inaudible)? 

 BURKE: People will be processed, and people would be processed according to law, if they  don't have valid claims they get sent home, if they do have valid claims then over time they end  up getting protection visas, if they end up getting permanent visa over time they won't get them  more quickly than people in an equivalent situation who are waiting in camps, that's what the no  advantage policy means. But over time they will get it. And think about the logic, now, there was  a different argument before we announced the Papua New Guinea arrangements, there was a  different argument then, and there was a contestable policy argument as to whether temporary  protection visas would matter as a deterrent. 

 Now I believe they don't, I believe all the evidence we have is that when they were introduced by  John Howard, the number of people getting on boats went up, not down. That's what happened,  and John Howard ended up switching something like 80 per cent of people over time onto  permanent visas anyway. So there was a contestable argument before we made the PNG  announcement as to whether or not temporary protection visas would work. But now they are  irrelevant to whether or not people get on boats, because people who get on boats under our  government's policy don't get Australian visas at all. 

 So the only possible reason to make an announcement like they made today, because it's  irrelevant to the boats, the only possible reason to make that announcement is for apolitical  desire to look tough and mean just for the hell of it. Because there is no policy outcome of any  sort of decency that you might see that comes as a result of today. 

 JOURNALIST: Speaking of decency, do you think we need to kind of boost resettlement  services for that 30,000 cohort who do become permanent residents and refugees in general, do  we need to boost services? 

 BURKE: Look, the actual settlement services are handled on a day to day basis by Kate Lundy  and not by myself, certainly services of that nature always need to be reviewed and always need  to be looked at because ultimately, if someone is going to stay in Australia, then you want them  to be making a contribution and you want them to be at home and settled as quickly as possible  if they're going to stay. 

 And if they're not going to stay, you want them to leave, and if they're working out which way they  should come to Australia if they're not here yet, you want them to come with a visa on a method  that is safe in an orderly fashion. So that's the best way I can map out the principles. 

 JOURNALIST: Asylum seeker advocates have spoken out about (inaudible), were you ever brief  on TPVs specifically and did you ever canvass it  when you took over the role from your  predecessor, just to cover off that option? 

 BURKE: Well the data always spoke for itself, and even though I hadn't held the portfolio I've  obviously been a member of Cabinet since we first came to office in 2007, so I've been in many  discussions on these issues. 

 The data on temporary protection visas was really clear, when they were introduced, the number  of people coming by boat went up, really simple. So the data spoke for itself, but from the  moment that the regional resettlement arrangement was put in place, even that argument  changed fundamentally, because under our policy, people who arrive don't get an Australian visa  at all. 

 Now unless Scott Morrison is suggesting that he would want to undo the arrangements with  Nauru and Papua New Guinea, unless he's suggesting that he would want to give them an  Australian visa, mind you I don't believe he's saying that, but unless he's saying that, then today's  announcement is completely irrelevant to what's happening with boats across the Indian Ocean,  completely irrelevant. 

 JOURNALIST: When asked about what he would salvage from the PNG for example,  (inaudible), do you think he does have plans to abort the PNG resettlement options? 

 BURKE: Be in no doubt, the resettlement arrangements are the most fundamental attack on the  business of people smugglers that we've ever had, fundamental, because they're doing two  things. At one end, they're taking away the product that they've been charging people for which  was the chance to live and work in Australia, at the other end, they're taking away the customers,  and we know that from the information that's happening on the ground. People smugglers  haven't had an attack this like before on the business model, and it needed to be a tougher  attack than before because the pipeline had grown so strongly and the pressure had become so  great. So Scott Morrison, if he has the privilege to hold the job that I hold in a few weeks’ time, 

 make no mistake he will be doing everything he can to take back every word he said during the  campaign. Because at that point it switches from politics to responsibility and there is nothing  responsible in anything that is coming out of Scott Morrison’s mouth. 

 Today, irrelevant to the boats, just being mean for the hell of it because he thinks it might be  good for politics and when he wants to undermine and say that something is unravelling and its  actually being implemented and being implemented in a completely streamlined fashion, every  planeload is going across exactly as we had organised. People are there the organisation is  happening on the ground, the expansion of Manus Island is happening, we have expanded it out  with Nauru as well, the settlement services are being put in place, we are implementing it and it’s  important for Australia that it happens. 

 And if there is a change of Government, Scott Morrison’s language will turn in an instant. And I  really think he should fess up to the Australian people because the truth is it’s being  implemented, it’s working, he knows it and he would rather have the political issue that he thinks  has been cruelly taken from him. Well bad luck, let’s just deal with the policy, let’s deal with  something that is important for Australia and important for people who are trying to get to  Australia and dying on the way here. 

 JOURNALIST: The Greens have labelled both the Coalition and Labor as being in a cruelty race.  Do you think the Coalition have won that race today? 

 BURKE: Look if there is a race for cruelty I have never been in a race like that. I don’t know  whether someone else is racing like that, if they are they are not racing against me. The policies  that we have implemented, I have been upfront the whole way through about my motivations. I’m  not a thump the table, look at how tough I am sort of person, but I do identify a problem and if a  difficult measure needs to be taken in order to deal with it, then my resolve will be firm and I will  not shift and that’s exactly how I’m handling it. 

 Scott Morrison can speak for himself on why they have announced policies today that even  under their own definition are irrelevant to whether or not people now get on a boat. 

 JOURNALIST: Does the Coalition actually have the legal grounds to remove the rights of appeal  if their applications have failed? 

 BURKE: There have been many attempts of the Australian parliament to do things of this nature  and in every instances the courts have found a way back in. If what Scott Morrison has  described, and I heard parts of an interview he gave just before I came down to this media  conference. 

 If what he says is true which is all appeals now will go to the high court, I really think that’s a  ‘careful for what you wish for’ moment. If that’s the outcome then I fail to see how that does  anything other than create an almighty backlog in the courts that keep people here waiting for  appeals longer than ever.  So you know policy on the run always lands you in holes. 

 They did it when they put a cap on their numbers for Nauru which could have easily been  overwhelmed. They did it when they added a star to the seniority of the General issue and played  that game. They have made errors today where they have had policies that three months ago  before the Papua New Guinea arrangements were in place, might have been relevant to whether  or not people got on boats but they are actually no longer relevant because those individuals no 

 longer get Australian Visas. But they have released it anyway either because they only care  about the politics or because they just don’t think these things through. Either way I don’t think it  reflects terribly well for them. 

 JOURNALIST: Under the current processing system how long does it take (inaudible) 

 BURKE: It is a difficult question to answer because it depends entirely on the caseload, entirely  on the caseload and I don’t have specific information on that. I will see if I can get some of that  from my department and report it for you at a media conference but I suspect information of that  nature is very difficult to get accurate. And the truth is, you don’t want to be in a situation, if the  alternative is you are going to return people back to their country of origin, you do want to make  sure you get it right. You don’t want to be sending someone back and finding that you are  sending them back and they are getting killed. Or they are getting tortured or their claim turned  out to be true and you rushed the assessment and you got it wrong. We are not the sort of  country who does that and I think the truth is the other side of politics wouldn’t want to be the sort  of country that did that. I would be surprised if that was what they were after. 

 So depending on the caseload you can get a different answer on timeframes. Ultimately you do  want to minimise the time spent on appeals because if someone is on a pathway home, you want  them to go home. If that’s where they are headed that’s what you want to have happen. But to  think that you can have a unilateral action that will just get rid of all court appeals, it is either  naive or its spin, it’s one or the other. 

 JOURNALIST: Is that one of your main concerns with the idea that the policy (inaudible) 

 BURKE: Look there is two different things that they have announced. The Temporary Protection  Visa one has no possible deterrence impact on anybody who is currently considering getting on a  boat. So if that’s the case I’m trying to work out what’s the motivation, either than a political one  to look tough. I can’t see what the motivation is if it’s actually irrelevant to how many people are  going to get on a boat and risk their life. On the other issue with respect to appeals that they  have announced today, I'm not going to say that they are being brutal or anything like that, they  are probably just being naive. They have probably forgotten the number of times that parliament  has tried this and the courts have said no, people still have a right of appeal on jurisdictional  matters. It’s happened time and time again and you know either the people making decisions  have not done their homework from the opposition’s side or they know that it’s nothing other than  a bit of a media circus that they are engaging in an they think they might get away with it. Well  they didn’t. 

 ENDS 

