---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 4 September 2013: National Broadband Network; Kevin Rudd's leadership; Liberal candidates in hiding; Electorate of Melbourne; climate change policy; Better Schools plan; refugee policy; marriage equality"
date: "2013-09-04"
creators:
  - "Albanese, Anthony"
source: "DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "National Broadband Network"
  - "Kevin Rudd's leadership"
  - "Liberal candidates in hiding"
  - "Electorate of Melbourne"
  - "climate change policy"
  - "Better Schools plan"
  - "refugee policy"
  - "marriage equality"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211436927
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2709213%22
---

 

 

 Campaign Transcript    

 

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER ANTHONY ALBANESE &  CANDIDATE FOR MELBOURNE CATH BOWTELL  DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE 

 4 SEPTEMBER 2013    

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________ 

 

 SUBJECTS: National Broadband Network; Kevin Rudd’s leadership; Liberal  candidates in hiding; Electorate of Melbourne; Climate change policy;  Better Schools plan; Refugee policy; Marriage equality.   _____________________________________________________________  

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE: Here, some 21,000 homes have already been  connected in this area. If there is a change of government, that will stop, and the  area on the other side of Nicholson Street will not receive the National  Broadband Network. 

 Now Mr Turnbull seems to think that doesn’t matter. But if you are looking for a  property here in this region of Melbourne, this area will be worth more than that  area simply by an accident of history in terms of the timing of the rollout and  when the rollout hits particular suburbs. 

 It will mean that for this side, unconnected to the National Broadband Network,  you will also have these dirty big ugly fridge-type cabinets on the corners of  streets, connected up with copper going to the home.  

 Now the situation is that we need to do it right, do it once, and do it with  broadband. The Coalition plan is a second-rate system that relies upon last  century’s technology.  

 Conservatives of course, in the Federal Parliament 100 years ago, were arguing  for iron wire technology rather than copper. And I note that there is a bit of  precedent from 1942. There was a conservative member of parliament who said  this in the Australian Parliament, ‘there is no need for a wireless set in every 

 home. There are 200,000 people in London who have no wireless sets but who  listen to everything because they have loud speakers.’ 

 There is a history of conservatives arguing that progress won’t advance. Indeed  one of the inventors of home computers thought that they would sell about two  million computers because not every home would need a computer. The fact is  that we do need the best technology. Fibre is the best technology.  

 The difference in terms of cost is $29.5 billion for their plan, for a government  injection into their fraudband plan. Ours is $30.4 billion for fibre to every home  and every business. A three per cent differential in cost but our plan will deliver  40 times the speed provided by their plan in terms of downloads, and in terms of  uploads will deliver 400mbps. Their plan doesn’t even mention uploads, and  uploads are the key to driving education, health and assisting small businesses  to operate from home. 

 The area of Brunswick, which has been connected, has been shown to have 50  per cent more people engaged in telework, working from home right now, than  the area which isn’t connected. That shows in practical terms how quickly the  delivery of the NBN will transform the way that we work, the way that we live, the  way that we deal with our lives. 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, the Deloitte report cautions that it’s not a cost  benefit analysis of high speed broadband. In light of that, how seriously can it  really be taken? And why won’t the Government do a proper cost benefit analysis  if the NBN will justify the spending?  

 ALBANESE: The analyses have been done and what they show is a seven per  cent return from the NBN to government. 

 And you might recall there was an election - there is an election every three  years - and at the last election the Coalition ran around and said we’ll use the  savings from the NBN to pay for promises that we’ve made. It’s one of the  reasons why they have such a black hole in their costings. 

 This time around, the Coalition is also, under their plan, saying it will be off-budget. They accept it will provide a return to government. The fact is when you  get the infrastructure right, the only limits on the commercial opportunities, the  productivity benefits that will come from the NBN, are our imagination. 

 There are tasks that will come through the NBN that we don’t even know about  today over the next decade because the NBN will drive innovation. We know it  makes economic sense. The Coalition regard that it makes economic sense. The  National Broadband Network was the first priority of the seven themes that were  set out by Infrastructure Australia in their first report to the Council of Australian  Governments.  

 And this report, by Deloitte, has serious economic analysis going through  different individual situations, different family situations, different scenarios, by  2020. And importantly one of the things that the report notes is that that is given  existing applications. The benefits would be increased as applications come  through.  

 The fact that we’re going live here on Sky and ABC24 - that is a transformation  of the way that the campaign has been run due to new technology. People are  recording this on their smartphones, they will just download it onto their  computers. 

 New technology drives innovation and drives change. And the NBN is critical for  that. 

 JOURNALIST: Ms Bowtell, do you think this part of Melbourne needs an  upgrade given its already got quite good broadband coverage, it’s got faster  speed than a lot of outer suburban areas, including the hybrid fibre cable? Why  does this part of Melbourne need an upgrade? 

 CATH BOWTELL: Absolutely we do. The broadband at my place isn’t too good I  can tell you that. But we don’t want digital haves and have nots; this side of  Nicholson Street having the NBN, over there in Fitzroy, Abbotsford, Collingwood,  Richmond, Burnley not having it. 

 It’s also really important if you think about the Parkville precinct, with the clinical  and research practices there, being able to deliver e-health out to the broader  community, not just here in Melbourne.  

 And the issues around teleworking - congestion is a problem here in Melbourne  - if we can extend teleworking right across the community, that is going to be of  benefit to people who live and work here in Melbourne as well. 

 ALBANESE: Can I make this comment in response to that. I noticed Malcolm  Turnbull yesterday made some pretty extraordinary comments. What Malcolm  Turnbull is saying is that your current broadband if you live in a city is good  enough: you’re not a priority.  

 That’s an extraordinary proposition for someone who wants to be the  Communications Minister of the country after Saturday: ‘It’s good enough.’ 

 The fact is, it is not good enough. One of the reasons why as well we want to  make sure the NBN is rolled out to every home and every business is because  it’s an equity issue. 

 This community I’m sure has a lot of people who are transient. A lot of students  and a lot of young people tend to live in the inner city. The homes, if they are  going to connect up and pay $5,000 to connect up high speed broadband, you 

 don’t do that if you have got a six month lease on a share house. You don’t do  that. Therefore you miss out. 

 Some of the people who most need access to broadband - students, people  involved in the education sector - will miss out. And that is a fundamental issue  of the divide that will occur also - not just around suburbs - but within suburbs  between people who rent and people who buy. 

 We believe that access to the NBN is an essential service that is just as  legitimate in the 21st century as access to water and energy. 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, is Kevin Rudd a leader that has been discredited  by his own conduct? 

 ALBANESE: Kevin Rudd is a great leader of our party. He has a vision for this  nation. That’s a vision that includes the National Broadband Network. It’s a vision  that includes action on climate change. It’s a vision that includes our Better  Schools plan, the work that we are doing on health, the support for small  business.  

 The alternative vision is a guy who won’t tell you what he will do. He wants to  skate through til Saturday without having costings out there of his plans. He is  taking Australians for granted. Taking Australians for granted. 

 I did a candidates’ seminar last night and my Liberal opponent didn’t turn up.  That’s happening right around the country. Tories in hiding is what is going on  this campaign. You can’t find them! 

 I say to Liberal candidates - come out, come out wherever you are! We want to  see you. You are running in an election campaign, you can’t be hiding.  

 There might be one behind the tree over there! It is extraordinary. It is  extraordinary behaviour from an arrogant political party that are taking  Australians for granted.  

 And I don’t think Australians want to be treated like mugs. They want to hear  from their local candidates. They want to hear from Tony Abbott.  

 You don’t find Tony Abbott fronting up to forums that aren’t completely scripted,  completely scripted. That’s why Tony Abbott has for such a long period of time  avoided serious commentary. 

 I did Australian Agenda on Sunday, linked to The Australian, not noted for their  strong advocacy day by day of a vote for Labor. There was an empty chair there  because the Liberals wouldn’t send a senior person to the Australian Agenda  show. Why? Because on Australian Agenda you get grilled by Paul Kelly and  Peter Van Onselen and sometimes other journalists as well - for up to half an  hour about details of policy.  

 JOURNALIST: Is it appropriate for RBA board members to be making political  comments in an election campaign?  

 ALBANESE: That is a matter for them. I am not going to comment on  individuals, responsible people should act responsibly.  

 JOURNALIST: Would Labor reappoint Mr Corbett if you were re-elected?  

 ALBANESE: That is a matter into the future. I know Roger Corbett. He's an RBA  board member. He also has a number of other positions.  

 I don't intend commenting on Mr Corbett at all. I know him and I have a good  relationship with him.  

 JOURNALIST: Cath, can I ask you about the seat of Melbourne. How confident  are you of winning it with the latest polling?  

 CATH BOWTELL: I think it is going to be very close. The feeling that I get on the  ground - and that is the only poll I am doing - is talking to voters every day.  

 We've been making phone calls every night, we’ve been at train stations, we’ve  been at primary schools, we’ve been at street stalls and I think it is going to be  very close here in Melbourne.  

 But I tell you what, as the Deputy Prime Minister said, we haven't seen the  Liberals. We have not seen the Liberals. We have done six candidates’ forums  here and they haven't turned up at any.  

 And people who making up their mind are saying what are we going to get if the  Government changes? What will it mean for me, what will it mean for my local  primary school? What will it mean for the delivery of health services here in  Melbourne?  

 What will it mean for public housing tenants who rely on government to continue  to invest in public and social housing? And they are particularly worried about a  change of Government, and I think they will come back to Labor.  

 JOURNALIST: Are there any concerns though that the Liberal voters may  preference the Greens?  

 BOWTELL: Preferences are what other people like to talk about.  

 You know what people are talking about at street stalls and primary schools and  train stations? They are talking about investing in urban rail, they're talking about  the Melbourne Metro, they are talking about the fact they don't like the East West  tunnel.  

 They are talking about the fact that they like the money that we’ve spent on  investing in our schools and they want to see the Gonski reforms, the Better  Schools plan, implemented.  

 They want to make sure that Disability Care is implemented in a way that lives up  to its promise, and that's what they're worried about.  

 JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, if the Coalition wins will you support the policy to  remove the carbon tax? 

 ALBANESE: I support our policy. I’m the Deputy Prime Minister; I am running in  an election on Saturday to win.  

 I am running in an election on Saturday to win so that we can implement our plan  of an emissions trading scheme.  

 And can I say this: if the Liberals and the Greens in 2009 had done what  everyone had a mandate for - everyone - John Howard and Kevin Rudd both  went to that election in 2007 supporting an emissions trading scheme, there was  the Shergold report.  

 All it would have taken - because a couple of Liberals crossed the floor -was for  the Greens senators to get up and walk across and vote for action on climate  change. They didn't do so.  

 As a result of that, Tony Abbott had a coup in the party room against his own  policy of which there was a mandate for.  

 So I do find it a bit ironic, Tony Abbott speaking about mandates.  

 There was a mandate for an emissions trading scheme. Had he honoured that,  had the Greens actually had a bit of common sense and voted for that position,  we wouldn't be talking about this issue today.  

 The emissions trading scheme would be entrenched just as it took time to  entrench the other great Labor reforms. Like compulsory superannuation, like  Medicare.  

 There is one thing that is consistent; the conservatives rip away reforms, Labor  builds, Labor builds, Labor takes actions.  

 Whether it be all the great reforms going back - everything from the existence of  old age pensions, workers’ compensation, compulsory superannuation, Medicare  that we're now transforming into Disability Care, access to tertiary education. All  of these great reforms the Liberals have tried to undermine at every step.  

 We need to take action on climate change for this and future generations; it's a  great reason to vote Labor on Saturday. It's a great reason here in Melbourne to 

 vote Cath Bowtell Number 1 because we want Cath Bowtell as part of the Labor  Government team.  

 JOURNALIST: If the Coalition wins on Saturday, Mr Albanese, will you put your  hand up for leadership of the Labor Party? Do you have ambitions to be leader of  the Labor Party?  

 ALBANESE: I have ambitions to be Deputy Prime Minister after Saturday and  beyond. That is my ambition.  

 My ambition is to win, not for me but for what Labor Governments can do. So that  we continue to roll out the National Broadband Network, so that we get the Better  Schools plan done.  

 The Better Schools plan; here we have our plan, $10 billion over six years, their  plan one-third of that, less than a third, $2.8 million over four years.  

 But importantly they have no obligations on the state governments. So what  would happen would be the Federal Government putting money in and Mr  Napthine here would rip it out; the equivalent amount. No obligations at all.  

 This is an opportunity on Saturday to end the debate that has existed for  decades of private school versus public school; to actually get an outcome based  upon needs based funding. That is why it's so important.  

 JOURNALIST: Ms Bowtell, how much do you think Labor's asylum seeker policy  has hurt you in Melbourne?  

 BOWTELL: People are talking about that, but they are talking about a lot of other  things as well. I think that everyone in Melbourne understands there are no  simple answers to this. They don't like the politicisation of this issue. I don't think  it should be an issue in the election campaign.  

 But they understand the complexity of the issue, they understand there are  people drowning and that we need to find policy responses to prevent that from  happening.  

 JOURNALIST: Earlier in the campaign you did say you were uncomfortable on it,  is that something you’ve changed your mind on?  

 BOWTELL: No I've continued to say that I oppose the PNG arrangement, but  that doesn't absolve us from the responsibility to continue to search for policy  responses that will prevent people from drowning at sea, and I don't walk away  from that.  

 JOURNALIST: Is there a lot of objection to the PNG policy within the Labor  Party? 

 BOWTELL: I have been talking only to people within Melbourne over the last  couple of weeks and I will continue to do that.  

 JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese?  

 ALBANESE: We support the policy and our policies have been adopted by the  Caucus. These are complex issues. These are complex issues but when you  have a thousand people arriving by boat in a week, week after week, and when  you have more than a thousand people who have drawn drowned at sea, you  have a responsibility to take action.  

 The fact is that our plan is actually working. The numbers of boats are dropping,  the numbers of people coming are dropping. The only people who are  disappointed about that are Scott Morrison and some members of the Coalition.  

 JOURNALIST: Ms Bowtell, do you feel that public opinion on the refugee issue  in the seat of Melbourne will have led to you losing votes as a result of the Labor  stance on it? 

 BOWTELL: The Deputy Prime Minister mentioned candidates’ forums. As I said,  we have done a number of those here and the issues that are raised here in  Melbourne are actually issues around school funding, they are issues around the  National Disability Insurance Scheme and how that is going to be implemented.  They are issues around traffic congestion here in Melbourne, they are issues  around public housing as I said.  

 We have ten major public housing estates, the biggest concentration of public  housing tenants in the country living here in this electorate. And what they are  worried about, many of them are former refugees themselves, they worry about  family reunion and the number of places that are available there.  

 But they are worried about is will they have enough money to live on? What will it  mean for their pension supplements? What will the SchoolKids Bonus loss mean  for them? And that is what is raised with me constantly.  

 There are a lot of people living in this electorate who are quite vulnerable and it’s  very important we focus on them as we go into the election.  

 JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, Tony Abbott has suggested a double dissolution  election if the Coalition can't get the carbon tax through. Is that fair on the  Australian public six months after an election?  

 ALBANESE: It is pretty arrogant to be talking about the next election when we  haven't got through this one.  

 But that is Tony Abbott - taking Australians for granted like his candidates in  hiding all around the country. 

 I am amazed there have been six forums here with the Liberal candidate not  turning up to any. It really is not good enough.  

 Tony Abbott is taking Australians for granted.  

 I said on Sunday at the campaign launch that Labor sought to govern, not  because that was the end in itself, but because of what we wanted to do with  Government, that we understood that Government could change people's lives  for the better by enhancing opportunity. 

 The Liberals, many of them unfortunately seek to govern because they think it is  their entitlement. That is why since 2010 Tony Abbott has been involved in such  a destructive, negative campaign of trying to tear down the Parliament itself.  

 We have had, I think, a very unfortunate political discourse in the last few years.  It's been one driven by negativity and anger of Mr Abbott. Now, Mr Abbott's kept  under a very tight rein because they don't want to see another Mark Reilly  moment that we saw when he was actually placed under a little bit of scrutiny for  his own actions, and everyone well remembers that footage.  

 I don't believe Tony Abbott has the temperament to run the country. You can't sit  in the G20 and be controlled by your staff and just talk to people who you want in  circumstances in which you control when you're involved in the G20, and  Australia will of course host the G20 meeting in Brisbane during the next term.  

 I don't think Tony Abbott sitting in a room with Barack Obama and David  Cameron and Angela Merkel and saying climate change is absolute crap, which  is what he has said, saying that he doesn't believe in market-based mechanisms  in the form of an emissions trading scheme, engaging in foreign policy which is  something that he doesn't seem to be anywhere near on top of, and engaging in  that sort of control. You can't do that, you can't do that.  

 If you're frightened of a Lateline interview, you should be pretty horrified at the  thought of a G20 summit.  

 JOURNALIST: Do you think Kevin Rudd has a better temperament? 

 ALBANESE: Absolutely. 

 JOURNALIST: Do you think the Prime Minister’s support for gay marriage may  discourage some people from voting Labor on Saturday? 

 ALBANESE: He has stated his position, he has stated it openly and honestly  and it is a pretty clear position.  

 We have a conscience vote in the Labor Party. People have thought these issues  through.  

 I come from a similar perspective - I had my position a lot earlier of course - but  I know because I discussed it with Kevin that he thought deeply about this. The  important thing here is by giving people equal rights, it doesn't take away the  existing rights from anyone. From anyone. 

 There are no losers to giving marriage equality. That is important. And indeed I  find it difficult to reconcile the view of people who say marriage is really important  but we don't want more people to have access to it.  

 To me, it's just common sense, it is not something that affects me personally.  Obviously I had a right to marry, why should I deny someone else that right as  well? 

 Thank you. 

 ENDS 

 

 Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111   www.alp.org.au     

 Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor Party, 5/9 Sydney Avenue, Barton, ACT, 2600   

