---
title: "Australian Greens on Indonesian suspension of cooperation"
date: "2013-11-20"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211400888
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2853829%22
---

 Australian Greens on Indonesian suspension of cooperation 

 The Australian Greens are deeply concerned about implications of the diplomatic crisis that  continues with Indonesia. 

 “I am deeply disappointed and alarmed at the rate of deterioration in the relationship between  Indonesia and Australia,” Australian Greens Leader Christine Milne said. 

 “Australia and Indonesia should be building and deepening our friendship but instead Tony Abbott  has allowed his cheap domestic politics of ‘stop the boats’ to undermine the long-term interest of  the nation. 

 “In calling on Tony Abbott to pick up the phone to President Yudhoyono I have been hoping that the  PM would be prepared to put the interests of the nation and the lives of refugees ahead of Coalition  party politics. 

 “Ratcheting up Australian nationalism versus Indonesian nationalism will never end well.“ 

 Australian Greens immigration spokesperson Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said: “Indonesia’s  decision has a blown a hole right through Tony Abbott’s refugee policy. 

 “The Operation Secret Boats sham is over. 

 “The Prime Minister’s arrogance and single-minded determination to prosecute a phony war on  refugees has cost Australia dearly. 

 “Coordinated search and rescue efforts between Australia and Indonesia are needed to save lives.  Without them the lives of refugees will be put at risk.” 

 Media contacts:   Senator Milne - Peter Stahel 0437 587 562  Senator Hanson-Young - Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 21 November 2013 

