---
title: "Gillard prefers boat arrivals to skilled migrants as another boat"
date: "2013-03-08"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391738
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2721558%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for Stirling GILLARD PREFERS BOAT ARRIVALS TO  SKILLED MIGRANTS AS ANOTHER BOAT  ARRIVES March 08, 2013

 The  illegal  arrival  of  the  latest  boat,  carrying  72  people,  comes  at  the  same  time  as  the  Prime  Minister  continues  to  trash  talk  Australia’s skilled migration programme with her shrill attack on 457 visas, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott  Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “In the past few days since this latest boat arrived the Prime Minister has been more concerned about people coming to Australia  legally on 457 skilled migration visas, who contribute from day one, than the 72 people arriving illegally on a boat that go straight  onto the taxpayer’s dollar,” Mr Morrison said.

 “While Labor allows more and more people to come illegally on boats, they are saying they want less and less people to come the  right way, pay taxes and get jobs. 

 “Labor  has  their  immigration  priorities  all  wrong.  Labor  seem  to  think  immigration is  a welfare  programme.  The  Coalition  believes  immigration is about national security and promoting our economic interests through an effective and well planned skilled migration  scheme. 

 “With more than half of all permanent skilled visas sponsored by employers going to 457 skilled visas holders who are already here  and 457s providing the pool for more than 30% of all permanent skilled migration, the 457 visa programme plays an import role in  securing the short and long term skilled migrants that Australia has always needed and will need well into the future.

 “Skilled  migration  has  been  a  key  driver  of  Australia’s  economic  performance.  The  Prime  Minister’s  enthusiasm  to  trash  talk  our  skilled migration programme by demonising 457 visas demonstrates that she has truly lost her way.

 “The Prime Minister’s trash talking of 457s is just a desperate attempt to distract focus from her Government’s border failures. As she  continues to do this, the boats just keep on coming,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “More than 1,500 people have already arrived illegally by boat this year despite Labor’s promise to restore order to  Australia’s borders.

 “2013 is shaping up to be another record breaking year for arrivals under the Gillard Government, with more people on more boats  having already arrived than this time last year.

 “Not only has this Government failed to protect our borders but they have failed to shut down the organised criminal gangs that make  huge profits from these illegal boatloads of arrivals.

 “This litany of failure has come at an enormous cost to the Australian taxpayer, to the safety of the people who are smuggled down  here and to the integrity of our immigration system.

 “The Coalition will restore temporary protection visas and will turn the boats back around when it is safe to do so, in order to send the  strongest possible message to the people smugglers that our borders are no longer open for business,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 GILLARD PREFERS BOAT ARRIVALS TO SKILLED MIGRANTS AS ANOTHE...

 12/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

