---
title: "Migration fraudster convicted"
date: "2013-03-18"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392089
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2307686%22
---

 1

 Ible, Caitlin (LNG - AUS)

 From: Maria HAWTHORNE [maria.hawthorne@immi.gov.au] Sent: Sunday, 17 March 2013 3:46 PM

 Subject: O'CONNOR: MEDIA RELEASE *** EMBARGOED UNTIL 0001 AEDT MONDAY, 18  MARCH 2013 [SEC=UNCLASSIFIED] Attachments: mg_info.txt

 Categories: Purple Category

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 EMBARGOED UNTIL 0001 AEDT Monday, 18 March 2013    

 Migration fraudster convicted    

 An Egyptian national who falsely claimed to be a Sudanese refugee has been convicted of migration fraud following  an extensive investigation by the Department of Immigration and Citizenship.    

 Nabil Gundi Mish Igladious was convicted in Melbourne Magistrates Court last week.    

 He was placed on a 12-month bond, fined $500 and ordered to pay costs. The Government is now considering  whether to revoke Mr Igladious’s Australian citizenship.    

 In 2004, Mr Igladious made claims to the department that he was a Sudanese national who had suffered  persecution. He was subsequently granted permanent residence and then Australian citizenship in 2007.    

 “The Government is committed to ensure that our humanitarian intake is reserved for people with genuine claims,”  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Brendan O’Connor said.    

 “When new information becomes available about people who have made claims, we will investigate.    

 “In Mr Igladious’s case, we discovered through advanced biometric capabilities that he was in fact an Egyptian  national and that documentation supplied to support his claims of persecution were falsified.”    

 Mr Igladious faced charges s234(1)(c) of the Migration Act 1958, s50(1) of the Citizenship Act 1948 and s29(1) of the  Australian Passports Act 2005.    

 The Government used facial recognition, document examination, and fingerprint analysis to build the case against  Mr Igladious.    

 DIAC has also expanded biometric collection points and the sharing of data with partner countries and government  agencies.    

 “These developments have led to several recent successful prosecutions against people found to have used false  information, including identity details, as part of visa application processes,” Mr O’Connor said.    

 “Over the past 12 months, six people have been successfully prosecuted for offences relating to identity fraud to  subvert immigration channels.    

 2

 “Where the department, which works closely with other federal and state government agencies becomes aware of  fraud, the matters are fully investigated, resulting in both criminal and administrative penalties.  Someone who uses  a false identity to obtain a visa and/or Australian citizenship will be considered for criminal investigation or  revocation of citizenship.    

 “A person who provides incorrect information to the department in relation to a visa application may have his or her  visa cancelled.”    

 Media Adviser:                 Maria Hawthorne 0407 015 986                                                  

 

 Maria Hawthorne  Media Adviser  Office of The Hon Brendan O’Connor MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Telephone: 02 6277 7860  Mobile: 0407 015 986  Email: maria.hawthorne@immi.gov.au   

 

 

 UNCLASSIFIED 

