---
title: "Top end unites to celebrate Refugee Week"
date: "2013-06-20"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396073
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2802576%22
---

 

 

 Top End unites to celebrate Refugee Week  Thursday, 20 June 2013 

 Territorians will join together to celebrate the contribution of refugees to Australian  communities as part of World Refugee Day 2013 today. 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Brendan O'Connor, and Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, said as well as marking the rich diversity of  refugee communities around the country, there is an extra occasion to celebrate,  with the settlement of 800 000 refugees and humanitarian entrants in Australia since  World War II. 

 Refugee Week, which coincides with World Refugee Day on June 20, has been  celebrated in Australia since the 1980s. 

 Mr O'Connor said the week's celebration - from June 16-22 - was a unique  opportunity to recognise the plight of refugees around the world and acknowledge  the contribution made by government and non-government organisations to assist  refugees to contribute to Australian society. 

 'Australia has a long and proud history as a refugee resettlement country and a  cooperative international partner, which is demonstrated by the settlement of 800  000 refugee and humanitarian entrants under the humanitarian program,' Mr  O'Connor said. 

 'The Australian government is committed to ensuring that people settling here have  the help they need to rebuild their lives and become active participants in the  community, and this week is an important time not only to recognise this  commitment, but also the diversity which has grown through the humanitarian  program.' 

 Senator Lundy said Australia's resettlement tradition was integral to providing new  opportunities for those in humanitarian need. 

 'The contributions of people settled under Australia's humanitarian program are  enormous in both economic and social spheres, and this week is an important  occasion to reflect on the amazing impact these entrants have had in carving  Australia's identity,' Senator Lundy said. 

 One of the people who has benefited from Australia's humanitarian program is Mercy  Nebo, originally from Liberia but now living in Darwin. She said that living in Australia  had allowed her to rebuild her life in a supportive community. 

 'I left Liberia and came to Australia via a camp in Guinea in 2007,' she said. 

 'I was in the camp six years. I spent some time in Coffs Harbour before moving here  and I love it - Darwin is a very easy place to live.' 

 Australia's contribution to international protection and humanitarian efforts continues  this year, with 20 000 people to be welcomed through the humanitarian program in  2013-14. 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/bo/2013/bo204679.htm  Last update: Thursday, 20 June 2013 at 13:07 AEST 

 

