---
title: "Another boat arrival, another budget blow out on the way"
date: "2013-04-29"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435253
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2406161%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Another boat arrival, another budget blow out on the way 

 Monday 29th April 2013 

 The latest illegal boat arrival, this time with 75 people on board, will add to the budget blow out on Labor’s 

 failed border protection policies as Wayne Swan’s budget black hole widens, Shadow Minister for 

 Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border 

 Protection, Michael Keenan said today.  

 

 “Ten boats arrived from Sunday to Friday last week with over 800 people on board, bringing the total 

 number of people to arrive so far this financial year to almost 19,000,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “In a bit to prop up its phoney surplus Labor originally budgeted just 5,400 people, or 450 a month, would 

 arrive by illegal boat this financial year. In February they revealed that number had been revised to 12,000 

 and yet with still nine weeks to go in 2012/13 there have already been almost 19,000 arrivals on over 300 

 boats.  

 

 “A new day under this Labor Government means new illegal boat arrivals and more hits to taxpayers. Since 

 the last election taxpayers have had to wear combined blow outs on illegal boats of over $5 billion thanks to 

 Labor’s failure on our borders. This is money that won’t be spent on education or a National Disability 

 Insurance Scheme.  

 

 “Only the Coalition will reinstate the proven measures of the Howard Government to stop the boats and 

 stop the budget blow outs that taxpayers are shelling out for under Julia Gillard,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest arrival is the 649th since Labor came to office in 2007.  

 

 “As the problem snowballs out of control it is clear that Labor is incapable of fixing the mess that they alone 

 created.  

 

 “Every time the Minister issues a statement about a boat arriving he is quick to point out that ‘People 

 arriving by boat without a visa after 13 August 2012 run the risk of transfer to a regional processing 

 country’.  

 

 “But that risk is so small due the volume of illegal arrivals that it has no value as a deterrent.  

 

 “If Labor is serious about stopping people smuggling they will return to the suite of policies that were 

 proven to work under the Howard government,” Mr Keenan said. 

