---
title: "TPV's no deterrent to boat arrivals"
date: "2013-12-03"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211401380
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2878470%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 TPV’s NO DETERRENT TO BOAT ARRIVALS   

 Federal Labor successfully supported a disallowance motion of the Migration  Amendment (Temporary Protection Visas) Regulation 2013 on 2 December 2103 in  the Senate. This has had the effect of stopping the reintroduction of TPV’s.    

 With the PNG Regional Resettlement Arrangement in place the Abbott Government’s  stated rationale for TPV’s is redundant. If TPV’s are not to apply to any new arrivals  in Australia, because they are being resettled in PNG, then TPV’s cannot act as a  deterrent. They will only apply to a cohort which is already in Australia.    

 What the PNG arrangement did was take Australia off the table, and that is what has  made the difference in helping to stop the boats.   

 The last thing we want to do, through TPVs, is to put Australia back on the table.  

 Labor’s position on TPV’s is clear. The evidence speaks for itself. As a deterrent they  are redundant and indeed have the potential to act as an encouragement for people  taking a risky boat voyage. Once in Australia TPV’s are a significant cause of distress  for which the whole community pays.    

 TUESDAY, 3 DECEMBER 2013   

 MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREWS 0401 443 524   

