---
title: "Address to the Migration Institute of Australia National Conference, Canberra"
date: "2013-10-21"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399901
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2797138%22
---

 Minister for Immigration & Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 Monday, 21 October 2013 

 Address to the Migration Institute of Australia National Conference, Canberra 

 It's a great pleasure to be here again at the MIA conference but in this case in a very  different capacity. I am pleased Angela that you have been re-elected as the  President of the organisation. Minister Cash and I certainly appreciated the  opportunity to work constructively with the MIA and the various other bodies that  operate throughout the migration agent community. That was an important process  for us as we prepared policies, as we prepared for the task of government that has  now been entrusted to us. Congratulations Angela and to your new board members  on the MIA, we look forward to working with you in the years ahead. 

 Can I also acknowledge the Assistant Minister for Immigration, Senator the Hon  Michaelia Cash here with me today. Particularly when I am talking about Senator  Cash, it is true that two ministers are better than one. What you should read in to  having an Assistant Minister for Immigration of Senator Cash's standing is our  commitment to get it right. To get it right not just in policy but to get it right in  implementation because it is in implementation where you spend your days and  nights and weekends and all of that period of time. So the implementation of policy  and its effective and practical implementation, it's workability, the professionalism  that is required, the relationships that need to be established; that is a tone , that is  benchmark that I would like to see set for our stewardship of the immigration  portfolio. 

 Policy is all about implementation. People can have all sorts of ideas - some of them  good, some of them bad. But a good idea badly implemented becomes a bad idea  very quickly. So our focus is on getting things right and getting the implementation  together. Senator Cash's responsibilities lie very much at the heart of the visa  service delivery elements of the portfolio. As you may have picked up, I'm quite  focused at the moment with Operation Sovereign borders and a range of other  issues related to that. We wanted to make sure right from the outset that our focus  on the day to day delivery of visa services and the working horse nature of the  immigration department was in no way diminished by our very serious intent and  focus on the border control issues that are currently my responsibilities. So we have  got two ministers for immigration effectively. It's a big portfolio, it services the entire  country and has offices all around the world doing the job that needs to be done. So  that gives a bit of an overview about how Senator Cash and I will be dealing with  matters in the portfolio so you may actually see a lot more of Senator Cash when it  comes to these issues, particularly when you're sitting down and working through  some of the technical issues within your responsibilities, and for your clients and so  on. The policy framework and these sorts of things is very much represented at my  level to Cabinet. 

 I want to thank you for inviting me to address your conference this morning as this is  my first opportunity to address you as the Minister for Immigration and Border  Protection. 

 It is a privilege to serve in this portfolio and there is no doubt that immigration has  shaped the Australia we know today. It has made us a stronger Australia and it will  make us a stronger Australia in the future. 

 Robert Menzies called it the 'greatest exercise in nation building for Australia' that his  century had ever seen and that remains true in this century also. 

 I am extremely optimistic about our future as an immigration nation. I am optimistic  because immigration has been our past and has forged our present. That optimism  is rooted in the reality that we have built this together as a nation. 

 We are all of us migrants, whether our ancestors came to our shores in 1788 or  more recently in 2008 or even since then. For those of us who don't claim a linkage  to first Australians, all of us are migrants. This is a theme that I am hoping to develop  as Minister. Immigration didn't start after the Second World War. Immigration has  been Australia's experience since the modern birthplace of the nation. We all have  an immigrant story that we connect to and I think if we can all see ourselves and our  heritage and our ancestry along those lines it will much better assist us to connect to  each other as Australians, as immigrants with an immigrant heritage and an  immigrant history. 

 In the United States, they have more of that understanding and I think it does help  with social cohesion to think about it in these terms. That's not to say that many of us  don't have a long ancestry and lineage here in Australia going back hundreds of  years. That is true, we do. 

 But when those ancestors did come, they dealt with all the same challenges that  those who come today face. Leaving the place they knew, leaving the culture they  knew. Coming to something which is uncertain, having to break into a new economy,  a new way of life. To leave baggage behind and pick up new opportunities. Whether  you did it in 1788 or you did it last week, the same human challenges present and  the great story of immigration in Australia is it is a success. It is an overwhelming  success but there are conditions on that success going forward that I will talk about. 

 One in four Australians were born overseas - one in five of us have at least one  parent born overseas. Whether you are a first generation Australian or a sixth  generation Australian, whether we became Australians by birth or by pledge, we all  share equally in the legacy that we have all inherited from all of those who have  gone before us. 

 Australia has a well-earned reputation as arguably the most successful and cohesive  multi-ethnic society in the world today. There are many reasons that we can be  confident this will continue into the future but we cannot take it for granted. 

 I'd like to spend some time with you this morning outlining the Coalition's approach in  particular to skilled migration, education and Significant Investor Visas. 

 But whether we are talking about managing our Refugee and Humanitarian  programme, student visas, investor visas, parents or partners or employer  sponsored visas, protecting the integrity of our immigration programme is critical to  our continued success. 

 Importantly, an immigration programme cannot be successful without the strong  support of the Australian people. 

 The Howard Government ran an immigration programme that Australians had  confidence in. Our longest serving Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock introduced  reforms to sharpen the programme's economic focus, reduce the size of the family-reunion component and restricted new migrant access to welfare. 

 Australia's experience and indeed our success as an immigration nation over time  has been based fundamentally on our commitment to the economic participation of  migrants at all levels. We have always valued the involvement of migrants in our  economy and under the Coalition this will continue. 

 During the Howard years the percentage of Australians who were concerned about  immigration levels being too high almost halved, from more than two thirds to just  over one third. Over the same period our permanent immigration intake doubled. 

 Those who had come had the skills to find employment. Over a decade to 2005/2006  unemployment for skilled migrants fell from 9% to just 3%, better than the national  average. Labour force participation rates were also higher. 

 On our borders, the Howard Government stopped the boats, while resettling about  150 000 Refugee and Humanitarian entrants. We had a proud record of welcoming  people from more than 140 nations and over ten years, the Howard Government  provided more than 52 800 offshore Special Humanitarian visas, with an average of  more than 5000 places each year. When I took on the portfolio the other day, the  number of places was in the hundreds that under the previous Government setting  would be provided for Special Humanitarian visas, which is a disgrace. 

 This is what you can achieve when Australians have confidence in their government  to run an immigration programme with stability and integrity. The Abbott Government  is committed to running such a programme that the Australian people can have  confidence in once again. 

 But how do we achieve that? 

 There is much work to be done to clean up the mess that was created by the  previous government. You will have heard a lot from me in recent weeks about  Operation Sovereign Borders and the efforts that are underway to stop the boats. I  want to be very clear. There is still a long way to go on this task. While we have seen  a significant decline over the first month of Operation Sovereign Borders, we are  assuming nothing, we are reading nothing into that and we remain fully committed to  the deployment of the full policy measures that we took to the election. 

 That is why the Coalition has brought together Immigration and Border Protection  under one department because policy and operations in these areas go hand in  hand. 

 If you want to know how much a government values immigration, look at their border  protection policies because strong border protection polices create the platform for  strong and successful immigration programmes. That is why we are so committed to  strong borders. 

 They are inextricably linked, border protection and immigration. You cannot pretend  to control your immigration programme if you are not in control of your borders. I've  made it very clear to my Department that my first responsibility as Immigration  Minister is to enforce our immigration laws, not to run a welfare programme. That is  my first responsibility as Immigration Minister. We have immigration laws, those laws  need to be upheld and they need to be enforced. The people who sit in this room are  key partners in ensuring that we achieve that goal. 

 The Coalition is committed to stopping those who come the wrong way and we are  taking back control of our borders and our migration programme as a result, whether  it's taking that back from criminal people smugglers or anyone else who wants to  have a crack at our borders or our immigration programme. 

 And we are encouraging people to come the right way, which people in this room are  involved in doing every single day. People who wish to make a contribution to our  nation, to our society and our economy from day one. They're the people we want to  come. 

 Disorderly immigration through illegal arrivals who violate the integrity of our  migration programme damages community support and confidence in that  programme. 

 And a government that constantly changes the rules and moves the goalposts for  visa holders and employers only creates uncertainty. That uncertainty discourages  foreign investors, skilled workers and students from making the decision to work or  study or invest in Australia. The integrity of our immigration policies and the capacity  of our systems to ensure compliance are more important now than ever. 

 As a Government, we have a responsibility in the way we shape and administer  policy in this area. A responsibility to support a robust programme and a  responsibility to provide resources to uphold the laws. 

 The Abbott Government will be strong on immigration laws on our borders, in the  community and in the workplace. 

 But we will also achieve this by working in partnership with you and with industry to  lift the standards, to strive for professional best practise that secures sound  outcomes for our programme. Whether as policy makers, as migration agents or as  migrants, we have a shared responsibility to uphold a programme that is robust, that  has integrity and consistency - to hold each other to account to the highest standard  of ethics and professional practise. 

 The Australian government has a strong history and proven working relationship with  the Migration Institute of Australia and I very much look forward to continuing that, as  I'm sure Minister Cash does, as we work side by side in the months and years  ahead. The professionalism and expertise of your members remains important to the  delivery of our migration programmes and their integrity. 

 In skilled migration, I believe that Australia's success as an immigration nation is  based fundamentally on our commitment to the economic participation of migrants at  all levels. Our migration programme has delivered social and economic strength,  prosperity and unity; helping create a strong economy but also sustaining our strong,  cohesive society. 

 The continued economic participation of migrants should be our main objective. 

 We want to bring people to Australia who add value - who have a real go and make  a contribution to our society. It's very much the principle of a fair go for those who  have a go. A key reason for our success which continues to set us apart from other  countries is that we receive migrants principally and strongly in our skilled migration  programme. This programme will continue to be the key driver of our immigration  future. 

 The cornerstone of the Howard Government was our commitment to skilled  migration and we will return to that foundation. Over the course of that government,  the percentage of skilled migrants in the permanent programme rose from the less  than 30 percent under the Keating Government to almost 70 percent at the end of  the Howard Government. 

 The primary purpose of our immigration programme is economic, not social, in our  view. Immigration is an economic policy, not a welfare policy. 

 Today, Australia's migrants have the second lowest rate of unemployment amongst  OECD member nations in 2011, just behind Israel. That's an extraordinary result. 

 In late 2011, Australia's migrants had an unemployment rate of 5 per cent—a  similar rate of unemployment as those born in Australia. Most skilled migrants have  even better employment outcomes with their unemployment rates below the national  average. 

 Traditionally, we have structured skilled migration around our permanent  programme, made up of the points tested skilled migration stream and the demand  driven employer sponsored stream. Around 68 per cent of people migrating to  Australia permanently come under the Permanent Skilled Programme and it is a  critical focus of ours that we keep it that way, if not even higher. That is why the  Coalition is committed to ensuring the proportion of skilled migrants does not fall  below two thirds of our overall programme. 

 Australia's permanent employer sponsored migration programme plays a pivotal role  in ensuring that businesses right across the country, regardless of where their  workplace is, can find skilled workers to fill genuine vacancies - and I stress genuine  vacancies - where they emerge. 

 A business that has had to shut its doors because it can't source the skilled workers  it needs employs no one. Employs no one at all. There is a link where this is done  properly, and I stress when it is done properly, where the employment benefit for  Australians from these programmes is positive. It is a net addition to Australian  employment prospects when done properly. 

 The employer sponsored programme shows significant benefit to Australia, with  migrant employment rates of 98 per cent on any given year—the best  performing element of the programme by far. 

 More skilled people now arrive on a temporary visa and then having proven  themselves and decided they'd like to stay in Australia, they find an employer who is  willing to back them. These are exactly the productive migrants we want to  encourage to stay. They have worked in our country. They have paid taxes from day  one. They have improved their language skills through engagement in the workplace  and in the community and off the clock and they are living and enjoying the  Australian way of life they came to this country to enjoy, to experience, to be part of  and to contribute to. 

 While the balance in the Skilled Migration Programme is shifting to employer  sponsorship, non-sponsored migrants who have well developed human capital  attributes are still important too of course. Particularly for the small business sector,  where employers may not always be in a position to use those programmes and to  meet the obligations of those programmes. 

 Independent skilled migration ensures that there is a pool of skilled workers available  more generally to fill shortages in the economy where they develop and cannot be  filled from within the Australian workforce. 

 The Coalition has always approached this issue from the starting point that wherever  possible, jobs should be filled from within the Australian workforce. That is our clear  commitment and that is our goal. 

 But where those skills are not available and that can be demonstrated, migration can  and should play a vital role in supporting Australian business and creating Australian  jobs. It provides the labour and importantly can facilitate the process of getting  workers out to the sites where they are actually needed, whether in major projects  particularly increasingly infrastructure projects or in other places around the country. 

 The current points test system was built on the bedrock of skilled migration reforms  introduced under the Howard Government. These reforms culminated in the major  structural reforms announced in early 2007, by then-Minister Kevin Andrews, and  included the rationalisation of skilled visa subclasses and a focus on stronger  English language skills and relevant work experience and tertiary qualifications. 

 The skills and attributes that intending skilled migrants require, as specified in the  points test, retain the focus on key attributes such as skilled employment experience  and English language proficiency. 

 I will continue to review these attributes to ensure the skilled migrants coming to  Australia can fully participate in our economy and contribute to the socially cohesive,  multi-ethnic society that we celebrate in this country. 

 One of the most disappointing things I have seen in this portfolio having served in it  in a shadow capacity for almost four years was the end to the bipartisan consensus  that was brought about earlier this year when the former Government embarked on  outrageous attacks on skilled migration and demonising rhetoric against skilled  migrants to Australia. 

 This was very disappointing and I note the new Shadow Immigration Minister has  indicated he's looking for more bipartisanship in the area of immigration. I would  welcome an end to the Labor party's attack on skilled migrants. He could start there. 

 You will not hear from this Government that migrants take Australians' jobs. You  won't hear that from this Government. 

 In relation to the 457 visa programme, we made our position very clear in the  previous Parliament and you will hear more from me and Minister Cash in coming  months on this front as we work through these issues. 

 But I do not think there is any doubt where the Coalition stands in support of skilled  migration in this country. 

 Of course you know, as I do, fine-tuning our programme and visa streams and  evaluating the effectiveness of compliance measures is a constant process. It's a  never ending process that arises as we work through the issues associated with  implementation. That reflection is critical to ensure the generous opportunities we  offer as a nation are not abused or taken for granted. 

 So while you hear me say very clearly the Coalition Government under Tony Abbott  is supportive of skilled migration, and has been consistent in thick and thin through  various attacks particularly from the previous government when we were in  opposition, I say this; if you abuse it, then you can expect me in my first responsibility  for law enforcement in immigration to be as tough on that as people smugglers find  that I will be tough on our borders. Because I know if the 457 programme is abused,  it will be undermined and its critical value to Australia will be diminished. I want to  protect it and I'm asking you and I'm asking industry and employers to help the  government protect this vital asset for the Australian economy by making sure it is  used properly in the right circumstances and it is not abused. 

 There is a difference between nuanced and effectively targeted law enforcement and  heavy handed regulation and red tape that stifles business productivity, ingenuity  and creativity, which is how I would have characterised the laws the former  Government brought in earlier this year. 

 Temporary skilled migration when it is managed well under a process with integrity  and clarity not only helps employers and businesses fill short to medium-term skill  shortages that are genuine, it creates Australian jobs. 

 457s have been a mainstay of Australia's skilled migration programme since their  inception in 1996. The programme is flexible and responds to the economic cycle in  line with employer demand. The Coalition has always approached this issue from the  perspective that Australia's migration programme is intended as a supplement, not a  substitute, to the Australian workforce and there are particular challenges at the  moment with changes in the resources sector and the level of peak employment  that's been experienced there and in other parts of the construction sector where  people who were working in those roles are returning to their suburbs and  communities around Australia and are seeking employment back in those places.  Many of those jobs when they were away working somewhere else would have been  taken up by others who may have accessed this programme. So that is an  environment we need to be very, very conscious of and the government is sensitive  to those issues out in the community as we speak. That's why the 457 programme  has to be managed carefully and sensitively with integrity. 

 If you run your immigration programme properly then immigration creates jobs. That  is our history, that is our experience and that is our future. 

 It was that very notion that Prime Minister Tony Abbott conveyed as Opposition  Leader some months ago that 457s in that respect can continue to provide a  mainstay for our programme. That's what we were talking about. 

 People coming to the country temporarily initially, proving themselves and then  making an application for permanent residency. This is a positive pathway that  hands the control of the decision to a sovereign country and these are the aspects  we will continue to pursue. That pathway from temporary to permanent if managed  well has great opportunities for this country. It is probably one of the best ways to  manage the integrity of the programme and to ensure that those who do get  permanent residency are well suited to it, well qualified for it. They have earned it.  They have demonstrated that, rather than the simple processing of applying one day  offshore and then turning up some months later in Australia. My preference is the  other pathway because it gives greater surety around not just the national security  and integrity issues that are so relevant but also the economic and social  participation issues that are vital to social and economic cohesion. 

 What's important is that we understand, both as policy makers and those working in  this field, that there is though a temporary labour market within Australia in how we  deal with this issue. There are at any given time around one million temporary  entrants to the country living here in Australia, many of whom have work rights. They  are students, working holiday makers, they're 457 visa holders and various elements  of these programmes have different protections which are attached to them. 

 There is an existing temporary labour market within Australia and the role of the  government is to ensure we have the appropriate controls and processes around  those programmes to prevent against abuse, to ensure the ongoing integrity of that  programme and also to ensure that those who are migrants in that situation are not  vulnerable themselves. 

 The answer to that is not more regulation to tie business or practitioners up in more  union red tape but to have more effective enforcement methodologies and practises  and resources. 

 Critically it is about recognising that unless you can provide a proper pathway then  there is the great risk that people will find themselves in the temporary labour market  illegally and they will be subject to very serious vulnerabilities. And we need to be  aware of that. To pretend that there is not some sort of unofficial temporary labour  market out there operating in Australia today is naÃ¯ve. It exists. And we need to  ensure that we are running a proper process to have people moving through a  proper programme that is connected with a legitimate end that exists within the  economy, and are not putting migrants or the community more generally at risk. 

 We need to find and encourage pursuit of legitimate pathways with appropriate  controls for temporary migration that prevent the abuse of programmes designed for  other important purposes and meet the labour needs of an economy that the Abbott  Government wants to see expand. 

 On the Significant Investor Visas, the Coalition's plans for continuing this programme  is a positive one and a strong one. When this programme was announced by then  Minister Bowen, he was the second of the four Labor Immigration Ministers in the  last government, it was designed to attract migrants with successful businesses and  investment experience. It was scheduled to commence in November last year and  on paper, it was good policy. We supported it before I think Minister Bowen even sat  down from delivering his speech. We thought it was a good initiative, we think it's  good policy but again good policy poorly implemented often turns into a bad idea. 

 Potentially the scheme could and should and I still think can attract millions if not  billions of overseas capital investment into projects that will stimulate our economy  and create jobs and capital for hundreds of Australians and many small businesses. 

 But where commitment and delivery were critical to get this programme up and  running to send a positive message to potential investors and participants in the  programme, the implementation simply fell away as we saw so many times from the  previous government. 

 It took six months for the first visa to actually be granted on 3 May 2013 - about a  year after it was first announced. In spite of the fact that during that time there had  been 435 expressions of interest for this visa. 279 people were invited to apply and  171 primary applications were lodged. 

 It happened so frequently under the previous government. So committed to the  announcement but under committed to the delivery and the implementation. You  won't find that from this government. You won't find the big announcements. What  you will find is the implementation and the work horse in the government that is  getting on and just working through the issues and the details. It's not our job to  provide a running commentary on our daily activities; it's our job to do our job. And in  your area in particular, that detail is what we mentioned before that Minister Cash will  be focusing very acutely on to make sure we can get that working. 

 This programme was largely sabotaged from the outset I think by poor  implementation. I think the criteria for how a Significant Investor visa should work  needs to have some attention applied to it. It has been described as 'vague and  unnecessarily prescriptive', creating further confusion and uncertainty in the market 

 place. The proposed turnaround time of nine months for the Significant Investor Visa  under the former government I believe is far too long for a programme such as this. 

 It is no wonder that potential investors - and remember this is a programme where  people are putting $5 million into our economy - no wonder they are starting to get  cold feet and look to alternatives elsewhere. 

 Effectively what I'm saying is the programme needs to be rebooted. We need to get it  back and ensure the processes are right and the criteria is as it should be and that is  the work we are going through at the moment. We will say more once we are in a  position to implement those things, not at the outset. 

 We recognise there are significant implementation issues that are currently holding  up the progress of this programme but we don't want to sit and talk, we want to get it  done. We will send a clear message that we are open for business on this visa. We  will put in place the assessment capacity to back that up once we have the system  rebooted and remodelled. We will look to review the investment criteria for this  programme, with a view to having a more flexible approach that could see more of  the investment capital attracted under that programme being available to more small  and medium sized businesses including entrepreneurial start-ups. 

 Such an approach would also seek to create the possibility of a broader range of  what I'd term ‘compliant investments', a dual path if you like - what is a compliant  investment and then handling immigration matters separately, approved in advance  and then parallel to the visa process. 

 We should also look at this programme not as a way to secure $5 million bucks -  that's not what it's about - by stapling a visa to an investment product. If people are  interested in that, I'm not. If people are going to pursue the programme from that  mindset, they will not have the enthusiastic cooperation from this government or  myself or Minister Cash because that's not our objective. 

 The $5 million invested under the Significant Investor visa should be the first of  hundreds of millions that would flow from someone making this decision to come and  live and settle and become part of our community and an Australian citizen. The $5  million should be the appropriate hurdle for someone making such a decision and  having access to this programme if we only look at it from the short term perspective  of that initial investment then I think we've missed the point of the opportunity of this  programme. That's not where I see its future. I'm not really after their money. I'm  after them. I want them to come and migrate to Australia and to bring their  experience, their knowledge, their networks, their families, their wealth and come  and establish that here in our country to become part of this country's future. That's  what we're looking for. 

 These people we're seeking to attract to Australia have demonstrated enormous  entrepreneurial success. They are wealth generators and in Australia we welcome  and we celebrate wealth generators in this country because they generate wealth  that is pumped into our economy and provides benefits right across the economy for  all Australians. 

 We think people who create business, people who risk their capital, people who go  out there every day and create jobs off their own effort and off their own enterprise is  what we need to see more of in this country and certainly within our immigration  programme. 

 This programme is geared to bring high net worth individuals who will transfer their  wealth to Australia over a generation. And we need to look at this programme in  generational terms because the applicants are. This is an intergenerational move for  the applicants and certainly the applicants I'm interested in attracting. This requires  the scheme to be flexible with the residence requirements of the principal applicant  who will need to spend their time overseas predominantly running their global  businesses. 

 Where we need to focus though is on the residence requirements for the secondary  applicants and family members of the principal applicant because we're looking to  see that family anchor themselves here in Australia. Their kids going to Australian  schools and universities, their kids taking over those businesses and moving the axis  if you like or the centre of gravity of their family's global commercial operations to this  country to become an Aussie company and Australia providing that opportunity for  them to make their international family business an Australian family business. 

 To be successful this programme will require a dedicated assessment team and that  I'm sure will have implications for the fees that are attached to the programme. I think  we also need to ensure that through those fee arrangements we can put the  dedicated resources in place to deal with what are quite sophisticated and forensic at  times financial analysis and review of the applicants that can be done at a high level  of skill and done in a timely manner. We can move more quickly but we cannot move  more quickly at the expense of the integrity of the programme. 

 We can have a more sophisticated and pro-active engagement programme to  ensure these measures are delivering on what we are trying to achieve. This means  we need to be working with the business community, with the migration agent  community and drawing on the contacts within our own ethnic communities across  Australia to identify and target suitable applicants for the programme, whether it's in  China, India or the Middle East. Such an approach should link in with our broader  trade and investment strategies in the regions and I look forward to having that  collaborative approach with the Minister for Trade and Investment, the Hon Andrew  Robb. 

 An Immigration Minister in many respects I see as a little like a recruiter for your local  sports team. It is about trying to get the people on our team that make us a stronger  team as a country and principally that is in the area of economic participation. 

 That is also true about the values of the programme when it comes to overseas  students. The Minister for Education, Christopher Pyne, reminds me on an almost  daily basis and the Assistant Minister as well, of the value of international education  to our economy. But we need no convincing, we know it to be true from our own  home states and our own involvement in this portfolio. 

 International education is our fourth largest export, contributing more than $15 billion  in export income to our economy in 2012. We recognise the strong economic and 

 cultural contribution of our international education sector and we remain committed  to continuing to support its growth by facilitating the visa process for genuine  international students. 

 At the industry's peak in 2009 there were almost half a million international students  studying in Australia. 

 The Coalition has a strong record of supporting this sector which grew strongly under  the Howard government. We believe international students should come to Australia  with the bona fide intention to study in some of the world's finest education  institutions, not as a backdoor to a permanent migration outcome. We're interested in  selling education, not visas and I know that is the widespread view not only within  the migration agent community but within the international education sector as well.  We want to compete on education, not a comparison test on visa classes. 

 The Coalition supported the changes made by Labor in 2009 to tighten up visa  arrangements and decouple student visas from permanent migration to protect the  integrity of our programme and the quality of our sector. But clumsy and heavy-handed visa changes coincided with a strong Australian dollar, intense global  competition for international students and weak global economic conditions. This all  contributed to an immediate and a devastating impact on the education services  industry in our country. In 2009/10 the number of student visas granted plunged by  almost 50,000. 

 The damage was particularly severe on vocational education and training providers  where unfortunately the measures failed to distinguish between good and bad  providers and everyone was burnt. Thousands of jobs were lost in the industry and  the economy took a significant hit. 

 I am constantly reminded of that example when I think about visa integrity issues  across the system and particularly when I think about 457s. If the system gets out of  hand then of course you have to take quite serious measures and when you  undertake those measures they can often fall on both the good and the bad when it  comes to those devastating impacts. The best way we can avoid a repeat of what  happened in the international education industry is to ensure an industry wide  partnership focus between government and industry and the agent community to  protect the community of the programme. Because if we fail then you have to take  fairly drastic action which hurts everybody. That is why I will always be very mindful,  as the Assistant Minister will be as well, of ensuring and protecting the integrity of the  programme so we don't find ourselves in the situation that presented some years  ago in the international education sector. 

 The Knight Review in 2011 made some helpful suggestions as to how to redress  some of the damage done and the Coalition has been supportive of the directions  outlined. We particularly support measures to strengthen student bona fides checks,  the use of modern risk based and streamlined processing of low risk visa  applications and post study work arrangements. These are positive steps which are  helping the industry bounce back from the damage done and helping restore  Australia's attractiveness and competitiveness as a study destination. 

 What the student visa industry needs after a rough six years is stability from the  government. Consistency. Certainty. Adult Government. 

 The Coalition will provide a much-needed period of stability in this area to ensure the  industry can plan for the future with confidence. 

 We will not support measures that attempt to use study in Australia as a back door to  permanent residency but we will always promote high quality in education services  and a high level of integrity in the programme. 

 We intend to invite a group of 22 low immigration risk non-university higher  education providers to participate in Streamlined Visa Processing. Similar to the  arrangements currently in place for universities, students enrolled in a bachelor,  masters, doctoral degree or eligible exchange programme at these 22 non-university  providers would potentially be able to apply for their student visas under the SVP.  This will provide a simpler and faster visa process for eligible students. 

 We will do this one step at a time. We are not going to promise you the world and  deliver you a peanut. We will work through this consistently and get the job done. 

 Students who are not eligible for streamlined processing are assessed under the  Assessment Level framework assigned to their passport country and the education  sector in the country they intend to study. The higher the AL, the greater the  evidentiary requirements that must be met by the applicant, including English  language skills, financial capacity and academic history. We are currently  considering options to simplify elements of the assessment level framework which  would benefit registered education provides and enable them to better compete  internationally based on the quality of their education product. 

 The Coalition will work hard to promote the high quality of Australia's education to  prospective students in an increasingly competitive international environment and we  will be doing that hand in glove with the Minister for Education. 

 As I conclude, I would like to make one plea to those in this room today from the  Migration Institute. You are our partners in ensuring integrity of the programme. Both  government and the sector need to be good partners to each other. We need to work  harder on our systems and our processes and our engagement and stability and  certainty. The sector needs to work on its own internal processes and its own  internal accountability and its reputation, which you are doing under the leadership of  the MIA and other organisations and I would encourage you to keep going down that  path. To work with the MARA, to work with the structures that are there but also to  continue to put in place your own structures, your own standards and to ensure that  you are dealing with those who don't measure up to your standards. 

 Your reputation is in your hands, the government's reputation is in its hands. Let's  focus on the things we each can do to improve the standing of both and I think that  would greatly influence the level of cooperation and partnership that we have. And it  is for this great benefit; the great benefit an immigration programme that Australians  can be proud of once again, that they can have confidence in, that they will support. 

 If there's one thing I hope to achieve as Immigration Minister and I know the  Assistant Minister shares this goal, is that in three years from now we can speak of  that confidence having returned. 

 Thank you. 

 

