---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 5 March 2013: 457 visas; Australian Human Rights Commissioner; Prime Minister's visit to western Sydney; Opposition division over asylum seekers"
date: "2013-03-05"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "457 visas"
  - "Australian Human Rights Commissioner"
  - "Prime Minister's visit to western Sydney"
  - "Opposition division over asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391510
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2277605%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  SYDNEY  TUESDAY, 5 MARCH 2013  2.15 PM   

 SUBJECTS: 457 Visas; Australian Human Rights Commissioner; Prime Minister’s Visit To Western  Sydney; Opposition Division Over Asylum Seekers   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, thanks very much for coming everybody. As the Government  announced last Saturday week we want to make sure that we remove the rorts that currently exist  within the 457 visas. As I made clear on that day, the Government is a strong supporter of the  migration path, the permanent migration path, of which more than two-thirds of people that come  that way are skilled migrants - an important fillip to our economy. It helps our economy. It helps  productivity. And it is absolutely crucial.   

 And of course, we also have other means by which people can provide support in the labour market.  We have limited work rights for students and holiday makers. That provides, sometimes, supply for  industries and sectors of our economy that might have a labour shortage. And also, of course, we  have the 457 visa, which, if used properly, is a very good tool to provide supply of labour, skilled  labour, on a temporary basis for those businesses, those sectors of our economy that clearly have  shortages.   

 But that's not to say that we would support an abuse of that process. The facts are that in 2009 we  legislated to protect workers against the rorts of 457s that emanated out of the previous  government's policies, and that certainly put some protections in place. However, there's been a  need to revise, if you like, re-assess any potential further deficiencies in the 457 visa scheme.   

 And as a result of the work by the Ministerial Council on Skilled Migration, who provided  recommendations to my predecessor, Minister Bowen, the government has decided to respond to  the deficiencies in the 457 visa arrangement so that we ensure that Australian workers are not  discriminated against.   

 And as I say, if you use this visa appropriately, there is no problem. But if you seek to dress up a job  and pretend it's skilled to bring somebody in from overseas and then have them work in a semi-skilled or unskilled job, that is abuse of the process. If you say that you have an occupation and you  say it is of a skilled variety and that is not the case, that is abuse of the process.   

 If you say that you're demonstrably looking to provide support and training for local workers and  you do not dedicate any resources to do that, that is abuse of the process. If you seek to bring from  overseas a person who may be a family member or a friend using the temporary skilled visa scheme,  that is abuse of the process. There are other paths to migration other than using the 457  inappropriately.   

 Now, I made all of these comments very clear on last Saturday week when I made the  announcement. And I made it very clear that this was the result of the very significant work  undertaken by the Ministerial Council on Skilled Migration and, of course, the Department of  Immigration and Citizenship. And I also have, of course, acknowledged the work of my predecessors,  Minister Evans and indeed Minister Bowen, in attending to that. 

 

 What we've heard over the last few days is the Leader of the Opposition say that he does not believe  that Australian workers should get a fair go. What we've heard from the Leader of the Opposition is  his lack of concern for the deficiencies that lead to rorts.    

 Well, I say this to the Leader of the Opposition; if you do not support the reforms, you support the  rorts. And if you support the rorts, you do not support Australian workers.   

 And so this is the difference between the two major parties, no doubt. It is always Labor that will put  jobs first. It was Labor who, of course, abolished Work Choices. It was a Labor Government that  responded to the global financial crisis supporting hundreds of thousands of jobs. And of course  again, it is the Labor Government that is looking to stamp out rorts in a visa process that would be, if  allowed to continue, unfair for local workers.   

 Now, I want to make it very, very clear - the Labor Government supports the current arrangements  for permanent migration of which more than two-thirds are skilled migrants. And, indeed, we do  support the proper use of 457. But what we will not do is be influenced and lectured to by  billionaires about allowing rorts to continue that deny local workers a chance of a job. That's un-Australian and quite frankly, it is unfair to those people who deserve a decent living and a decent  chance of work.   

 Now, the Leader of the Opposition has said he wants to ensure this is a mainstay, not just a  complement to the migration path, if elected. The shadow minister has said he wants to remove  impediments that currently exist to the 457 visa and he's said that in a speech to the AMMA  Conference in August last year - to remove impediments to allow greater access.   

 There is no doubt that the Opposition is seeking to increase the use of 457s in a manner that will  discriminate against Australian workers and for that they should be ashamed.   

 I'm happy to take questions.   

 QUESTION:         How much evidence is there of rorts and have there been prosecutions and how  much does it stack up?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  There's been quite a few sanctions. There's been over 100 sanctions. There's  been a few cancellations. One of the problems that we've identified is that there is difficulty getting  sufficient information before the application succeeds, that is that the sponsored employer can  present the argument that it is a job that is a skilled job and that they can present other arguments  to satisfy the conditions but that is not demonstrable enough to allow the department to properly  verify the veracity of those claims.   

 Now, what we need to ensure is that if there are doubts around applications, then the Department  is provided with sufficient teeth to be able to investigate properly the concerns that might arise in  either the dressing up of a job to pretend that it is a skilled job or indeed using the path of  temporary migration for other purposes, which would be wrong.   

 Now, for example, I can name, obviously, a number of examples without going directly to the  identity of the employers, but for example, in Parramatta we have a business who has brought in  project and program administrators and once they were in were employed as security guards. We  have a small hospitality firm in Melbourne that says it needed to import an HR manager, to suggest  there were no HR managers in the city of Melbourne. We have a Perth manufacturing company  sponsoring foreign workers on what they say was an amount exceeding $92,000 per annum, thereby 

 avoiding the requirement for English language conditions and then subsequently referring them to  another company on a much lower level of pay.   

 We, as a Government, and indeed the Department, are not in a position to respond adequately to  those situations and it's exactly for those reasons that we want to make sure that what is being put  by sponsoring employers is, in fact, the case and that we're able to respond adequately and  sufficiently and effectively to the rorts when they exist.   

 Now, we would hope that the Opposition would understand that but clearly today, and over the last  week, they've shown a disregard for the deficiencies in the current system and further to that have  foreshadowed that they're going to remove any of the protections that this Government has put in  place in 2009 to allow open slather the capacity for sponsoring employers to use this process.   

 Now, we think in the end, not only is that bad for Australian workers, that will undermine the  integrity and the purpose behind the 457 visa, which has a legitimate purpose, which was to provide  temporary skilled labour where there are genuine shortages.   

 QUESTION:         One of the arguments the Opposition is making is pointing that the Prime Minister's  director of communications is on a 457 visa. What's the need for that?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, I'm not going to go into individual staff members of Government and I  find it quite absurd that we're being distracted on such an important issue by that matter. The facts  are we're dealing with hundreds of thousands of people on this visa. Of course, each visa applicant  should satisfy the conditions and my concern is - and of course, it's the role for the department to  determine that - my concern is there is not sufficient capacity to determine the claims made in  certain circumstances by employers when they seek to bring people from overseas.   

 Now, I've cited a number of serious examples and I think it's fair to say that we need to make sure  we strengthen protection so that we do not discriminate against local workers. That was the  recommendation of the Ministerial Advisory Council on Skilled Migration. That is the  recommendations, of course, of my Department to me and indeed to my predecessor and that's the  reason why we'll be looking to provide the relief that is needed to ensure that Australian workers get  a go.   

 QUESTION:         Minister, if you don't have support of the Opposition to, I assume, get this  legislation through to change 457 visas or to tighten them, what sort of support do you think you'll  get from the independents? This afternoon Rob Oakeshott tweeted that he wasn't happy with the  changes that the Government's proposing, saying that both the Government and the Opposition are  basically trying to push a xenophobic message out there.   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  No, I think the people who have sought to allow the abuses to continue have  attempted to masquerade this as something that is xenophobic. That is just ridiculous. The facts are  we are, as I say, we are strong supporters of two-thirds of the permanent stream being comprised of  skilled migrants. And that should continue. But what we don't believe should happen is that you use  a visa scheme inappropriately to displace local workers. That's what shouldn't happen.   

 Now, I'm quite confident in speaking to the crossbenchers we will have the support in both  chambers to proceed to ensure that the deficiencies that currently exist are removed. I am  concerned, however, as I said, that the Opposition not only will seek to oppose those proposals, but  seek to remove current protections for local workers.   

 QUESTION:         Why is legislation needed? Why can't this be done through regulation? 

 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Look, I said last Saturday week that we'd look at a number of ways to do this.  There's no doubt that legislation provides the greatest protection of all, but we would look at  legislative, regulatory, and administrative arrangements to ensure we have the sufficient protection  required so that there's a vote of confidence in the 457 scheme, and also there is a fair go for local  workers.   

 And I think that is what people expect a good Government to do, and as I say, remembering that we  are strong supporters of migration, but we just want it to be done in the proper way.    

 QUESTION:         You say that the shadow minister wants to allow greater access to the scheme, but  actually under your Government there's been an increase in the number of 457 visas, so is that a  hypocritical argument, or is there a difference [indistinct] point of view?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well as I say, in August last year, he - I didn't say he said, I'm referring to the  speech he made where he wanted to see a removal of current impediments to allow greater access  to the current scheme. And of course at the same time we've had the Leader of the Opposition say  he doesn't want it to be just a complement of the migration stream, he wants it to be the mainstay.  Now there's a clear intent here by the Opposition to use the 457 in a much greater, expanded way.  Not only are they unhappy with what we're proposing, but they're also looking to remove current  protections.    

 Now, what we saw over the course of the time from the Howard years, is we saw from 1996 to 2007,  a 400 per cent increase - or a 300 per cent increase in the visa applicants. When we brought the  protections in, there was a decline from 2009, but it is on the incline. Now what we've seen is - and  that's why we want to respond to this - what we've seen is that the growth from 457 visas are  outstripping total employment growth rate, and that is a concern to me, and that is I guess the most  obvious macro evidence you can provide to show that there's been an abuse of the 457 visa.   

 Now you add to that the examples I've cited today, and there are many many more, we are saying  we have to fix this. Now this is about ensuring the integrity of the 457 scheme, ensuring that people  who, businesses who need skilled labour, where there are shortages, where there are genuine  shortages, are able to receive that labour through the 457 scheme. But what we do not support,  what we will never condone is, in fact, employers misusing this to prevent a local worker getting a  job.   

 QUESTION:         How many years have the rorts been going on for though, that you know of?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well as I say, it's hard for us to know all of the information, I've looked at the  figures from 1996 to now. We knew that there were rorts in place, and that's why we responded  with the Protection of Workers 2009 legislation, introduced by Minister Evans at the time, which did,  indeed, provide certain protections. It did ensure that there was comparable wages, although there  are now ways, as I've just outlined, where people are obviating those conditions. And there were  costs associated with bringing people in, which would have acted if you like, as an incentive for  people to consider local workers first.   

 But unfortunately, that's not happened in every case, and now what we've seem is a return to what I  would say is a misuse, and for that reason, my predecessor, if you like, commissioned the Ministerial  Council to consider these things, consider them wisely and dispassionately, and come up with  sensible, practical changes to the current scheme, to ensure that we can maintain the integrity of  the 457 scheme, but at the same time, remove the rorts.   

 QUESTION:         Can I just ask you one more question on another topic? We've heard today that the  Human Rights Commissioner's been given legal advice that she can't visit Manus Island or Nauru,  what's your response to that, do you think it would be helpful if she could pay a visit to those -   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Can we just perhaps finish on this subject, and I'll be happy to return to that.   

 QUESTION:         Yeah, Adam Bandt says if the Government's serious about protecting local jobs, it  should require employers to advertise locally?    

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well as I say, I think, I'm happy to talk to Adam Bandt about these matters, I  have yet to speak to the Greens Party about these changes, but I'm very happy to talk to them about  a number of the proposals we have. I haven't seen his comments, I have to say, so probably without  seeing them entirely, I probably wouldn't want to comment fully, other than to say we're open to  discussions with indeed the Opposition and indeed the cross-benches about what we should be  looking to do.    

 I think that we want to make sure we get the balance right here. Yes, there needs to be a  demonstrable evidence to show that there are shortages, and at the same time we don't want to  hamper businesses that need that labour where there are those shortages. So, I'm always mindful of  ensuring that in protecting local jobs, we don't overdo it in the regulatory area, and that's why we  sought the advice of the Ministerial Advisory Council.  But our focus at the moment is cracking down on the rorts that exist, we can only do that through  changes to the current arrangements, and we'd hope to get the support of the Greens Party.   

 Are there any other questions?   

 QUESTION:         [Indistinct] Human Rights Commissioner not being able to visit Manus Island or  Nauru. Do you think that she should be able to, and how is she supposed to, you know, verify  complaints to her if she can't -    

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well I met with the Human Rights Commissioner and she raised that matter  with me, it pre-dated my appointment in so far as that matter being examined. As I understand it  there's an issue as to whether in fact her powers are ultra vires, whether she has the jurisdiction to  examine it and it's not for me to determine that. And as I understood it in my conversation with the  Commissioner she was quite relaxed about making that clear before determining whether she would  visit.    

 She seemed quite at ease about it being determined. What she wouldn't want to do of course is act  without authority, or seek to do things that's beyond her powers. So I think it's a very sensible  approach to ensure we get that right, but let's be very mindful of what's happened to date in Manus.  We've had, of course, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights [sic] * visit the centre and  publicise a report, we've had the Red Cross visit as we should. We've had the shadow minister visit,  we've had Senator Hanson Young visit. It's not a place that's without scrutiny.   

 Let's also remember that this is a decision of the Government of PNG, we do not determine the  sovereignty of that, determine matters in another country. But as I say, there's been quite good  access and it really is for the matter to be determined as to whether there's jurisdiction for the  Human Rights Commissioner. And as I say, in my conversation with her, she seemed quite relaxed  about that.   

 QUESTION:         Minister do you think that the Prime Minister should confront ordinary voters in  shopping centres, and maybe do a street walk? Over the last couple of days her trip to western 

 Sydney has been criticised as being far too stage managed, and that she's not meeting quote,  unquote, real voters or real people. Do you think that she now needs to do that, maybe tomorrow?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  I think that's not true, I think she is meeting a lot of people from western  Sydney. It's not about whether you get to a shopping mall, it's whether you actually meet  stakeholders, representative bodies, and ordinary people. In fact, I watched the footage myself, and  she was meeting a lot of people as I've seen it, and of course she's been speaking a lot to the likes of  you, out here, as is also appropriate.    

 But this is a very important visit by the Prime Minister, a very important part of Australia, and, you  know, the best way to find out things is to come and listen, listen to the locals, that's what she's  done. I think that's a good thing, and the fact that there are other ministers here wanting to speak  with the community, talk to the local members, talk to the local councillors, talk to residents,  generally is the best way to find out not only what concerns people, but how we can respond to  those concerns.   

 QUESTION:         But the criticism seems to be that she's not talking to the local residents, that she  may be talking to councillors -    

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well I've seen some commentators make that comment, and I've seen some  media commentators say that, but I don't accept that proposition. I think that she's been amenable,  I mean this a Prime Minister that has, you know, Community Cabinets throughout the country,  including in Western Sydney. She is a very accessible Prime Minister both to the media and the  public, and I think that will continue because that's her style, and I also know that meeting people  really is something that I think assists her in the way in which she wants to respond to the matters of  concern. So that's not going to end. I just disagree with some of the commentary to say that she  hasn't been accessible.    

 I just want to add one thing too, if I could, on a separate matter, and that was of course the Leader  of the Opposition was asked about the shadow minister's register, or proposed register for people  on bridging visas. It's clear from not only his comments, but also the comments of the shadow  treasurer, that the Coalition is totally divided on this matter.    

 It doesn't appear that the shadow minister advised the shadow treasurer, or the Leader of the  Opposition in terms of his plan to suggest that we freeze those people on bridging visas, and it's also  very clear from the shadow treasurer's comments that he is totally at odds with the shadow minister  for immigration's comments about this matter.   

 And I think that's because the shadow minister has been seeking to vilify and demonise people who  have done nothing wrong, and it's clear that the shadow treasurer feels very uncomfortable about  that and I think it's really now time for the leader of the Opposition, Tony Abbott, to bring into line  both the shadow minister for immigration, and indeed Senator Eric Abetz, who last week also I think  went too far in seeking to associate people on bridging visas with sex offenders.   

 Any other comments or questions? If not, thanks very much everyone.    

 * United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees   

 ENDS   

