---
title: "Risk of tragedies at sea rising with record arrivals and bigger boats"
date: "2013-05-03"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435529
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2422918%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison

 Risk of tragedies at sea rising with record arrivals and bigger boats

 Friday 3rd May 2013

 The biggest illegal boat to arrive in six months, with 186 people on board, and consecutive record months

 for boat arrivals present a growing risk of further tragedies at sea under Labor’s border protection failures,

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs

 and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Record boat arrivals, including two successive record months, and larger numbers of people per boat

 elevates the risks for those people sent on a boat to Australia by criminal people smugglers under Labor’s

 border protection failures,” Mr Morrison said.

 “No one wants to see a repeat of the tragedies at sea that have occurred over the last five years. That is

 why it is crucial that a full suite of proven policies is implemented as a proper deterrent to break the people

 smugglers’ networks which under this Labor government have spread as far as Sri Lanka and India.

 “Each new illegal boat is potentially a tragedy waiting to happen and that risk has increased dramatically

 this year. That’s why the Coalition will, if elected, act to stop the boats and in turn save lives and restore

 integrity to our immigration program,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “May has started badly as the biggest boat arrival of the year, carrying 186 people, was

 intercepted on Wednesday.

 “This reaffirms that May is set to start exactly how April finished with the Australian navy being used as a

 daily water taxi by the people smugglers.

 “April was the biggest month for boat arrivals ever on record with 46 boats, carrying 3369 people, being

 smuggled across Australia’s borders courtesy of criminal people smuggling syndicates.

 “The farce that is Labor’s border protection policies has reinvigorated people smuggling to a level

 previously unseen.

 “It is going to take a strong resolve to implement the necessary tough measures to put an end to this

 insidious trade - something only a change of government will bring,” Mr Keenan said.

