---
title: "Record illegal boat arrivals continue"
date: "2013-03-30"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392682
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2721525%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling RECORD ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS  CONTINUE March 30, 2013

 The latest illegal boat arrivals, with a total of over 100 people on board, mean over 2,200 people have arrived on 34 boats 

 so far this month, a new March record, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow 

 Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “This March is the biggest ever for illegal boat arrivals. It is also a record first quarter for illegal boat arrivals with over 

 3,600 people arriving - a 179% increase on the first quarter of 2012 - and follows a record summer where over 2,500 

 people arrived,” Mr Morrison said.

 “The last 200 of the 600 boats that arrived under Labor came in just over 200 days as Labor's bridging visa community 

 release policy supercharged the people smugglers' business model.

 “At every turn, with every successive failed Prime Minister and Minister Labor has put up, the only result has been 

 more cost, chaos and tragedy on our borders.

 “In contrast, the Coalition has a track record of implementing proven policies with the strong resolve needed to fight 

 people smugglers so that control can be once again restored to our borders,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “The flood of boat arrivals continue at an unprecedented rate whilst the Gillard Government’s lack of  action only encourages more people to make this dangerous journey.

 “The decision to abolish the robust border protection regime, inherited from the Howard Government, was one of the  single biggest failings of the Labor Government.

 “They created a crisis out of a problem that had already been solved when they came to office.

 “Only a change of Government will see the proven measures of the Howard Government restored and the boats stopped,”  Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 RECORD ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS CONTINUE > Michael Keenan MP

 12/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

