---
title: "Budget needs honest numbers"
date: "2013-03-26"
creators:
  - "Hockey, Joe"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392562
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2705281%22
---

 Budget needs honest numbers by: Joe Hockey 

 From: The Australian March 26, 2013 

 HAVING been obsessed with itself, Labor must get back to framing a responsible budget  because Australia's finances are in a state of disarray.

 First, this must be a budget for all Australians. As Simon Crean and Martin Ferguson noted,  Labor must end its pandering to special interest groups and its attacks on Australians who  have earned their success.

 Second, the budget must have honest forecasts of revenue and spending. For example,  carbon pricing in Europe -- the benchmark for Australia from 2015 -- has slumped to  between $5 and $6 a tonne, yet the budget figures are calculated at $29 a tonne. That is a  looming multi-billion dollar shortfall.

 Forecasts of spending on asylum-seeker costs must also be realistic. Total spending for  this year alone is $2.8 billion and the total blow-out since the ALP came to power is $6.6  billion. But forecasts tabled in Senate additional estimates hearings claim that spending on  border protection policies will decline by almost $2 billion a year between 2012-13 and  2015-16. This is hardly plausible with 48 boats already this year carrying more than 2600  people.

 The forecasts of the nominal growth in the economy must reflect the medium-term winding  down in commodity prices and the terms of trade. Nominal GDP grew by only 2 per cent  last year, a pace not seen, outside the GFC, since the early 1990s recession. This makes  achieving the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook forecast of 4 per cent nominal growth  for 2012-13 very unlikely. And there must be no more money shuffling and raiding of  dividends to engineer paper outcomes.

 Third, the commitments to initiatives such as the Gonski education reforms and the National  Disability Insurance Scheme must be fully costed over the medium term, beyond the four-year forward estimates if necessary, and it must be explained how the new spending will be  funded. The government must not, as it did with the NDIS, fund a low-cost trial and then  claim reform has occurred.

 Fourth, end the waste. There must be believable structural savings to restore the integrity of  the budget over the medium term -- real cuts to programs, and not the new or increased  taxes Labor repeatedly relies on.

 Opinion Piece - The Australian - Budget  needs honest numbers Tuesday, 26 March 2013

 Page 1 of 2 Opinion Piece - The Australian - Budget needs honest numbers | Media | The Hon. Joe...

 4/09/2013 http://www.joehockey.com/media/media-releases/details.aspx?r=296

 Fifth, the budget must deliver a believable strategy for stabilising and repaying the  commonwealth debt of $262 billion, up $200bn in five years. Last May the government  changed the debt limit for the fourth time to a record $300bn but pledged it would never  exceed $250bn at the end of any financial year. Yet it is likely that in May the Treasurer will  seek to further increase the debt limit.

 This year's deficit will be Labor's 11th in a row, whereas the Coalition delivered surpluses in  10 of its last 11 budgets.

 Only by delivering surpluses can Labor start paying off its record debt which, long after this  government is history, will still be a heavy burden on us all.

 Joe Hockey is shadow treasurer.

 Page 2 of 2 Opinion Piece - The Australian - Budget needs honest numbers | Media | The Hon. Joe...

 4/09/2013 http://www.joehockey.com/media/media-releases/details.aspx?r=296

