---
title: "Labor government sends children to tent-slum on Nauru"
date: "2013-08-21"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399261
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2678538%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Wednesday, 21 August 2013   

 Labor government sends children to tent-slum  on Nauru   

 It is appalling that the Australian Government has sent families, including children, to the inadequate  and cruel conditions of detention on Nauru, the Australian Greens have said.   

 “It’s unthinkable that this Labor government is locking up children in an island prison simply because  they came to Australia when fleeing from war and persecution,” the Greens’ immigration  spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “It’s a stifling 30 degrees on Nauru right now, with incredibly high humidity. My heart goes out to  the children who are being detained in those conditions, living in tents, because of Labor’s cruelty.   

 “Polling released this week shows that the majority of Australians don’t support Labor’s shameful  choice to send women and children to Nauru but the government is continuing this race to the  bottom as they race to the polls.   

 “Australia is a generous country but our commitment to the fair-go is under attack.   

 “The Greens want to see all children freed from detention, sparing them the disastrous mental  health impacts of arbitrary indefinite detention in cruel conditions.   

 “With more boats arriving, including yesterday’s tragic capsizing, it’s clear that this cruelty isn’t  stopping people from embarking on dangerous journeys and it’s not saving lives at sea.   

 “Standing as a sole voice in the Australian Parliament, speaking up for the rights of refugee children,  the Greens want to see an end to the senseless and soulless cruelty of the old parties.   

 “The Greens are standing up for vulnerable people and putting forward a genuine regional solution  that would save lives at sea while caring for refugees.”   

 

 Over 8,000 Australians have already signed up to the NotWithMyVote.com.au campaign, sending a  clear message to the old parties that these cruel policies are not being carried out in their names.   

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

