---
title: "Record first quarter and second highest month ever for illegal boat arrivals"
date: "2013-04-01"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392690
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2721523%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling RECORD FIRST QUARTER AND SECOND  HIGHEST MONTH EVER FOR ILLEGAL BOAT  ARRIVALS  April 01, 2013

  The arrival of two more illegal boats, with a total of more than 200 people on board, has seen a record 3,864 people  arrive by boat in the first quarter of this year and over 2,400 people arrive in March, the second highest number of arrivals  in a single month on record, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 "With the monsoon season over illegal boat arrivals have returned to their record levels of late last year. In March over  2,400 people arrived on 36 boats, just short of November 2012 - the all time record for illegal arrivals,” Mr Morrison said.

 "This year continues to trend as a record for illegal boats with arrivals currently running almost 200% higher than at the  same time last year - which turned out to be the biggest ever for illegal arrivals with over 17,000 people coming.

 "For as long as Labor remains in office, the people smugglers will remain in business and Australians will be left with  ongoing cost, chaos and tragedy.

 "Labor's record - over 600 illegal boats and more than 35,500 people arriving illegally, over $6.6 billion in blow outs, riots  and chaos in immigration detention and a bridging visa policy to dump asylum seekers into the community with no care  and no responsibility - is also their vision for the future.

 "The Coalition believes in stopping the boats, has done it before and will do it again with our full suite of proven border  protection measures, get our immigration budget under control and restore confidence in our immigration program," Mr  Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “In the last week, there have been well over 800 people arrive illegally by boat - or the equivalent of  more than the full quota of the Government’s so called Malaysian Solution.

 “Labor have no plan to stop the boats from coming - instead the Prime Minister is using her failed Malaysian swap deal as  an excuse to do nothing. 

 “The Gillard Government’s mismanagement of our borders has severely damaged Australia’s reputation on border  protection and made us a laughing stock within the region.

 “The Labor Party has a choice - they can swallow their pride and implement the proven border protection policies of the  Coalition or they can continue to allow this crisis to get even worse,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 RECORD FIRST QUARTER AND SECOND HIGHEST MONTH EVER FOR ILLE...

 12/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

