---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 1 March 2013: Senator Sinodinos; Asylum seekers; Ben Zygier"
date: "2013-03-01"
creators:
  - "Dreyfus, Mark"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
  - "Senator Sinodinos"
  - "Asylum seekers"
  - "Ben Zygier"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391353
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2273091%22
---

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP 

 Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management 

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW - MELBOURNE - 1  MARCH 2013 

 TOPICS:  Senator Sinodinos; Asylum seekers; Ben Zygier   

 MARK DREYFUS:  I'm here to talk about the admission last night by Senator Arthur  Sinodinos - the Liberal Senator for New South Wales - that he has failed to disclose  six directorships in his register of interests to the Australian Senate.    

 The register of interests of course is where parliamentarians tell the Australian public  about business interests that they have so that we can all see what conflicts of  interests they have and it's so that we can see that they're not taking unfair  advantage of their parliamentary positions.   

 One of the directorships that Senator Sinodinos disclosed was in a company called  Move2Live, and that's a company in which another director is former Liberal Minister  Santo Santoro.    

 That's the same Santo Santoro who was sacked by John Howard when he was  Prime Minister for failing to disclose his shareholdings in various businesses.   

 I just want to read what former Prime John Howard had to say on that occasion  when he sacked Santo Santoro.   

 This is former Prime Minister John Howard:   

 “This is a clear breach of the Senate rules and of his obligation to me. He had no  alternative but to resign. I am frankly angry and disappointed at the Senator's  conduct.”   

 And this is still former Prime Minister John Howard:   

 “I can accept that you can overlook one, but you can't overlook a score or more and  nobody is going to believe that.”   

 And this is John Howard again:   

 “I am frankly angry and disappointed at the Senator's conduct. There is no excuse  for somebody not complying with the rules.”   

 Now we have former Prime Minister John Howard's chief of staff - that's of course  the job that was held by Arthur Sinodinos for nearly a decade. In that job he was  responsible for enforcing the ministerial code of conduct.    

 There is no excuse for him not knowing what he had done. There is no excuse for  him not knowing about his obligations.    

 And of course he's only disclosed these directorships when pushed to do so - when  pushed to do so - by questions from journalists who have been asking him what  were his business dealings.   

 Now what's been the response of Tony Abbott to these stunning admissions by  Senator Sinodinos?   

 Tony Abbott was asked this morning what action he proposed to take against  Senator Sinodinos and this is what he said - he said that he understands that  Senator Sinodinos believes that all the requisite disclosures have been made.    

 And I say to Tony Abbott that understanding what your hand-picked personal  parliamentary secretary believes simply isn't good enough.   

 This hand-picked Parliamentary Secretary is someone against whom action should  be taken.    

 He's someone, of course, who replaced Tony Abbott's former personal hand-picked  Parliamentary Secretary, Senator Bernardi, when he made his despicable comments  of linking gay marriage with bestiality.    

 And on this occasion, what should be occurring is that Tony Abbott should be  applying the same standards that John Howard applied when he was Prime Minister.   

 He needs to be applying standards that are what the Australian people demand -  standards that show that the standards that John Howard adhered to are still being  adhered to. Tony Abbott needs to take action right now against Senator Sinodinos.   

 QUESTION:  [inaudible question]   

 MARK DREYFUS:  Look, this isn't about the proposed changes to codes of conduct.    

 This is already a clear breach, and not just one breach, but multiple breaches by  Senator Sinodinos of what was required of him in relation to the registry of interests.   

 QUESTION:  Given the not-for-profit directorships, is this really a [indistinct] error?   

 MARK DREYFUS:  Well, that's wrong. Move2Live, the company I mentioned, was a  profit making business venture.    

 That's the company of which former Liberal Minister, Senator Santoro, was also a  director. So it's incorrect to say that these were not-for-profit ventures.   

 QUESTION:  Well, the other ones - does that apply to the ones that weren't for profit,  then?   

 MARK DREYFUS:  The requirement is not made the less by some of them possibly  being not-for-profit.    

 There's an absolute requirement that your directorships in organisations be  disclosed, as I said before, so that the Australian public can judge what your conflicts  of interest are and whether you're trying to seek unclear advantage by reason of your  parliamentary position.   

 QUESTION:  We recently saw Tony Burke and Stephen Conroy disclose  accommodation they enjoyed courtesy of Eddie Obeid. Is Senator Sinodinos' error  worse than their initial non-disclosure?   

 MARK DREYFUS:  Absolutely. This is a direct requirement that you disclose formal  legal directorships in companies and organisations.    

 Senator Sinodinos omitted not just one, but six directorships that he held and that's  the breach. That's why I read those words to you before from John Howard making it  clear that perhaps a single omission might be something that could be overlooked  but under no circumstances can you overlook six omissions that we have here - six  directorships.   

 QUESTION:  Doesn't it just show that all MPs can make mistakes?   

 MARK DREYFUS:  On the contrary, this is no mere mistakes, and again, I stress the  role of Senator Arthur Sinodinos, Liberal Senator for New South Wales, a man who  has been in public life for something like two decades, one decade of that taken up  with being chief of staff to the Prime Minister.    

 Someone who had responsibility for enforcing codes of conduct on behalf of the  Prime Minister who knows very well what the standards are.    

 Indeed, before he left former Prime Minister John Howard's staff he was one of those  involved in interviewing, as I understand it, Senator Santoro as he then was.   

 QUESTION:  Would you then call on all MPs to review whether they need to update  their interest registry?   

 MARK DREYFUS:  There's a standing obligation for MPs to update their register of  pecuniary interests as changes occur and that's an obligation which most MPs I  know take very seriously.   

 QUESTION:  Would you call on them, you know, at this opportune to take another  look?   

 MARK DREYFUS:  I'm saying that there's a standing obligation for MPs to review  their pecuniary interest register entries, to make sure that they're kept up to date, so  that the Australian public can have the information that they are entitled to.  

 

 That's its purpose, so they can judge whether parliamentarians are potentially  misusing their positions.   

 QUESTION:  Does Senator Bob Carr update his register?   

 MARK DREYFUS:  Well, I'm not going to comment on any individual members.    

 I'm here commenting on the gross failure by Senator Arthur Sinodinos, Liberal  Senator for New South Wales, to properly disclose to the Australian parliament and  through the parliament to the Australian people what directorships he held.    

 He's only now owned up to these six directorships because he was asked questions  about his business dealings, specifically of course in this company, Australian Water  Holdings.   

 QUESTION:  Can I ask about asylum seekers? Tony Abbott has said that some  asylum seekers have been dumped in the community with no supervision. What sort  of standard supervision do they get at the moment?   

 MARK DREYFUS:  That's another disgraceful comment by this Liberal Opposition.    

 We had yesterday from Scott Morrison disgraceful comments that show what a grub  he is by damning people who come to this country seeking asylum.    

 Today, of course, we've had a number of statistics that have been made - which  make it absolutely clear that asylum seekers are far, far less likely than people in the  general community to commit any offence. And you can understand why that should  be so.    

 You can understand why it should be so because asylum seekers want to stay in our  country but they're very, very much more likely to behave. And this notion of  supervision is just more of the dog-whistling from members of the Liberal Party and  Tony Abbott, far from going on with this line, should actually be disciplining Mr  Morrison.   

 QUESTION:  There is no sort of daily monitoring or weekly monitoring or any  monitoring in any sense, is there, or...   

 MARK DREYFUS:  People who are in Australia who don't have permanent resident  status have a range of different visas and some of those visas have various reporting  conditions.    

 It depends on what kind of visa you have but the suggestion that has been made by  Mr Morrison, the suggestion apparently backed up today by Tony Abbott that damns  all asylum seekers, needs to be rejected for what it is.   

 QUESTION:  If we're talking about the language that's used around people in  describing human beings - and the government's criticised the Opposition on this  front - was it right to call Mr Morrison a grub right then? 

 

 MARK DREYFUS:  I think that these are grubby comments and I'd repeat that Mr  Morrison is behaving like a grub when he is using that kind of language and in effect  suggesting that there is wrongdoing on the part of all asylum seekers who come to  our country.    

 He knows that not to be the truth and right thinking Australians know that not to be  the truth and I say again, asylum seekers - and the statistics tell us this - are far less  likely to be committing an offence than general people in - than the general  community.   

 QUESTION:  Can I just ask one more question, sorry, Attorney-General? Do we  know when the government will get the Ben Zygier report or do we have it already?   

 MARK DREYFUS:  I assume by that you're referring to the review that Senator Carr  has asked his department, the Department of Foreign Affairs, to provide and as I  understand it Senator Carr said he'd asked for the report to be prepared on an  urgent basis and as I understand he's going to be receiving that report very shortly.   

 QUESTION:  You're not considering asking for your own report into the matter?   

 MARK DREYFUS:  No, I've already said that I've seen no reason at all why there  should be any review by the Attorney-General’s Department or within the Attorney-General’s Department.   

 Thanks very much.   

 

 

 ----------------------------- 

 To unsubscribe click on the following link:  mailto:leave-mediarel@lstsvr1.ag.gov.au 

 

 

 If you have received this transmission in error please  notify us immediately by return e-mail and delete all  copies. If this e-mail or any attachments have been sent  to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver  of any confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect  of information in the e-mail or attachments.   

