---
title: "MOU shows Rudd's PNG deal not fair dinkum"
date: "2013-08-07"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398381
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2647689%22
---

 

 Media Release    

 Scott Morrison MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Coalition Campaign Spokesman 

 

 Wednesday 7 August 2013    

 MOU shows Rudd’s PNG deal not fair dinkum    

 The Memorandum of Understanding signed with Papua New Guinea shows Kevin Rudd  has not been fair dinkum with the Australian people over his PNG arrangement, with no  compulsion on PNG to settle all people sent there and no guarantee that anyone sent to  PNG won’t be back in Australia.     

 “The arrangement gives PNG a clear right of veto about who gets there, who is resettled  there  and  who  stays  there,  just  as  the  Coalition  said  it  would.  That  means  PNG  is   deciding who is resettled in PNG and the  circumstances in which  they are settled - not  Kevin  Rudd,”  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scot  Morrison  said   today.    

 “This  is  despite  Mr  Rudd's  big,  bold  claims  and  $30  million  taxpayer-funded  election   advertising campaign declaring that no one would end up in Australia.    

 “The  arrangement  once  again  exposes  Kevin  Rudd  as  not  being  fair  dinkum  with  the   Australian people on border protection.     

 “Not only is there nothing in the MOU to support his claims that no one arriving by boat  will  end  up  in  Australia,  it  remains  silent  on  those  sent  to  PNG  and  found  not  to  be   refugees who will remain our problem.    

 “The  MOU  confirms  the  entire  arrangement  is  subject  to  PNG  law  meaning  the  PNG   Parliament  could  pass  laws  excluding  whole  classes  of  people  from  the  arrangement.   Additionally - as with the Nauru arrangement - resettlement is not permanent.    

 “The  MOU  also  contains  a  new  obligation  on  Australia  not  included  in  the  original   arrangement to finance the support of those entering PNG illegally. There are many from  Indonesia  who  cross  into  PNG  this  way  who  may  be  eligible  for  Australia-funded  support.    

 “There  are  also  no  details  on  how  long  Australia  will  be  financially  supporting  those   resettled in PNG, with these arrangements still not agreed to.    

 “This  comes  on  top  of  $438  million  in  additional  funding  commitments  for  hospitals,   police, universities  and roads  in PNG - the price  of this  underwhelming and overhyped   deal.     

 “If Australians are wondering where their funding has gone for their own local hospitals,  roads, police and universities, they have Kevin Rudd to thank.      

 “This new undertaking came into effect during the caretaker period and raises questions  both  about  the  Government's  compliance  with  caretaker  provisions  and  their  attitude  to   the spirit of those conventions.    

 “Kevin Rudd promised no one could end up in Australia under this arrangement. Those  promises  have  been  exposed  for  the  bluff  and  empty  election  sloganeering  he  is  well   known for.     

 “True to form, Kevin Rudd just can't deliver on his promises.    

 “Less than one in 15 of the almost 2,000 people who have arrived since the signing of the  arrangement have actually been sent to Manus Island.    

 “The  Prime  Minister  has  overreached  in  another  desperate  and  on-the-run  election   promise.    

 “Just as the PNG arrangement continues to unravel, so too does Kevin Rudd's credibility  on border protection.”    

 Media Contact: Julian Leembruggen 0419 494 667   

