---
title: "$1b attack on Australia's generous heart"
date: "2013-08-02"
creators:
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398098
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2643161%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Friday, 2nd August   

 $1b attack on Australia’s generous heart   

 It is appalling that the government is spending more than a billion dollars of Australian tax payer money  on its cruel deal with PNG, the Australian Greens have said.   

 "The government’s cruel PNG deal is a billion dollar attack on Australia's generous heart," the Greens'  immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “Raiding the aid budget to bribe our poor neighbours into doing Australia’s dirty work won’t help anyone,  especially those who need our protection.   

 “Delaying the increase to the aid budget again to cover up a budget blowout on the back of cruelty to  refugees is unthinkable.   

 “We’ve seen the government try to sneak through funding for two new detention centres in Australia,  costing over $100m. There is also a further $55m to expand existing detention centres’ capacity, so that  more families and children can be locked up.   

 “It’s clear the government doesn’t even believe its own rhetoric when it says its cruel deal with PNG will  stop refugees coming to Australia.   

 “It is very disappointing that the government has again failed to fund the UNHCR in Indonesia in the way  the Houston Report said it needed to if it wanted to save lives at sea.   

 “There has been no money committed to rebuilding the Nauru detention centre in this budget update.  The government must come clean on their plans for Nauru, including whether families will ever be sent  there.   

 “The $1.3 billion dollar blowout revealed today means the government is now spending over $8 billion on  refugees over the next four years.   

 “In contrast the Greens plan that was revealed this week would be more humane and far cheaper, costing  $5 billion less in the same period, and it would actually work.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

