---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea: 15 July 2013: visit to Papua New Guinea"
date: "2013-07-15"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "visit to Papua New Guinea"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397132
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2593222%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE  PORT MORESBY, PAPUA NEW GUINEA  15 JULY 2013 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:      Visit to Papua New Guinea   

 PRIME MINISTER O’NEILL: Thank you very much ladies and gentlemen, welcome  to the press conference that we’re holding today at Parliament House.    

 Firstly on behalf of the Government of Papua New Guinea and the people of Papua  New Guinea, let me extend a warm welcome to the Prime Minister of Australia, the  Honourable Kevin Rudd, and his Ministers to Papua New Guinea on this very short-term visit, this working visit to Papua New Guinea.    

 Papua New Guinea [inaudible] and of course the ministers in cabinet had an  opportunity to discuss issues and programs that the two countries continue to work  on and develop over the past years and ongoing into the future.    

 We appreciate the assistance that the Australian Government continues to provide in  terms of developing our country and on behalf of the Government of Papua New  Guinea I want to express our appreciation to the Australian Government and to the  Prime Minister and people of Australia.   

 Today the Prime Minister and I agreed to moving forward many of the programs that  we have agreed to so that we can start implementing many of those initiatives that  we initially signed as part of the ongoing programs that we have between the two  countries.    

 That includes some of the police work that we are going to do, some of the work in  the correctional services, some of the work in the health programs and much of the  work that we need to do in education.    

 These are important programs that the government of Papua New Guinea is  embarking on. As many of you know we have framed our own budget and our own  policies towards delivering on many of these key sectors.    

 And I want to thank the Australian Government for accepting our desire and our  suggestion to them that they work together with our government in making sure that  we work on the same priorities and the same programs so that we can deliver a  meaningful program for our people.    

 So with that, thank you for the opportunity for the Australian Prime Minister to visit us  on this short trip, but of course as the closest neighbours, and the closest friends, it’s  always very easy for us to welcome him back to the country on this occasion.    

 PRIME MINISTER RUDD: Thank you Prime Minister.    

 [REMARKS IN TOK PISIN]   

 My apologies to everyone who didn’t understand that, including most of the people of  Papua New Guinea.    

 It’s so much a pleasure, Prime Minister, to be back here in PNG on my third visit as  Prime Minister. I’ve been here previously as Foreign Minister, and I’ve been here  also as a private citizen.    

 It’s a beautiful country, I love it very much, and I feel as if I’m here among friends.  And I thank the Prime Minister and his Cabinet for their kind hospitality today.    

 This morning I met of course with our business community who have a strong  economic interest here in Papua New Guinea. I want to see that economic  relationship built to become even stronger.    

 Two-way trade is currently about $7 billion a year and it’s growing, but we believe we  can do much better.    

 There’s no better example of course, when we look at PNG’s long-term economic  development, than of the PNG LNG project, with potential for $150 billion in returns  over the next three decades.    

 This is an extraordinary project and the Papua New Guinea Government needs to be  congratulated for its work with the company in ensuring that this project is brought to  conclusion next year.    

 Because of the importance I attach to the economic relationship and the trade and  investment relationship, I’ve asked Richard Marles, who’s here today, a person who  knows Papua New Guinea very well, to continue working in Port Moresby in the  period ahead, the days ahead, on resolving some outstanding questions with  PACER Plus negotiations on trade, as well as other associated investment issues.    

 Richard loves this country dearly, he first came here as a high school student, and  he’s been back here dozens of times over the years, so he’ll be continuing that work  in the days ahead.    

 Also in my discussions with Prime Minister O’Neill we looked at the development  challenges facing PNG into the future, in law and order, in education, in health.    

 Our work in these areas is underpinned and informed by the principles established in  2008 in the Port Moresby Declaration I signed then as Prime Minister.    

 That declaration was based on the principles of fundamental mutual respect and  mutual responsibility.    

 And I remember in particular the decision that we had taken then and sought to  implement since then to align the work of the Australian international assistance  agency with the development priorities of the Government of Papua New Guinea.  

 

 That way we’re all rowing in the same direction. That way we’re achieving great  outcomes for Papua New Guinea, right across the field.    

 Specifically today we’ve agreed to bring forward design and scoping work for the  Ramu-Madang Highway as well as scoping and design work for the lower court  complex in Port Moresby.    

 Also recognising the importance of law and order to PNG’s economic prosperity,  we’ve also agreed importantly that by year’s end Australia will deploy 50 Australian  police in visible policing roles in Port Moresby and Lae.    

 Our law and order cooperation will not stop here, however this is a good start. Law  and order is an important domestic priority for PNG and we have sought to respond  to the Prime Minister’s priorities for his government.    

 Also Australians themselves have a huge soft spot for this country. With 3000  Australians doing the Kokoda Track each year - I was one of them way back then,  and I’m a survivor of the Kokoda Track - this is a good investment for Australia and  a good investment for PNG.    

 I’m also pleased to announce that the new dedicated passenger lane arrangements  for Papua New Guinean citizens will be put in place at Brisbane and Cairns airports  to streamline the arrivals process.    

 These new arrangements will be rolled out from 1 September and will allow PNG  citizens to use the immigration processing lanes as holders of Australian and New  Zealand passport holders do.    

 Today we’ve also spoken about our common regional challenge of people  smuggling.    

 I have thanked Papua New Guinea for its cooperation on asylum seekers including  on Manus Island. On Manus specifically I’ve also noted, and we’ve noted, the report  just released by the UNHCR.    

 I thank the UNHCR for its work on this report and we are studying its  recommendations. We will work through those recommendations with our friends  here in Papua New Guinea.    

 It’s important to understand the permanent facility is still being built, and as that  progresses, both governments will be mindful of the conclusions contained within the  UNHCR report.    

 Following my meetings in Indonesia I’m also pleased to have spoken with Prime  Minister O’Neill about continuing, strengthening and furthering our regional  cooperation on asylum seekers into the future.    

 PNG is an important part of an effective regional response. This is a challenge that  as Prime Minister of Australia I will not shy away from.    

 As I’ve said before, when the circumstances change, Australia will adjust, continue to  adjust, and where necessary change our policy.    

 Prime Minister, thank you once again for your generous hospitality during this visit,  thank you for the time you’ve made available to me today.    

 You are a good friend of Australia, and Prime Minister, you’re a good friend of mine.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Rudd, are there plans to expand the policing beyond  the 50?   

 PRIME MINISTER RUDD: If I may say initially and then I’m sure Prime Minister  O’Neill will add, it’s important that we get this first deployment done and demonstrate  to all concerned it’s effective.    

 These will be in visible policing roles and we have to make sure they have an effect  on the ground, mindful also of the legal environment which people will work in in  PNG.    

 But if this goes well, of course we will be open-minded to further suggestions from  the Government of Papua New Guinea, our friends and partners in here in Moresby  high priority to this.    

 PRIME MINISTER O’NEILL: We agree with the Prime Minister that this is a good  start, a good start in that we need to rebuild capacity within the police force in Papua  New Guinea.    

 We all know the challenges we have there. And I think that with the help of  experienced, well-trained personnel on the joining our men on the ground will  certainly make a big difference in enforcing law and order in the cities and the  country.   

 JOURNALIST: Can I get a further explanation on the Manus Island issue, Mr O’Neill,  your reaction to the UNHCR report and the criticisms involved, and Mr Rudd there’s  a report today in The Australian newspaper saying that economic migrants will be  sent here and be more a part of the role PNG plays. Can I get your reaction to that?   

 PRIME MINISTER O’NEILL: Well on the issue of the UNHCR report, we agree with  Prime Minister Rudd that we welcome that report, we will look into the details of it,  and of course we just reopened the Manus facilities, and we are rebuilding the  permanent structure there.   

 The Papua New Guinean government has always stated it must be a regional effort.  There will be in the future more illegal immigrants and refugees and asylum seekers  who will continue to come into this part of region.    

 That is why we need to establish a permanent regional processing centre. And I’m  thankful to the Australian Government for their understanding and their desire to join  us in building that facility.    

 So the process of building that permanent facility is now continuing, so I think we  appreciate the UNHCR report and the recommendations and we hope that they  understand the challenges we have in building a permanent solution to this problem.    

 PRIME MINISTER RUDD: I think also to reinforce what the Prime Minister has said,  Papua New Guinea and Australia are broad-shouldered enough to receive reports  from the international community including UNHCR and to study carefully their  recommendations.    

 As I said, as this project is rolled out, we will be mindful of those recommendations  as we construct the facility.    

 On the second part of the question that you raised, as I said before as Prime Minister  of Australia, I will not shirk my responsibilities to deal with the ongoing challenge of  people smuggling, as it affects Australia, as it affects the wider region.    

 That’s why I have been very frank about the fact that we will continue our  discussions with regional governments, in Indonesia, here in Papua New Guinea and  elsewhere across the region, on a common regional response.    

 A common regional response which seeks to reduce the scourge of people  smuggling and those who depend on people smugglers to come to this part of the  world.    

 And in the case of PNG, we will work in dialogue, with our friends in PNG, to  continue to strengthen and to further our practical cooperation against our common  enemy, people smugglers.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will the deployment of the Australian police into  Papua New Guinea, is that part of the ECP program?   

 PRIME MINISTER O’NEILL: This is a part of the joint agreement that we signed with  Prime Minister Gillard and the ongoing work from there onwards.    

 So this is certainly not a part of the ECP program that had some legal issues, but  both governments and the officials are working to overcome many of those issues  that are before us.    

 But I think the deployment of the initial 50 policemen and women on the ground here  in PNG is a much welcomed initiative by the Australian Government and I can be  certain that the Papua New Guinean communities will appreciate that.    

 JOURNALIST: Will that be over and above the 150 exchanged with Queensland?   

 PRIME MINISTER O’NEILL: Yes we are working closely with the Queensland  Government and of course it must be channelled through the Australian  Government’s initiative and we will work them together to try and build the numbers  up as we go.    

 But many of you know we have a ministerial forum which continues to review some  of these programs between the two countries, and those reviews will indicate to us 

 whether we need more numbers or not, and that is the opportune time for us to  discuss that.    

 PRIME MINISTER RUDD: And on the policing question just to conclude, of course I  speak for the Australian Government and what we’re prepared to do at the request of  Prime Minister O’Neill, what the Queensland Government seeks to do separately in  terms of its own police service is a matter for Queensland and PNG.    

 We will seek where possible to work together with the Queenslanders but I’m talking  about what we the Australian Government have committed to do.    

 Thank you very much.    

 [ENDS]   

