---
title: "Emergency aid for 9000 people left homeless by violence in Rakhine State"
date: "2013-07-12"
creators:
  - "Carr, Bob"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397056
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2609493%22
---

 Foreign Minister Bob Carr 

 Emergency aid for 9000 people left homeless by violence in  Rakhine State 

 12 July 2013 

 Australian Foreign Minister Bob Carr today announced Australia would provide $3.2  million for emergency shelter, sanitation and safety equipment for up to 9000 people  driven from their homes by ethnic and sectarian violence in Rakhine State. 

 Speaking from Yangon in Myanmar, Senator Carr said the commitment lifted  Australia's total aid for Rakhine State to $9 million. 

 "My talks in Myanmar this week have included a focus on the humanitarian crisis in  Rakhine State," Senator Carr said. 

 "It's a matter I've raised directly with Myanmar President Thein Sein, and with  opposition MP Aung San Suu Kyi. 

 "I've outlined Australia's support for a durable long-term solution to bring Rakhine's  sectarian violence to an end help these displaced families return to their homes. 

 "More than 140,000 people have been forced out by recent violence and are living in  makeshift camps, their situation worsened by the onset of the rainy season. 

 "With these additional funds, we'll be working with the UN and the Myanmar  Government to provide shelter for 9000 people as well as 114 clean water points and  680 latrines. 

 "We will also provide blankets and clothes for 2,5000 women and girls in refugee  camps in Rakhine, as well as solar-charged lamps and whistles to improve safety  when walking in the camps after dark. 

 "We have also offered the expertise of Australian civilian corps volunteers to work  alongside United Nations staff in Rakhine to improve the co-ordination of aid." 

 Australia is the largest country donor to the humanitarian crisis in Rakhine State.  Australian aid is provided on the basis of need and does not discriminate between  people based on ethnicity or religion. 

 Media enquiries 

 • Minister's Office: (02) 6277 7500 

 • Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555 

 • AusAID Media: 0417 680 590  

 

