---
title: "Another boat as Labor's people swap farce exposed again"
date: "2013-02-17"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390696
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2238969%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   Scott Morrison 

 Another boat as Labor's people swap farce exposed again 

 Sunday 17th February 2013 

 The arrival of another boat, with 35 people on board, comes as the obvious flaws in Labor's 

 failed people swap with Malaysia have been underscored by the recent experience of 

 Senator Xenophon, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and 

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.  

 

 “The incident concerning Senator Xenophon only highlights the problems Labor would have 

 faced with their failed people swap which was ruled illegal by the High Court and has since 

 been abandoned by Labor," Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “If our government cannot secure guarantees for Australian Senators, then what credible 

 claim could they make for people transferred without any legally binding protections.  

 

 “No wonder Labor have binned their Malaysian people flop, as they know they cannot secure 

 the protections the Houston panel demanded in their report last year.  

 

 “Labor have no answer to the record boats arriving on their watch. Only a change of 

 government can now restore the polices and resolve that have been proven to stop the 

 boats,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 Mr Keenan said: “Another illegal boat arrival has been intercepted following further reports 

 that another people smuggler has been running his operation from right under the nose of 

 the Labor Government, in our community.  

 

 “The latest revelations are just another indication of the Government’s failures to protect our 

 borders, which has resulted in these criminal organisations running their lucrative trade from 

 our own backyard.  

 

 “Over 13,000 people have already arrived illegally by boat this financial year - clearly 

 showing the people smugglers are continuing to call Labor’s bluff as their business booms 

 under this Government’s inability to implement the tough border protection policies needed.  

 

 “Until there is a change in Government, the people smugglers will continue to run Australia’s 

 borders and our immigration system,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

