---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Minchinbury, Sydney: March 26, 2013: Visit to Chifley; the Coalition's Real Solutions for Australia's future; Budget; Labor's soap opera; Newspoll; asylum seeker tragedy; Afghanistan"
date: "2013-03-26"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Visit to Chifley"
  - "the Coalition's Real Solutions for Australia's future"
  - "Budget"
  - "Labor's soap opera"
  - "Newspoll"
  - "asylum seeker tragedy"
  - "Afghanistan"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392555
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2855776%22
---

 Joint Doorstop Interview, Minchinbury, Sydney  March 26, 2013

 Subjects: Visit to Chifley; the Coalition’s Real Solutions for Australia’s future; Budget; Labor’s soap opera; Newspoll; asylum  seeker tragedy; Afghanistan.

 EO&E...........................................................................................................................................

 TONY ABBOTT:

 It’s terrific to be here at the Minchinbury Fruit Market. I want to thank the Gauci family for making Isabelle White, our candidate for 

 Chifley, and myself so welcome. This is a great family business. It’s been here on this spot for more than 50 years now. It’s had  good times and not so good times but what the Gauci family and their customers don’t deserve is a government which is out of 

 touch with small business and what we have seen after the reshuffle yesterday is that we’ve got the fifth small business minister in  just 15 months. Unfortunately, Labor just doesn’t get it when it comes to small business. If they did get it, they would never have 

 saddled us with a carbon tax, they would never have appointed as small business ministers people who know a lot more about  unions and big business that they do about the struggles of running a business like this.

 Now, I want to assure the people of Australia the Coalition has a plan. I want to say to the people of Australia that we are on your 

 side. We understand your life and we want to make your life easier. That’s why we will cut the carbon tax - it’s gone. We will cut  red tape - there will be a bonfire of the regulations. Here in Sydney we will build WestConnex; in Melbourne we will build the East 

 West Link; in Brisbane we will build the Gateway Motorway extension because we want to take the pressure off your cost of living,  we want to take the pressure off your job security and we want to make it easier for you to get around the cities and towns where 

 you live. That’s what we want to do. That’s what our Real Solutions Plan is all about.

 Now, we had the reshuffle yesterday. We’ve now got a succession of L-plate ministers grappling with the coming Budget. Less  than 50 days to the coming Budget and this is a government which needs to get its $300 billion worth of debt under control and 

 they’ve got to debt under control by eliminating unnecessary government spending, not by raiding people’s superannuation  savings, not by attacking the superannuation piggy bank and yet, that is what this government is planning to do. How do we 

 know? We know because Simon Crean, until last week a senior minister, still Labor’s eldest statesman, says hands off the  nation’s superannuation savings and Julia Gillard has got to heed that advice.

 She should also heed Simon Crean and Martin Ferguson’s advice: end the class war, understand that the Australian people want 

 to see unity. They want to see a government which is bringing people together; they don’t want to see a government which  practices the politics of them and us.

 So, what I want to say to every Australian is: I respect you, I value the contribution that you are making to our country and I want 

 to run a government which is focused on you and not on itself and that’s what will happen after the next election, if you should  entrust me and my colleagues with the government of this great country.

 Now, obviously Isabelle White is one of our candidates. Chifley is one of the seats in western Sydney where the Liberal Party has 

 a real chance of victory because the people of western Sydney are sick of a government which takes them for granted. They are  sick of a Labor Party which has taken them for granted for too long. I think the people of western Sydney are looking for change 

 and Isabelle White is just the right person to give them change for the better. So, I’m going to ask Isabelle to say a few words  before taking some questions.

 ISABELLE WHITE:

 Thank you very much. I just want to thank Tony Abbott for coming out to Chifley today. It’s been a great pleasure for us to have 

 you here, Mr Abbott. The Gauci family are just one example of many small business owners in the area who are struggling at the  moment due to uncertainty and look, if we are elected we will get rid of the carbon tax, we’ll remove the red tape and quite frankly, 

 small businesses such as the Minchinbury Fruit Market deserve a lot better.

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Tony Abbott Federal Member for Warringah | Leader of the Opposition

 Page 1 of 4 Joint Doorstop Interview, Minchinbury, Sydney > Tony Abbott

 22/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 Thanks, Isabelle. Ok, do we have any questions?

 QUESTION:

 Yes, we are in the seat of Chifley and it is a safe Labor seat. Do you think now that the Coalition will move towards putting more 

 resources into potentially taking away some of the safe Labor seats out here?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well, I am here because we don't take the people of Chifley for granted. I am here because we think that the people of Chifley,  like the people right around our country, want a government which is focused on them. The people of Australia want a government

 which is focused on them and their interests and their concerns, not a government which is just focused on its own survival.

 QUESTION:

 Do you think Labor can look at any western Sydney seats as safe now?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 I think the Coalition is very eager to let the people of western Sydney know that we are focused on them. If I can directly address  the people of western Sydney, we are here with you in a way that this government never is. I am here now at one of the very well-known small businesses in western Sydney. This business, the Minchinbury Fruit Market, it won the award - the best green grocer  in Sydney in 2011. I am here with you at this business. Unfortunately, the Prime Minister spent most of her time holed up at the 

 Novotel when she was here lately.

 QUESTION:

 Mr Abbott, how important do you think it is that Coalition MPs don’t get too over-confident considering the latest Newspoll?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 We are working as hard as we humanly can every day to hold a bad government to account and to convince the Australian people  that there is a strong and credible alternative. We will be working very hard every day. We will be taking absolutely nothing for 

 granted. Kylie Gauci, a silver medal-winning Paralympian, she took nothing for granted and we will be taking nothing for granted.  We know that winning an election from opposition is like climbing Mount Everest. The Labor Party are hopeless at government but 

 they are brilliant at low politics and that is why we will be working hard every single day between now and the election.

 QUESTION:

 You must be pleased that your personal standing’s turned around?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 I don’t think people are really that interested in the polls. I think what they want is a plan and we have a plan for the people of  Australia. All the Prime minster has is a plan for her own survival.

 QUESTION:

 Will the Coalition be prepared to revisit the Malaysia Solution considering the asylum seeker tragedy?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 It was a terrible tragedy, a terrible tragedy that we saw off Christmas Island yesterday. As long as the boats keep coming, the 

 tragedies will keep happening. The only way to end the tragedies is to stop the boats and every time the Prime Minister invokes  her Malaysia people swap, she's basically looking for an excuse to do nothing. She's looking for an excuse to do nothing because 

 the Malaysia people swap involves just 800 people and just at the moment we are getting 800 people in a week.

 QUESTION:

 Can I taking you back to the Cabinet reshuffle? They have merged the climate change department into the industry department.  Does that wipe out or sort of get rid of one of the potential savings that the Coalition had in mind?

 Page 2 of 4 Joint Doorstop Interview, Minchinbury, Sydney > Tony Abbott

 22/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 TONY ABBOTT:

 No, it doesn't and it shows just how utterly inept this government is, that just a few months ago, they signed a 10-year lease on a  building for $158 million for a department that they have now merged with another department. It just goes to show that you can't 

 trust these people with money.

 QUESTION:

 Just on the direct action policy that you guys have got in place, any costs on that, any ideas of...?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Our policy will cost what we commit to it in the policy that we will announce before the election. We will spend no more and no  less on reducing emissions than we allocate and the amount that we allocated in the last election was $3.2 billion over four years.

 QUESTION:

 How many public servants would that involve?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well we think that our emissions reduction policies can be administered by the Department of the Environment in the normal way.

 QUESTION:

 Labor is now likely to focus on Coalition policy. Are you prepared for that?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 I am very proud of the policy commitments that we have already made and I would urge people to look at the Real Solutions Plan 

 that we released a few weeks ago and that we are now taking to the people of Australia right around our country, including in  electorates like Chifley. Now, every time the Government hyperventilates about the Opposition demonstrates that they have no 

 plans of their own, no real values or principles of their own. Only a bad government obsesses about the opposition.

 QUESTION:

 You just said that there will be a bonfire of regulations. Are you concerned that will bring you the negativity focus on the Coaltion?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 I think it is a very positive thing to reduce red tape - a very, very positive thing to reduce red tape - and one of the places where we  will start is having a one-stop-shop for environmental approvals because we do need investment, we do need jobs and at the 

 moment many, many major projects are bedeviled by the fact that the approvals process takes so long and costs so much and  there is double jeopardy environmental approvals at the moment. The Government promised that it would do something about it. It 

 hasn't. In fact, it’s making a bad situation worse every day and we will provide a genuine one-stop-shop for approval of major  projects.

 QUESTION:

 We’ve just had an announcement by Stephen Smith about the drawdown in Afghanistan. Is this good news?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 We support the commitment to Afghanistan. We have always said that it should end when the mission has been substantially 

 accomplished. We are happy to rely on the professional judgment of the military chiefs as to when that can take place and we  accept that the sooner we can bring our troops home the better, once the job has been done. 

 Thank you.

 [ends]

 Page 3 of 4 Joint Doorstop Interview, Minchinbury, Sydney > Tony Abbott

 22/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 © Tony Abbott MHR 2010 | Authorised by Tony Abbott MHR, Level 2, 17 Sydney Rd, Manly NSW 2095

 www.tonyabbott.com.au

 Page 4 of 4 Joint Doorstop Interview, Minchinbury, Sydney > Tony Abbott

 22/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

