---
title: "Boat arrivals surge past Manus capacity after Rudd's election fix"
date: "2013-07-25"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397647
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2618508%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Boat arrivals surge past Manus capacity after Rudd's election fix 

 Thursday 25th July 2013 

 Another three boats have arrived under Kevin Rudd's election fix, with a total of more than 300 people on 

 board, as Labor expressed confidence in their Captain Emad approach to border protection, Shadow 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and 

 Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “Over 650 people have arrived illegally on boats since Kevin Rudd announced his PNG election fix, more 

 than the current capacity of Manus Island,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “This comes as Kevin Rudd and Labor express confidence in their dysfunctional 'Captain Emad model' on 

 border protection which they have been running for the last five years that has led to cost, chaos and 

 tragedy on our borders including people smuggler Captain Emad entering into Australia on an illegal boat 

 only to then flee the country. 

 “In contrast to Labor's failed 'Captain Emad model' on our borders, the Coalition's Operation Sovereign 

 Borders policy announced today will unite government departments and agencies under the command of a 

 three star defence commander chosen by the CDF to co-ordinate our fight against people smugglers. 

 “We will not rest until the people smugglers are defeated. The first 100 days under the Coalition 

 Government’s Operation Sovereign Borders would see key initiatives undertaken including - establishing 

 the Operation Sovereign Borders HQ and creating a joint agency taskforce, finalising and issuing protocols 

 for Operation Relex II to turn back boats where it is safe to do so and increasing capacity at offshore 

 processing centres. 

 “Putting this new operational command structure in place means we can respond, we can move, we can 

 adapt and we can deploy in our efforts to defeat people smugglers. 

 “Under the experienced leadership of a three star military commander, we will stop the boats,” Mr Morrison 

 said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “Today the Government has announced the arrival of three more illegal boats, carrying 

 over 300 people, reinforcing the dire state that our borders are currently in. 

 “There have already been over 3,000 people arrive on 36 boats in the first few weeks of this financial year 

 alone. 

 “We cannot continue to have people arriving at this unprecedented rate - the hard working men and 

 women of Border Protection Command cannot keep working at this relentless pace. 

 “Protecting our borders is one of the most vitally important roles of the Commonwealth - something that 

 this Labor Government has failed to do since coming to office. 

 “The Coalition has a clear plan in place to stop the boats and we will implement these policies immediately 

 if we are given the chance to govern in order to restore sovereignty to our borders,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

