---
title: "People smugglers' business model continues to boom in April"
date: "2013-04-26"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435156
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2398363%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 People smugglers' business model continues to boom in April 

 Friday 26th April 2013 

 People smugglers continue to ramp up business at record rates in April with the illegal arrival  of another two boats, carrying 225 people, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael  Keenan said today.  

 “The latest two arrivals with 225 on board means more than 2,800 people have illegally  arrived so far in April, which already held the record for the largest number of arrivals ever in  one month,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “The navy's water taxi service is now being called on up to three times a day as Labor  continues to surpass itself with new records of border failure.   

 “In both these instances the Australian Maritime Safety Authority’s Rescue Coordination  Centre was called upon to assist with coordinating rescues of both vessels.  This once again  underscores the danger of these journeys and the fact that smugglers don’t care about  people, only profit.   

 “Cashed up from five years of business under Labor, people smugglers are continuing to flog  their wares in record numbers and reel in record profit.  Labor continues to cling to policy  failure rather than acting to restore the full suite of proven Howard Government policies.    

 "As long as Labor remains in office, the people smugglers will remain in business and  Australians will be left with ongoing cost, chaos and tragedy,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “It is no wonder that Border Protection Command is under so much strain  and pressure when six boats, carrying a total of 516 people, arrive in just 48 hours under this  Labor Government’s incompetent mismanagement of Australia’s borders.  

 “Week after week the rate of boat arrivals continues to increase at an unprecedented rate  yet Labor continues to do nothing to fix this crisis of their own making. 

 “Labor has relinquished control over our immigration system to organised criminal  syndicates and they do not have the will or the resolve to implement the tough border  protection policies to get it back  

 “The Coalition will stop the boats - we have done it before and we will do it again,” Mr  Keenan said. 

 

