---
title: "Free health screens in Western Sydney"
date: "2013-07-23"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND MEDICAL RESEARCH"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397487
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2616125%22
---

 

 

 

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP   Minister for Health  Minister for Medical Research   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 23 July 2013   

 Free Health Screens in Western Sydney 

 

 A health screening program to help prevent chronic diseases among the unemployed and  socially disadvantaged people living in Western Sydney has been launched by the Federal  Minister for Health, Tanya Plibersek.   

 The Federal Government has allocated $155,000 to PreventionXpress for free health screens up  to 5,000 locals to identify and prevent chronic conditions such as heart disease, type 2 diabetes  and possibly some cancers.    

 “The preventive health screens will identify preventable factors that are impacting on a person’s  health including excessive alcohol use, smoking, poor nutrition, obesity and lack of physical  activity,” Ms Plibersek said.   

 “By participating in these health screens, individuals will learn about their risk of developing  major preventable diseases such as heart disease, type 2 diabetes and even cancer.   

 “The health screens will be advertised to people living in Sydney’s west who would otherwise  find it hard to access health care due to financial, linguistic and cultural barriers. This includes  unemployed and underemployed people, some groups of overseas-born Australians including  refugees, some Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities and people who have fallen  on hard times.    

 “Importantly, the screens will encourage participants to improve their health by giving them the  information they need to make immediate and meaningful changes to their lifestyles.    

 The health screens will also help to ease the pressure on the local health care system which is  struggling to cope with the sharp rise in the number of patients with chronic diseases,” Ms  Plibersek said.   

 The health screens will be completely voluntary and will be conducted confidentially through  several Centrelink offices in Western Sydney. They will consist of a series of tests carried out by  a health professional and a questionnaire for participants about their health and lifestyle.    

 Established in 2002, PreventionXpress was one of the first companies in Australia to pioneer  rapid, convenient and confidential preventative health screening processes in a range of  workplace and community settings. 

 

 

 This initiative is funded through the Chronic Disease Prevention and Service Improvement Fund  which supports work to prevent chronic disease and improve services.   

 

 

