---
title: "Record summer of boats continues as another 68 people arrive"
date: "2013-03-25"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392513
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2721542%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling RECORD SUMMER OF BOATS CONTINUES  AS ANOTHER 68 PEOPLE ARRIVE March 25, 2013

 As the monsoon continues to produce treacherous weather off our north-west coast, another illegal boat, with 68 people  on board, continues the all time record summer of illegal boat arrivals, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Another boat arrival under Labor’s failed border protection policies means more than 3,000 people have come to  Australia by illegal boat since December 1, which is almost 1,000 more people than arrived last summer,” Mr Morrison  said.

 “If they were handing out Oscars for policy failure Labor would have a cupboard full.

 “Disturbingly not even the treacherous conditions of the monsoon season, with reports of a cyclone continuing to develop  off our north-west coast this evening, are dissuading people smugglers.

 “Labor’s border protection crisis is reaching new levels of failure and still they have no answer to stopping the boats.

 “Chris Evans gave up as Minister and so did Chris Bowen. Julia Gillard’s appointment of Brendan O’Connor as Minister  confirms that she has given up as well,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest boat arrival is the 25th for the year as the people smugglers begin to ramp up their business,  as this latest surge in arrivals continues to flood our borders.

 “This is not only placing immense pressure on the detention network but as a result, asylum seekers are now being  housed in university accommodation and backpacker hostels in our community.

 “2013 is already on track to be the biggest year of illegal boat arrivals under this Labor Government.

 “The Coalition’s position on this issue could not be clearer -time and time again we have called for a return to temporary  protection visas and turning the boats back around when it is safe to do so, but this continues to fall on deaf ears.

 “Labor cannot be trusted to fix this border protection crisis of their own making,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 RECORD SUMMER OF BOATS CONTINUES AS ANOTHER 68 PEOPLE ARRI...

 12/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

