---
title: "Another group of Sri Lankans returned to Colombo"
date: "2013-04-26"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435161
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2548240%22
---

 . 

 

 Another Group of Sri Lankans Returned to  Colombo  Friday, 26 April 2013 

 A further group of Sri Lankan irregular maritime arrivals has been flown home from  Christmas Island to Colombo, Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Brendan  O'Connor announced today. 

 None of the 25 people raised issues that engaged Australia’s international  obligations and, without a valid visa, had no legal right to remain in Australia. 

 All were recent arrivals but were not from the group which arrived at Geraldton  earlier this month, of whom 38 have been returned to Sri Lanka. 

 Since August 13 last year, 1,029 Sri Lankans have returned home - 820 of them  involuntarily. 

 "Returning this group to Sri Lanka sends the powerful message that people who pay  smugglers are throwing their money away and risking their lives in the process," Mr  O'Connor said. 

 "We are committed to breaking the evil people smuggling trade, deterring people  from taking dangerous journeys by boat and saving lives at sea. 

 "When people arrive in Australia without authorisation, any claims they make for their  reasons to travel to Australia are assessed by the Department of Immigration. 

 "If these claims are not covered by the refugee convention, they will be returned to  their homeland wherever possible. 

 "There is no visa on arrival, there is no speedy outcome, and there is no special  treatment. 

 "We will continue to transfer people to Nauru and Manus Island." 

 People returned involuntarily do not have access to reintegration assistance. 

 Almost 18 months ago, however, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship  became concerned about potential misuse of 457s. 

 Like the construction project in Western Australia which had 500 workers on 457  visas and no local workers. 

 Or the company in Parramatta which brought in project and program administrators  who were clearly working as security guards. 

 All of which is permissible under the 457 rules as they stand today, but clearly not in  the spirit of using 457s to fill genuine skills shortages. 

 That's why we announced the changes last month, and why we are giving Fair Work  inspectors the power to investigate potential breaches. 

 One of the areas of concern in today's figures is the big jump in the hospitality sector. 

 Applications for visas for the accommodation and food services sector jumped 110  per cent in the three months to February 2013 compared with the same period last  year. 

 Jobs in this sector are traditional entry-level jobs for young Australians and provide  them with valuable income while studying at TAFE or university. 

 Why should Australia be importing thousands of workers to work in restaurants,  cafes and bars? 

 This has the potential to undercut Australian wages and conditions, and is unfair to  most employers who do the right thing and offer jobs and training to locals. 

 The government always said that the 457 program is needed. But when we see  spikes in particular sectors that are out of step with growth in those industries, we  must take action. 

 This is not a debate about the number of overseas workers in Australia. This is a  debate about getting the right mix so that we are not leaving local workers,  graduates and apprentices behind when it comes to jobs and training. 

 

