---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House: 13 November 2013: Australia's damaged relationship with Indonesia; Coalition's secrecy on boats arrivals"
date: "2013-11-13"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Australia's damaged relationship with Indonesia"
  - "Coalition's secrecy on boats arrivals"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211400629
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2840637%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE  WEDNESDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2013   

 Subjects: Australia’s damaged relationship with Indonesia, Coalition’s  secrecy on boats arrivals.   

 MARLES: Morning, nice to be doing doors for the first time in the 44th Parliament.  Today we see reports in our newspapers that there are reports from Indonesian  officials that Australia has been engaging in negotiations for a people-swap  arrangement with Indonesia.  Yesterday we saw conflicting accounts from both  Minister Morrison and the Prime Minister about exactly what is going on in relation to  negotiations with Indonesia around a people swap arrangement. Well we need to  hear completely and finally from the Government about what they are doing. On  Monday night there were reports of another asylum seeker vessel arriving in Darwin,  reports of a vessel with Somalian refugees.  We need to hear, because we have not  yet heard, from Minister Morrison about whether such an asylum seeker vessel has  arrived in Darwin, we need that confirmation. We need to know that everyone on  board is safe, we need to know where they have been transferred and we need to  know what the plans are for those people going forward.  We need a full and frank  explanation from Minister Morrison about what are the circumstances from the  asylum seeker vessel, if there was one, that arrived in Darwin on Monday night.   

 Today, in our nation’s Parliament, speaking to our nation, there is the opportunity  for Minister Morrison to answer questions fully and completely about that incident as  well. We have witnessed, since this Government came to office and since Minister  Morrison became the Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the handling  and management of information to the Australian people on a “needs to know”  basis. This is not good enough. Information should be managed to the Australian  people on a public basis. What is in the public interest for people to know, should be  known. There should be transparency, accountability of our government to our  people about what they are doing and a “needs to know basis” for managing 

 information is arrogant, and it is simply not good enough. The opportunity for  Minister Morrison, the opportunity for the Abbott Government to rectify this is today  in our nation’s Parliament. 

 JOURNALIST: How do you explain the mixed messages that are coming out of the  Indonesian Government? We’ve got two senior officials contradicting each other  about what’s going on?   

 MARLES: Well in a sense its not for me to try and explain that, and in a way its not  even for the Australian Government to explain that. But that set of circumstances  highlights the need for the Australian Government, for Minister Morrison to actually  explain what is the Australian Government’s position? I mean this can all be very  simply put to rest if we have a plain and open and simple communication from  Minister Morrison to the Australian people about what our Government is doing in  relation to negotiations  around people-swap arrangements with Indonesia.   

 JOURNALIST: There was a statement from Minister Morrison yesterday that said  there was no people-swap negotiations (inaudible)?   

 MARLES: Well I don’t think its good enough in circumstances where the Prime  Minister, only a few hours later, left the door open for negotiations of those kind to  continue. He did not rule that proposition out. So we are left in a situation of  confusion, about where the Australian Government is at because they have internally  contradictory statements themselves, and if there is different information coming  from Indonesia that is precisely why we need to hear a plain and a coherent  explanation from our nation’s Government about what Australia is doing in relation  to these negotiations.   

 JOURNALIST: If some sort of agreement is struck between Australia and  Indonesia, would Labor be prepared to look at it and has Labor in the past tried the  same approach?   

 MARLES: Well the, well of course Labor’s -   

 JOURNALIST: - With Indonesia specially?   

 MARLES: What we did in Government in relation to negotiating agreements within  the region was always completely and openly (inaudible). The arrangement with  Malaysia which we sought to conclude could not have been more scrutinised by this  Parliament and by the Australian people and when asked the question as to whether  we would look at it, of course we would have a good look at it, I mean our attitude  to this is that we are all in favour of regional arrangements which deal with what is a  very difficult regional problem and we come to this problem with the very sincere  approach of simply trying to stop boats coming from Indonesia and stop the loss of  life at sea.    

 So that’s what our position is and we would be very happy to have a good look at  whatever proposal is being put forward. But right now we don’t know what that is, 

 right now we don’t have any explanation at all from our Government about what  they are actually doing and that is the issue. I mean the issue here is the culture of  secrecy, and that’s why today is so important, because today is the first opportunity  in our nation’s Parliament for this Government, for Minister Morrison, to come clean  and explain to the House of Representatives, explain to the Australian people,  exactly what he and his Government is doing.   

 JOURNALIST: Will Labor be supporting the Greens’ bill in the Senate to try and get  more information, the 24 hour turnaround (inaudible)?   

 MARLES: Yes, we will be having conversations with the Greens to have a good look  at what they are proposing, so I won’t make a commitment to that now.   

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)    

 MARLES: Well, I won’t make a commitment to that now, but we are very keen to  have a conversation with the Greens’ about what they are proposing. I would make  this point; I do think we need to be looking at every way in which we can use the  Parliament to gain more information about what our Government is doing and to  gain greater transparency about our Government’s actions and its behaviour. We  need to do that in circumstances where this is a Government that is conducting its  business on a “needs to know” basis. So I do think that heightens the need to look  at every avenue we can within the parliament to get transparency and to get  information from the Government and do that extent we’re very happy to have a  conversation with the Greens’ about what sort of a proposal they are putting forward  and how that might work.   

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) expect to have made a decision on that by the end of the  week (inaudible)?   

 MARLES: Look, I won’t commit to that, but we will be talking to the Greens’  urgently in relation to that that.    

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524 

 

