---
title: "Government cracks down on those abusing community release"
date: "2013-10-14"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399725
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2781971%22
---

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 

 Government cracks down on those abusing  community release  Monday, 07 October 2013 

 The government is continuing to fix Labor's legacy of border failure, ensuring that  asylum seekers who arrived by illegal boat released into the community and facing  criminal charges are taken back into detention and clear standards applied to those  granted the privilege of living in the community, Minister for Immigration and Border  Protection, the Hon. Scott Morrison said today. 

 'The rising number of serious offences alleged against illegal boat arrivals released  into the community on bridging visas or into community detention [alleged offences  detailed below] is of great concern to the Coalition Government and we are putting  strong measures in place to get the programme under control,' Minister Morrison  said. 

 'Visas are being cancelled for those charged with criminal offences and they are  being taken back into formal held detention. Address details are being provided to  the police and mandatory behaviour protocols for all those who have been released  into the community, as promised prior to the election, are being developed for  consideration by the government prior to implementation. 

 'Setting some clear standards and taking strong action to revoke the privileges of  those who violate those standards is an important early step in restoring integrity to  the bridging visa and community detention programmes. 

 'Labor dumped tens of thousands of people who arrived illegally by boat into the  community because the detention network could no longer keep up with the record  level of arrivals. 

 'People were dumped with a no care, no responsibility approach that left both those  released and the community vulnerable. There were no safeguards and no  consultation with local police or service providers. Warnings from the Coalition about  risks to the community and the need for tighter controls were not only ignored, they  were mocked. 

 'While there is no suggestion that the incidence of charges is disproportionate for  illegal boat arrivals released into the community, I have a zero tolerance attitude for  those who violate the trust given by granting them permission to live in the  community. 

 'This is not a right, but a concession provided by the government. If it were not for  the scale of border failure by the previous government, those who have been  charged with offences would never have been in the community in the first place,  they would have been in detention. 

 'The government will be making further announcements on the implementation of  these measures in due course,' Minister Morrison said. 

 Bridging visa cancellations and community detention  revocations due to criminal charges: 

  14 illegal boat arrivals' bridging visas revoked  due to criminal charges - 10 of 14 revocations  since 7 September election 

  14 illegal boat arrivals' community detention  revoked due to criminal charges. 

 Charges laid against bridging visa holders or those in  community detention across every state and territory: 

  NSW - 11 

  VIC - 3 

  QLD - 4 

  WA - 1 

  SA - 4 

  TAS - 1 

  ACT - 2 

  NT - 2. 

 Bridging visas revoked due to following charges: (since May  2013 when these types of cancellations began) 

 Act of indecency, Stalking, Indecent assault of a minor, Armed robbery with assault,  Assault occasioning actual bodily harm, Assault with Act of Indecency, Domestic  Violence, Family violence, Indecent act with child under 16 years - indecent assault,  Murder, Common assault causing harm, People smuggling, Rape, Indecent assault,  Aggravated burglary and assault. 

 Community detention status revoked due to following charges:  (since mid-2011) 

 Physical assault of a minor, Affray in public, driving under the influence, Assault  occasioning bodily harm while armed and torture, Driving offences (did not stop as  instructed by police and driving unlicensed), Aggravated assault and threat to kill,  Sexual assault of minor. 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases  

 URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2013/sm208507.htm   Last update: Tuesday, 08 October 2013 at 11:16 AEST 

 

