---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 23 July 2013: A Letter to Generation Next: Why Labor?; asylum seekers; Labor Party; FBT; election date"
date: "2013-07-23"
creators:
  - "Carr, Kim"
source: "MINISTER FOR INNOVATION, INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESEARCH"
subjects:
  - "A Letter to Generation Next: Why Labor?"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Labor Party"
  - "FBT"
  - "election date"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397477
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2616116%22
---

 

 

 SENATOR THE HON KIM CARR  Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research   Minister for Higher Education   

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE   

 23 JULY 2013 

 

 E&OE  

 Subjects: A Letter to Generation Next: Why Labor?, asylum seekers, Labor Party,  FBT, election date 

 KIM CARR:  We’re here today to launch the book, ‘A Letter to  Generation Next: Why Labor?’  

 This is a book which argues the case for why politics is  important and why people should care.  

 It’s an argument about why people should support the  Labor Party. It’s about the great Labor mission to remake  Australia for something much better - something much  richer, much greener and of course much fairer. And I  trust that you will enjoy it.  

 JOURNALIST:  You obviously wrote the book while Labor was crumbling,  in a sense, and you (inaudible) in the wilderness.  

 KIM CARR:  Well I wrote the book in some of our darkest times, but  this is a book of optimism and hope.  

 This is a book that actually doesn’t seek to denigrate  anyone’s contribution, it actually argues why people  should get engaged in the political process.  

 We have a serious problem in this country that over half a  million young people aren’t enrolled. We want to  encourage more people to actually get on the roll, more  people to take a keen interest in the future directions of  Australia. After all, that is their home, something that I  think they should all strive to improve, something they  should all work for, diligently, to make sure that we have  a much better country. 

 JOURNALIST:  There has been some indication of much more optimism  and hope for your side of politics in the past week or two.  Is today’s Newspoll any indication that that might be  coming to an end? 

 KIM CARR:  Well I don’t think it’s something to worry about too much -  about commenting on any particular poll. The fact is that  the Labor Party is back in the game.  

 The whole dimension of politics in Australia has now  changed. And we’re now facing a situation where the  people have real choices, and they have real choices  about the future directions for Australia.  

 That’s what this election will be all about - about what  direction this country goes in; who’s got the answers to  the big challenges.  

 So it’s important that more and more young people are  joining the Labor Party, more and more young people are  inspired to take an interest in politics. And we’re seeing  this right across Australia.  

 Just here in Melbourne, over 400 people spontaneously  sought to join the Labor Party, without being organised by  others - individually coming to Labor Party offices,  seeking to join the Labor Party.  

 We’re seeing quite significant improvements in the  amount of money that people are actually prepared to  give to the Labor struggle.  

 So we’re seeing a big change in attitudes. That’s because  there is a real hope for Labor to be able to answer the big  questions into the future.  

 JOURNALIST:  Some Labor - some first time voters have been saying to  me, ‘well what’s the difference between Labor and the  Coalition on asylum seekers?’ I mean, is there a cause  for -  

 KIM CARR:  Look, we’re in the business of making sure that Australia  remains a compassionate country, that Australia remains  a fair country. We’re in the business of ensuring that  Australia fulfils its obligations to all its humanitarian  conventions. We are a great international partner, but we  have to also take effect of those conventions in terms of  what we can do.  

 We simply have to have circumstances where people are  not allowed to drown. That’s the fundamental human  right: we don’t want to see people get on boats and  drown. We’ve got to do all we can to stop that happening,  and that’s what we are doing. We are making sure that 

 through our visa arrangements that we are trying to  encourage people not to actually take advantage of these  criminal gangs that are putting their lives at risk.  

 Now the Indonesian Government has taken steps to  tighten up its visa processing arrangements; the New  Guinean Government has taken steps to assist, and we  are now seeing a regional solution being developed  through this process and of course you will see a lot more  of it.  

 JOURNALIST:  Do you think that the PNG solution will be a vote winner?  

 KIM CARR:  Well look, it’s not just about winning votes, it is about  doing the right thing. It’s about ensuring that people don’t  drown. Surely that has to be a fundamental consideration  in any discussion on these questions.  

 JOURNALIST:  What’s coming up for the car industry? How are you  going to bail the car industry out? How much - 

 KIM CARR:  Well let me just say to you we do not bail people out - I’m  not involved in that sort of process.  

 We are in the process of building a strong industry in this  country. We are in the business of attracting investment -  international investment - about building the new  technologies in Australia, about providing the high-skill,  high-wage jobs in Australia.  

 We want to see more Australians engaged in industries  that are able to assist this country go forward.  

 So it’s all about the future of Australia. And whatever  investments we make, they will be co-investments and  they will be based on making sure that we keep the  capabilities in Australia to ensure that we have those  high-skill, high-wage jobs for the future.  

 JOURNALIST:  But what changes can you make to the proposed fringe  benefits tax change?  

 KIM CARR:  Well, we’re not interested in making changes to the fringe  benefits tax, it’s a fair tax. You simply cannot justify  having the taxpayer fund the private use of motor  vehicles.  

 Now in the past it might have been able to be said that  this money was used to support the Australian  automotive industry. But what we’re seeing is [that the]  increasing numbers of vehicles sold for private use in  fleets are of course imported. So we have to look at other  measures. We simply can’t rely upon, we can not rely  upon, this measure to sustain a business model which 

 essentially assumes that people are entitled to claim, for  private use, a taxation benefit.  

 For business use there is a taxation benefit there - we  want to maintain that. This does not affect people who  are tradies, who are using their utes; it doesn’t affect the  taxis; it doesn’t affect the hire car vehicles; it doesn’t  affect genuine, legitimate business use of motorcars.  

 We want to ensure however that we are using for private  purpose that people pay the appropriate tax.   

 JOURNALIST:  What did you make of car industry representatives giving  a joint press conference with the Coalition yesterday  morning to talk about what they described as the bungling  of this decision?  

 KIM CARR:  Well I didn’t see these car representatives - car industry  representatives. Are you saying that some people - what  from the..? 

 JOURNALIST:  Ah, I think it was from the - I can’t remember the names,  I could look them up for you, but  they -  

 KIM CARR:  I think you should. 

 JOURNALIST:  They were with Tony Abbott yesterday. There were three  leaders - one of whom appeared with Tony Abbott and  Joe Hockey and Sophie Mirabella in Melbourne  yesterday. I - yeah -    

 KIM CARR:  I’m sorry I was busy yesterday, I must have missed that.  

 JOURNALIST:  Surely, Toyota and Holden - they don’t approve the FBT  changes?  

 KIM CARR:  Look, there’s no doubt what they have said publicly - we  are working with them to ascertain what the facts are in  this matter, as distinct from what people’s assertions  have been.  

 We’ve seen a number of companies announce lay-offs  well before this measure is actually introduced - well  before. We are seeing a campaign being run. You  shouldn’t confuse people’s emotive responses to the  factual situation as it affects the Australian automotive  industry.  

 My concern is to ensure that we support manufacturing in  Australia, and I do all that I can to see that that happens.    

 JOURNALIST:  Will you consider options like the one that Jay Weatherill  put to you about tax exemptions for locally made cars?  

 KIM CARR:  Well we’re not considering any detail in public, because  the whole process here is to allow people to put  suggestions to us, and they will be examined, but we will  not be able to respond in public to any of those types of  propositions, irrespective of whether others choose to  make them public.  

 JOURNALIST:  When can we expect an election?  

 KIM CARR:  I think you can expect an election before the end of this  year. 

 JOURNALIST:  When would you like an election? 

 KIM CARR:  The question on the election is a matter for the Prime  Minister, and I think that we’ll see, that he’ll make a  decision within the constitutional arrangements and with  due regard to what is in the national interest.  

 JOURNALIST:  So you’re a senior member of his team, and no doubt he  has your confidence, how would you advise him?   

 KIM CARR:  I’m not in the business of providing advice to the Prime  Minister via the media. Thank you very much.  

 

