---
title: "Almost 2,200 arrivals in just 20 days"
date: "2013-05-21"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211394411
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719401%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ALMOST 2,200 ARRIVALS IN JUST 20 DAYS May 21, 2013

 Two more illegal boat arrivals, with a total of over 100 people on board, mean almost 2,200 people have arrived on illegal  boats so far this month, an average of over 100 people a day, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott  Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 "These latest illegal arrivals continue the record rate of boats under Julia Gillard, which have seen an average of over 100  people arrive every day this month," Mr Morrison said.

 "Labor's failed policies once again have resulted in hundreds of people being housed in tents on Christmas Island as  detention centres across the country fill to overflowing.

 "The last time this many people were in tents on Christmas Island was just before the riots there in 2011. Labor's policies  on our borders result in a cyclical pattern of failure of more boat arrivals and more repeated failure of the past.

 "This is the track record of Julia Gillard. Australians can't afford three more years of her government's cost, chaos and  tragedy on our borders.

 "The Coalition will break Labor's cycle of failure on our borders by restoring the proven policies and resolve necessary to  stop the boats," Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “531 boats carrying over 34,000 people have now arrived since the last election when Labor promised  the Australian people that they would regain control of our borders and stop the boats from coming.

 “Under Julia Gillard there have been more illegal boat arrivals than under any other Australian Prime Minister in our entire  history.

 “How can the Australian people believe the Gillard Government when they say that they will stop the boats when all they  have done is sit on their hands and use their Malaysia Swap Deal as an excuse to do nothing - despite their own expert  panel saying it wouldn’t work in its current form.

 “In the first four days of this month we had nearly 900 people arrive by boat, which is more than the entire quota for the  Malaysia Swap Deal.

 “The Australian people are sick of excuses - they need a government that will implement the tough border protection  measures to put an end to this evil trade,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 ALMOST 2,200 ARRIVALS IN JUST 20 DAYS > Michael Keenan MP

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

