---
title: "Global Day of Action on Military Spending - time to recalibrate defence"
date: "2013-04-15"
creators:
  - "Ludlam, Scott"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211393455
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2373892%22
---

 Global Day of Action on Military Spending - time to recalibrate defence   Australian Greens spokesperson assisting on Defence, Senator Scott Ludlam.  15 April 2013.   

 Governments around the world spent $1.75 trillion - $4.8 billion per day - on military  expenses in 2012, an amount higher than Cold War peaks - with Australia among the  five biggest military spenders in our region.*   

 “If governments spent 4.8 billion per day on addressing environmental, economic,  food and human security, many of the root causes of armed conflict would be  eliminated,” said Greens spokesperson assisting on Defence, Senator Scott Ludlam,  on the third Global Day of Action on Military Spending.    

 “While $4.8 billion each day is spent on preparation for war, 24,000 children under  the age of five die every day from preventable diseases.  Human security needs are  inevitably neglected when such substantial resources are wasted on preparation for  war.   

 

 “In the upcoming budget and Defence White paper, the Australian Government  should focus defence dollars on our genuine security threats, particularly the risks of  climate change in our region, rather than throwing more money at the technically and 

 financially infeasible Joint Strike Fighter.   

 “It is in Australia’s security interests to both prevent and prepare for catastrophic  climate change given the 150-200 million climate refugees predicted, as well as  potential resource wars, health security, and an unstable Asia-Pacific region.    

 "Australia is out of step with contemporary security experts and governments that are  addressing the climate security nexus. We should look to genuine 21st century  security needs and divert some of this senseless overkill to more productive ends,”  Senator Ludlam concluded.   

 *2012 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) report.   

 SIPRI Factsheet 'Trends in world military expenditure, 2012', 15 April 2013, available  at www.sipri.org and http://www.sipri.org/media/pressreleases/2013/milex_launch   

 Senator Ludlam’s submission on climate security to the Defence White Paper  Consultation: http://scott-ludlam.greensmps.org.au/content/committee/submission-2013-defence-white-paper   

 

 Media contact: Giovanni Torre - 0417 174 302   

 

 

 

 

