---
title: "Three illegal boats in three days"
date: "2013-08-26"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211436305
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2688909%22
---

 

 

 

 Media Release    

 Scott Morrison MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Coalition Campaign Spokesman 

 

 Michael Keenan MP 

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection    

 

 Tuesday 27 August 2013    

 Three illegal boats in three days    

 The arrival of another illegal boat, with a total of 73 people on board, is the third in three  days and takes total arrivals since Labor’s PNG election fix was announced to over 3,100  people, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow  Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.    

 “Over 150 people have arrived illegally in the last three days and a total of 3,148 since Kevin  Rudd announced his PNG election fix,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “Kevin Rudd’s and Tony Burke’s big talk on their PNG arrangement is being exposed on a  daily basis. Boats continue to arrive and yet there are no detailed guidelines on the  resettlement of refugees in PNG.    

 “Labor’s talk is no substitute for an agreement on how people will be resettled in PNG. Once  again Labor is all talk and no delivery on their big announcements and people smugglers  know it.    

 “Australians will have the chance at the election to stop the boats by electing a Coalition  Government. Three more years of Labor will see three more years of boats and three more  years of cost, chaos and tragedy on our borders,” Mr Morrison said.    

 Mr Keenan said: "The daily ferry service to Australia continues courtesy of the people  smugglers.    

 "Despite Mr Rudd's false claims that his PNG arrangement is stopping the boats, the facts  speak for themselves with 25 boats carrying almost 1700 people having arrived this month  alone.    

 "The boats will continue arriving as long as Labor is in Government - the people smugglers  know that Labor is just not serious about stopping them.    

 "To break the people smugglers’ business model you need to implement a suite of tough  border protection policies - something the Coalition will do if elected on 7 September," Mr  Keenan said.    

 Media contacts:         Julian Leembruggen 0419 494 667 (Morrison)                                      Hannah Weir 0458 167 600 (Keenan) 

 

 

 Members of the media wishing to subscribe or unsubscribe to Coalition Campaign Media announcements please email  CoalitionMedia@chq.liberal.org.au     

 Authorised and printed by Brian Loughnane, Cnr Blackall and Macquarie Sts BARTON ACT 2600 

 

 

 

 The information contained in this e-mail, and any attachments to it, is intended for the use of the addressee  and is confidential. If you are not the intended recipient you must not use, disclose, read, forward, copy or  retain any of the information. If you have received this e-mail in error, please delete it and notify the sender by  return e-mail. 

 

