---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Bundaberg: July 19, 2013: The Coalition's policy to fix the Bruce Highway; Bundaberg's flood disaster recovery; Kevin Rudd's border protection failures; opinion polls"
date: "2013-07-19"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "The Coalition's policy to fix the Bruce Highway"
  - "Bundaberg's flood disaster recovery"
  - "Kevin Rudd's border protection failures"
  - "opinion polls"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397372
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2837210%22
---

 Joint Doorstop Interview, Bundaberg  July 19, 2013

 Subjects: The Coalition’s policy to fix the Bruce Highway; Bundaberg’s flood disaster recovery; Kevin Rudd’s border protection  failures; opinion polls

 EO&E...........................................................................................................................................

 TONY ABBOTT:

 It’s great to be here in Bundaberg in the electorate of Hinkler with our candidate Keith Pitt at Bundaberg Brewed Drinks, which is 

 one of the iconic businesses in this city. It’s a very important business. It employs close to 200 people. It exports product overseas  and product from this factory travels right around our country, which is one of the many reasons why we need to upgrade the 

 Bruce Highway.

 This is day three of my trip down the Bruce Highway - day three of my campaign to promote the fact that we have got to bring the  Bruce Highway into the 21st century and the $6.7 billion that a federal Coalition government will spend over ten years on this 

 highway as part of what is close to a $10 billion plan to bring the highway into the 21st century as soon as we humanly can.

 It’s the lifeline of Queensland, it’s the gateway to Australia’s north. The traffic is getting heavier and heavier with each passing  year. It’s important that we work hard to make this road the sort of road that it should be for the people of Queensland and I call on

 the Labor Party to match our commitment to spend the extra $2.6 billion that is needed to bring this road up to an acceptable  standard. There’s a number of works that will be done in the electorate of Hinkler under this in particular, the preliminary works to 

 get the heavy vehicle bypass into Childers and I know that’s something which Keith is very, very keen to support and to  encourage as the LNP candidate in succession to Paul Neville.

 This obviously is a city which has been badly hit twice in two years by very serious floods. I was here in January to help with the 

 flood clean up. That was a heart breaking time for the people of Bundaberg. If you look around, you can still see some of the  physical scars - the mental scars take a lot longer to heal from something like this. I call on the federal Government to move 

 swiftly to ensure that the disaster recovery funds flow to the city so that the city can be fully restored and life - commercial life in  particular as usual can resume. I’m going to ask Keith just to say a few words about the importance of iconic businesses such as 

 this and the importance of ongoing drought to flood recovery efforts, the important of the Bruce Highway and then I’ll take a few  questions.

 KEITH PITT:

 Thank you, Tony. I’m very pleased to have Mr Abbott in the electorate today and a little bit of time last night and we’ve certainly 

 taken that opportunity to brief him on the issues which we have locally and in particular the river siltation and things around our  port which is clearly essential to the local sugar industry, but is something that we need to take action on very, very swiftly.

 Certainly the announcement for the upgrade of the Bruce Highway has been very gratefully received. In particular, businesses like 

 this at Bundaberg Brewed Drinks which use the highway every day for heavy vehicle transport are substantially affected if it’s  stopped by floods. Not only those, but the people who provide consumables in particular and Bundaberg and Hinkler are an area 

 where we produce lots and lots of vegetables and lots and lots of consumables which obviously just do not survive if they don’t get  to market in a very short period of time. So it actually stops the economy if we don’t have the highway open.

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Ok, do we have any questions?

 QUESTION:

 Mr Abbott, there’s been reports this morning about a possible asylum seeker policy that could be forming within the Rudd  Government. What are your thoughts on that?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well, I think the public are entitled to be very sceptical of Mr Rudd when it comes to these policy issues. Let’s face it, Mr Rudd put 

 the people smugglers back into business, back in August of 2008 when the Government he then led abolished the Howard  Government’s successful Pacific Solution. John Howard found a problem and created a solution. Kevin Rudd found a solution and 

 Tony Abbott Federal Member for Warringah | Leader of the Opposition

 Page 1 of 3 Joint Doorstop Interview, Bundaberg > Tony Abbott

 12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 created a problem and it is so much, much worse now than it ever was in the past. Illegal boat arrival numbers are racing towards  50,000. Mr Rudd has now been Prime Minister again for almost a month and it looks like his first month as a restored, recycled 

 Prime Minister are going to give us a monthly record for boat arrivals. So let’s wait and see what he comes up with, but I think the  public are sick of talk, they’re sick of endless meetings. What they want is firm action. I say to the Prime Minister - if you really 

 want to take the sugar off the table, you restore temporary protection visas - you don’t need a meeting to do that. You don’t need  Parliament to come back. You can sign back temporary protection visas today if you are fair dinkum about stopping the boats.

 QUESTION:

 What are your thoughts specifically about the idea of resettling - process refugees overseas?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well I’ll wait and see what the Government comes up with, but this is a problem that Mr Rudd created. It’s now up to Mr Rudd to  take urgent, decisive action actually to stop the boats and he keeps saying that he doesn’t like three-word slogans. Well if he’s not 

 going to stop the boats, what is he going to do? What is he going to do? At the moment, all he’s doing is servicing the boats and  that’s not a smart thing for a country like Australia.

 QUESTION:

 But has the Coalition considered this very same option?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 What we have been proposing all along and you’ve had the same strong team and the same clear plans from the Coalition for the 

 last three years - what we’ve been proposing all along, temporary protection visas to deny the people smugglers a product to sell,  rigorous offshore processing, not just the half-hearted processing that we’ve had from the current Government. The willingness to 

 turn boats around where it’s safe to do so and much better relations with countries like Indonesia.

 QUESTION:

 Mr Abbott, I’ve got a question for our Canberra office. A Seven news poll last night has found that if Malcolm Turnbull was leader,  the Coalition would win in a landslide. Why do you think Mr Turnbull’s popular and do you think you should stand aside?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well I’m very pleased to have a very strong team - a very, very strong team and unlike the Labor Party which is a one-man band,  we are a strong team. We’ve been a strong team for the last three years. If we’re elected, we’ll be a strong, stable and cohesive 

 government. We can run a political party that’s got room for more than just one big figure as we’ve seen from the Labor Party,  they just can’t do that.

 QUESTION:

 Are you worried by those poll results though?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Look, I’m very encouraged by the fact that we’ve got a political movement which is a broad church, it’s a big tent. There are room 

 for big figures inside a Coalition government.

 QUESTION:

 Just a local question, what were your thoughts when you saw the progress of flood-affected North Bundaberg?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well look, I know that this has been a tragic couple of years for the city of Bundaberg. Just at the moment and this was the  message that came through to me loud and clear talking to local people last night. The big issue is getting the port ready for 

 serious sugar exports again and that requires a lot of dredging work. My understanding is that the proposal has been fully cleared  and approved by the Queensland Government. That’s $12 million to get the port fully operating again with large ships coming in. 

 It’s necessary to get the port operating again if the sugar industry is to continue to flourish here in Bundaberg. As I understand it,  the application is sitting on Mr Rudd’s desk. Now, Mr Rudd doesn’t spend nearly enough time behind his desk. If he’s governing 

 as opposed to campaigning, get back to your desk in Canberra Mr Rudd, sign through this application so that the money can be  spent and the port can be dredged and the sugar exports can get going again. I’ve got to say, he would have the full support of 

 the Coalition to get this done.

 QUESTION:

 Mr Abbott, Indonesia are requiring visas from Iranians, is this a good idea and could it be spread to other countries?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Look, this is a step in the right direction. It’s long overdue. It is a step in the right direction. If it becomes more widespread, no 

 Page 2 of 3 Joint Doorstop Interview, Bundaberg > Tony Abbott

 12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 doubt that will be helpful.

 QUESTION:

 Just on the floods again, the federal Government’s promised $40 million for a betterment plan. The State Government wants it to 

 be $100 million. If you’re elected, what will you offer Bundaberg?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well I absolutely agree with Campbell Newman that this it’s important not just to replace the infrastructure, but to replace it with  more effective infrastructure. We don’t want to rebuild inadequate infrastructure. We want to rebuild the right infrastructure. So I 

 think Campbell Newman is absolutely on the right track and I’d be only too happy to work constructively with him should we win  the election.

 QUESTION:

 Labor have factored into its Budget, hundreds of million dollars to pay for the Cross River Rail project. There’s been no offer from 

 the Coalition. Has that money now been re-allocated into the Bruce Highway?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 My understanding is that the offer that the Labor Government made to the Queensland Government on this score was completely  unacceptable. It was completely unacceptable. It wasn’t a real offer, because it wasn’t an offer that was made in a form that the 

 Queensland Government could possibly accept. So, as is so often the case with the Labor Party, it’s all window dressing, it’s all  show, it’s all talk, it’s no action. Mr Rudd is all talk and no action, but when he finally does act as with the fringe benefit tax the 

 other day, he ends up destroying peoples’ jobs, badly damaging industries already under pressure.

 Thank you.

 [ends]

 © Tony Abbott MHR 2010 | Authorised by Tony Abbott MHR, Level 2, 17 Sydney Rd, Manly NSW 2095

 www.tonyabbott.com.au

 Page 3 of 3 Joint Doorstop Interview, Bundaberg > Tony Abbott

 12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

