---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 19 August 2013: Australia Council board; Arts policy; asylum seeker policy"
date: "2013-08-19"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
source: "MINISTER FOR THE ARTS"
subjects:
  - "Australia Council board"
  - "Arts policy"
  - "asylum seeker policy"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399114
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2674165%22
---

 

 Campaign Transcript    

 TRANSCRIPT OF MINISTER TONY BURKE  PRESS CONFERENCE   SYDNEY  19 AUGUST 2013  

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________ 

 

 Subjects: Australia Council board; Arts policy; Asylum seeker policy.   _____________________________________________________________  

 

 JOURNALIST:  Mr Burke, you said today that the Coalition (inaudible)  essentially interfered with funding, can you say why you believe that’s the case?     

 TONY BURKE:  George Brandis in the Senate moved a specific amendment for  the Australia Council Bill, it’s there, and in that amendment he said that a  directive of the Minister would override any decision of the Australian Council  board. 

 

 This policy represents the most direct level of political interference in arts funding  that you can imagine. Now it didn’t get much publicity at the time because it got  knocked over in the Senate because they couldn’t find other parties to support  them, nor should they, but now they need to come clean in this election about  whether or not they’re continuing it pursue that.     

 We know they believe it because they moved it and they voted for it, but it  actually turns the table on everything that has been the basis of arts funding in  Australia.    

 If you believe in arm’s length funding then you can’t support political interference,  but political interference is exactly how the Liberal and National parties tried to  change the law.    

 This policy represents the most direct level of political interference in arts funding  that you can imagine. Now it didn’t get much publicity at the time because it got  knocked over in the Senate because they couldn’t find other parties to support  them, nor should they, but now they need to come clean in this election about  whether or not they’re continuing it pursue that.     

 We know they believe it because they moved it and they voted for it, but it  actually turns the table on everything that has been the basis of arts funding in  Australia.    

 If you believe in arm’s length funding then you can’t support political interference,  but political interference is exactly how the Liberal and National parties tried to  change the law.    

 JOURNALIST:  And what would the ramifications be for the arts sector?    

 TONY BURKE:  Well it’s really simple, you end up either having a situation  where people who would otherwise be funded find a ministerial veto prevents it  from happening because you know  it might be politically challenging or  something like that, or in the alternative, it can be used to intimidate, to try to say  to the board, don’t you dare go down this path, and the board ends up acting  trying to avoid ministerial interference.    

 Either way, it is the opposite of creativity, either way, it is the exact antithesis of  why we established the Australia Council in the first place.     

 JOURNALIST:  And in terms of board appointments, there was also (inaudible)  of one of the appointees?    

 TONY BURKE: It was interesting, if you go through the board appointees, the  two who would be described as having multicultural backgrounds were the two  who George Brandis was opposed to. Now people can draw their own  conclusions as to why he leant back in his arm chair and pined from on high that  he had problems with those two individuals, but one was from Western Sydney  who had a background in theatre, George Brandis was only aware of the film  background, wasn’t aware of the writing background or the performance theatre  background, then claimed that we didn’t have authors, and one of the people  who he complained about was someone who’s published.    

 Effectively at the end of all this, if you look at the amendments that the Liberal  Party moved in the Senate, I think it’s the most telling thing. They moved one  amendment which was aimed at introducing ministerial interference in decisions  of the board of the Australia Council, and the other amendment was about  attacking references to diversity. So they took out, they wanted to take out, all  references to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders, and then when it comes to  complaining, look at the names he complained about on the Australia Council  board-     

 JOURNALIST: Khao Do and-     

 TONY BURKE: And Waleed Aly, were the two that he complained about. Now  people can draw their own conclusions, but if his argument was about artists and 

 people who’ve published, well these two individuals fitted each criteria. I’m  incredibly proud of the entire composition of that entire Australia Council board.    

 George Brandis, I’m not sure where he got this one from, complained that the  Opposition wasn’t consulted on the appointments to the board. I can’t remember  John Howard picking up the phone and checking with us before board  appointments were made, the truth of it is that we have a skill based board, we  probably have more actual artists on the board than we’ve had previously. Under 

 the new structure of the Australia Council, we actually have something that can  deliver for creativity, and it’s not designed for ministerial intervention, nor should  it be.    

 JOURNALIST: Just finally, you’ve got major talks coming up with the  Indonesian’s on people smuggling, what are you hoping to come out of it?    

 TONY BURKE: With any international conference, I think that we need to view  international conferences from the perspective of something that builds  momentum. Most of the things that you’d actually want to be achieved nation by  nation are down payments that we’ve already got.    

 Since the conference was announced, before we’ve got to tomorrow’s date,  we’ve already had Indonesia stop the visa on arrival for Iranians, we’ve had the  regional resettlement arrangement with Papua New Guinea and the regional  resettlement arrangement with Nauru, so in of the specific actions that you would  want to see on the table, they are already locked in. The conference and the  summit, I expect will be a chance to continue to build momentum and  cooperation for what is without a doubt a regional problem.     

 JOURNALIST: Now Minister, just quickly, PNG’s Prime Minister, there is an  article in the Oz today and he is once again saying that asylum seekers may be  resettle here in Australia. You know, can the Government deliver on this plan?    

 TONY BURKE:  I think if you read the actual quotes that are in that article, the  foreign minister has simply referred to the fact that from Papua New Guinea’s  perspective, if other countries are willing the help then they are completely open  to that and the agreement was framed that way. But the Prime Minister of Papua  New Guinea put out a statement that was circulated widely yesterday, it started  to be circulated on Saturday. In that statement the Prime Mistier of Papua New  Guinea said people transferred under the arrangement will not be returned to  Australia. They will not be returned to Australia. No less an authority that the  Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea in writing. They have signed up, we have a  formal memorandum of understanding on this.  

 

 The position of Australia is clear, people who arrive by boat without a visa will not  be settled in Australia. The people smugglers no longer have a product to sell. It  will suit my political opponents to try to spread misinformation about that. They 

 have their own agenda there in terms of the election. But anyone who is thinking  of getting on a boat, should know without any doubt, we have already started  transferring people to Papua New Guinea. We are about to start transferring  people to Nauru under the arrangement there. People will not be settled in  Australia and it is in writing and public from the Prime Minister of Papua New  Guinea, they won’t be returned to Australia.     

 Thank you very much.      

 ENDS 

 

 Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111   www.alp.org.au     

 

 Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor, 5/9 Sydney Avenue, Barton, ACT, 2600   

