---
title: "Illegal arrivals surge to 25,000 this financial year"
date: "2013-06-25"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396285
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719347%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ILLEGAL ARRIVALS SURGE TO 25,000 THIS  FINANCIAL YEAR June 25, 2013

 The latest illegal boat arrivals, with a total of 164 people on board, mean a record 25,000 people have arrived illegally this financial  year,  more  than  triple  last  year’s  figure,  and  more  than  45,000  in  total  under  Labor,  Shadow  Minister  for Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice,  Customs  and  Border  protection  Michael Keen said today.

 “As Labor limps through the final week of the 43rd Parliament people smuggler activity is surging. Boats are being sent on the dangerous journey to Australia like never before as smugglers exploit every single day under this failed government,”  Mr Morrison said.

 “This financial year 25,145 people have arrived on 394 boats - an average of over 70 people and more than a boat a day.

 “Three  years  ago  today  Julia  Gillard  removed  Kevin  Rudd  promising  the  Australian  people  she  would  restore  strong management of our borders. Instead she has become the people smugglers’ business model, having finished what her  predecessor started - the complete dismantling of the Howard government’s policies that had stopped the boats.

 “A change of leader back to Kevin Rudd - the ‘master and commander’ of Labor’s border failures, will not stop the boats.  Under Labor the chaos on our borders will only get worse no matter who is leader.

 “Only the election of a Coalition Government will see the policies that stopped the boats restored and the end of five years of record cost, chaos and tragedy on our borders,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “Since the Labor Party made the decision to abolish the robust border protection system they inherited from the Howard Government, more than 45,000 people have arrived illegally by boat in Australia.

 “On  top  of  this  over  25,000  people  on  nearly  400  boats  have  arrived  so  far  this  financial  year  amidst  the  constant leadership shambles of this Government.

 “The crisis at our borders has significantly worsened under the leadership of Julia Gillard - with nearly 600 boats carrying  well over 38,000 people having arrived since she knifed Kevin Rudd for the Prime Ministership. 

 “This is a Government that has been too embroiled in their own leadership tensions for the past three years instead of putting an end to the people smuggling trade that has been allowed to flourish in our region. 

 “Labor  has  no  plan  to  stop  the  boats  and  no  matter  who  is  leading  this  divided  Government  they  cannot  be  trusted  to implement the necessary policies to put an end to this insidious trade,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 ILLEGAL ARRIVALS SURGE TO 25,000 THIS FINANCIAL YEAR > Michael Ke...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

