---
title: "300 boats this financial year - the highest under Labor"
date: "2013-04-22"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211393829
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719463%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling 300 boats this financial year - the highest  under Labor April 22, 2013

 Following the interception of two illegal boats yesterday carrying 69 people and 63 people, the number of illegal boats to  arrive this financial year has risen to 300, the highest under this Labor Government in a financial year, the second highest  being 2009-10 with 117 boats arriving, Acting Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and Shadow Minister for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection Michael Keenan said.

 “Julia Gillard used Kevin Rudd’s failure to control our borders as one of the three reasons she was required to take over  as Prime Minister,” Mr Keenan said.

 “But illegal boat arrivals under her watch have been fives times the number of boats than under Kevin Rudd.

 “We have seen 502 boats arrive under Prime Minister Gillard - filling our detention centres with ever-increasing boat  arrivals,” Mr Keenan said.

 “We have already seen 96 illegal boats arrive this year, carrying 6,236 people, three times the number of boats and  people that arrived from 1 January to 30 April in 2012. 

 “The immigration detention network is bursting at the seams and the Government is now desperately looking for ways to  deal with this deluge of arrivals when they simply don’t have the infrastructure to keep up with the influx.

 “With over 38,000 people arriving since this Labor Government rolled back our border protection regime, the Australian  taxpayer has been forced to foot the $6 billion blowout bill for Labor’s inability to control our borders.

 “The Prime Minister is simply not doing her job. On her watch boat arrivals are accelerating, not declining - this is a  Government with no plan to stop the boats,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 300 boats this financial year - the highest under Labor > Michael Keenan MP

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

