---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 13 August 2013: Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal Outlook; Mr Abbott's plan for $70bn of cuts"
date: "2013-08-13"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal Outlook"
  - "Mr Abbott's plan for $70bn of cuts"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398753
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2662239%22
---

 

 

 Campaign Transcript    

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF TREASURER CHRIS BOWEN & MINISTER FOR FINANCE  AND DEREGULATION PENNY WONG   PRESS CONFERENCE   SYDNEY 

 13 AUGUST 2013     

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________ 

 

 Subjects: Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal Outlook; Mr Abbott’s plan for  $70bn of cuts  _____________________________________________________________  

 

 TREASURER:         This document is prepared by Australia's central economic  agencies. Independently of Government, free of any interference by any  politician, in accordance with the charter of budget honesty laid out by Peter  Costello in 1998.  

 It is produced, as I say, in accordance with the charter of budget honesty which  all political parties should comply with. The figures in this document confirm the  economic statement released by Minister Wong and I the Friday before last.  Confirms those figures in relation to the economic outlook, jobs, growth,  employment, inflation and also in relation to the fiscal outlook in terms of the  state of the budget. The only difference being a slightly larger surplus in 2016/17,  a very slightly larger surplus in 2016/17 estimated by this document.  

 Now that the independent analysis of Australia's central economic agencies has  been released to the public, it is time, as I say, for all parties to comply with the  charter of budget honesty as the Government has been doing. From this day  forward there is no excuse for the Opposition not to release all its costings, how it  intends to pay for its policies. Costings which should be done in accordance with  the charter of budget honesty. They should release a full and proper account of  the impact of their decisions and policies on the budget and they should release  most importantly of all, how they intend to pay for their promises and to fill their  promises and to fill their Budget black hole. Now of course, the Opposition has  been all at sixes and sevens about how they will release their costings, when  they will release them, who will cost them, whether they will respect the pre-

 election forecast or not. But we can take Mr Abbott at his statement in May where  he said he would release all their saves and spending decisions after the release  of the Pre-election Fiscal Outlook. From today, with the release of the Pre-election Fiscal Outlook, the alibis end, the excuses end. Nowhere to hide. Simply  release your costings and how you intend to pay for your promises.  

 This morning, I saw the Shadow Attorney-General George Brandis on television  saying all the policies have been finalised. They have all been costed. They are  all there ready to go. Yesterday, Mr Abbott said he had 200 policies costed. Well,  if they're all there, ready to go, if they're all there, all set, what is the excuse for  not releasing them and being up-front with the Australian people? Tony Abbott  has a plan as to how he is going to pay for his promises and fill his budget black  hole but he is not telling you about it. I expect the reason he is not telling you  about it is he knows if he does people will be less likely to vote for him. To pay for  his promises and to fill his Budget black hole it is inevitably the case there will be  deep cuts to health, hospitals and education. Tony Abbott is following the  precedent set by Campbell Newman, not to be up-front with people about what  cuts will be made before an election but only to embark on those deep cuts after  an election. It is simply not good enough. The Government's laid out our plans,  our budget bottom line. Minister Wong and I did that before the election was  called. From today onwards there is no excuse for Mr Abbott not to do exactly the  same and comply with the charter of Budget honesty. Penny -  

 WONG:          Thanks very much Treasurer. As the Treasurer has said, the Pre-election Economic and Fiscal Outlook released today by the central agencies, by  the Departments of Treasury and Finance confirms the Government's economic  statement, it confirms the Government's budget figures and it is now time for  Tony Abbott to come clean with the Australian people about his Budget numbers.  The Government's done that and it is time for Tony Abbott to do that. I do want to  make one point about some of the reporting today where we see that Joe  Hockey, the man who has made endless numbers of excuses about why he can't  tell people about his costings, why he can't tell people about the $70 billion worth  of cuts. Joe Hockey today has told one of the national papers about his new  comprehensive process for costings. The only comprehensive process for  costings that the Australian people can trust is that which is contemplated under  the Charter of Budget Honesty.  

 This is the Charter established by Peter Costello. It’s Peter Costello’s Charter of  Budget Honesty that we're saying Joe Hockey and Tony Abbott should comply  with. That charter doesn't contemplate using random accounting firms or  processes that Joe Hockey dreams up and let's remember the history on this. In  the 2010 election, Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey used an accounting firm which  was subsequently fined for unprofessional conduct to do their costings. That is  what they did. That is the comprehensive Liberal process that they gave the  Australian people in 2010. What happened after that election is that Treasury and  Finance costed the Coalition's policies and found an $11 billion black hole. Had 

 Tony Abbott been elected in 2010, we would have seen at least $11 billion worth  of cuts as the start of what an Abbott Government would have done. We also  have seen this term immigration costings done by a catering company. The only  process, the only process that the Australian people can trust is the process that  Peter Costello set out in the charter of budget honesty and that looks to  Treasury, Finance or the Parliamentary Budget Office to do the costings. It is  time Tony Abbott came forward with his costings and was up-front with the  Australian people about how he is going to fund his policies. What are the cuts to  health, education, to services to pay for the $70 billion black hole? Happy to take  questions.  

 JOURNALIST:         Why doesn't PEFO include figures for the repair of the  (inaudible)? 

 WONG:                      I think if you look at the statement it actually contemplates  the fact that this is provisioned for in the budget.  

 JOURNALIST:         What would that figure be?  

 WONG:                      I think the statement says it is provisioned for within the  budget. 

 JOURNALIST:         In the PEFO, in the outlying years there is a scenario that  deals with unemployment not falling as quickly as originally planned for. Is there  any risk that that might not recover as you hoped? 

 TREASURER:         I don't believe so. What we're talking about is alternative  forecasting methodology, not matters of the real economy. As I understand it,  The Treasury changed its methodology back in the earlier part of this decade.  They are contemplating an alternative methodology. It goes to different methods  of forecasting, it doesn't go to matters of substance in the economy. As I said the  projections made in the government's economic statement of the Friday before  last are endorsed and confirmed in this document.  

 JOURNALIST:         There is provision obviously for more than 8,000 more  asylum seeker arrivals next year - is that a prudent decision (inaudible)?  

 TREASURER:         Quite the contrary. I draw you to the comments by the  central agencies on p.56. This states that the decisions by the Government in  relation to PNG and Nauru which I quote "Are expected to provide a material  deterrent on future arrivals over time". So, they are making that point, however  they are making the prudent decision as the Government did in our economic  outlook to keep the arrival forecast as it was at Budget time and not to factor in  any reduction because that would be imprudent. We are confident in the 

 arrangements we put in place. The prudent thing to do is to keep the forecasts as  they are, or as they were at budget time.  

 JOURNALIST:         Is this a $40 million economic competitiveness fund - can  you explain what that is? (Inaudible)  

 TREASURER:         The Government's made various decisions in relation to  commitments that we wish to make. The economic competitiveness fund is  important in terms of the agenda that the Prime Minister’s been laying out in  terms of productivity and ensuring we modernise our economy and deal with the  transition out of the mining investment boom. We have allocated that money at  the time of the economic statement that has reflected here in this statement and  of course detailed measures arising out of that fund would be announced by the  Government in the future.  

 JOURNALIST:         PEFO warns that more asylum seekers may be needed if  the boats keep coming. What sort of extra spending can taxpayers expect in  future?  

 TREASURER:         I don't think you should read that conclusion into this  document. It does go to implications of alternative arrival scenarios. That is  unsurprising that if arrivals increased further, costs would increase further. Yes,  that is right and they put those alternative scenarios in there. The assumption  that is based on, it is the same assumption at budget time and as the document  says, we do expect "material deterrent on future arrivals over time". We expect  the arrangements put in place in Papua New Guinea and Nauru to pay that, if  you like, that dividend to the budget as well as of course the important deterrence  effect that we want it to have to save peoples' lives and stop them drowning at  sea and get a more fair and orderly system of resettling refugees in Australia.  

 JOURNALIST:         You don't have a dollar figure in mind of what that may  entail?  

 TREASURER:         There is tables here in the document towards the end of the  document, pages 56 and 57, but they are all alternative scenarios, the scenario  laid out here, as the base of the central agencies forecast is the same arrival rate  at budget time, bearing in mind we do expect and the central agencies expect a  deterrent effect.    

 JOURNALIST:           (Inaudible)   

 TREASURER:         -we want to invest in hospitals. We want to put more money  into hospitals. Hospitals are very important parts of our community. We don't  apologise for prioritising investment in hospitals. This goes to the point I am  making. We are being up-front and clear about our level of investment in health 

 and hospitals. We won't be slashing and burning after the election health funding  because we will have been up-front with the Australian people about our savings  measures whichever been outlined. On the contrary, not only are we not slashing  we are investing more and the minister for health will make further  announcements as to how that money is being allocated in relation to individual  hospital commitments.    

 JOURNALIST:           Are there any changes in the mining tax revenue and any  scope to redesign-   

 TREASURER:         In answer to the second question, no. The mining and  minerals resources rent tax is in and implemented and we have no plans to  change it. We think that sets the appropriate balance. It will go up and down in  relation to the levels of profit being made in the mining sector. The variance that  there is there is largely affected in changes of the Australian dollar and what  impact that has on export and therefore flow through to our profits.    

 JOURNALIST:           Given the volatility of the budget forecasts, isn't the  Coalition justified in waiting to see the document today and isn't that how the  system is meant to work?    

 TREASURER:         Well as I said, they have been at sixes and sevens on this  issue. Mr Hockey just last week said this document prepared by Australia's  central economic agencies wouldn't be worth the paper it is written on, he said he  wouldn't be abiding by its projections. That was Mr Hockey and Mr Abbott’s come  out and has said obviously we will use the PEFO as the budget bottom line. It is  obvious to everyone except Mr Hockey. Let's see how they respond to this. The  charter of budget honesty is an important document and it is a document we give  credit to Peter Costello for. It was the right thing to do to implement it and we are  honouring it as we have and his political successors should honour it as well.    

 JOURNALIST:           (Inaudible)   

 TREASURER:         I think Don Randall was being honest from his point of view.  What he was doing is outlining the real Liberal agenda. Don Randall has been  around a long time. He is a front bencher in the Liberal Party and if he says we  might have to go back on our promises, that should be taken seriously. I am  unsurprised that Mr Abbott has gone to take that alternative point of view. What I  think Mr Randall  has done has ‘belled the cat’ frankly on  the Liberal Party's  plans.    

 JOURNALIST:           What time period do you think the Commonwealth  Government should have to bring that net debt back down to balance?    

 TREASURER:         The document outlines when net debt will return to zero,  23/24. That is underlining the fact that we will return to zero net debt faster than 

 most comparable nations. It reflects that we're one of eight countries around the  world that have a AAA credit rating from each of the three credit rating agencies  and a stable outlook. It wasn't that long ago that there were more than eight  countries in that list and we weren't one of them. That club has become more  exclusive and we have joined it just as it becomes more exclusive under this  Government. That reflects the good economic management and it also reflects  the hysterical scare campaign we see from the Opposition as to just how  misplaced that scare campaign is when it comes to the deficit.    

 WONG:                      Can I just add one more point to that, no doubt you’ll get, if  he hasn’t already Joe Hockey and Tony Abbott standing up to talk about that.  Well I think the question to them is this; if they're concerned about debt, there is  really only one way they can say that they would have a different bottom line and  that is to cut more. In that time - I come back to what the Treasurer said in his  opening, according to their own senior front bencher, George Brandis, their  policies are costed and ready to go. There is only one reason why they wouldn't   be releasing them and that is they don't want to share them with the Australian  people. They don't want to share them with the Australian people because  people might have second thoughts about voting for Tony Abbott if they knew the  truth about his cuts.    

 JOURNALIST:           (Inaudible question)    

 TREASURER:         Of course. Absolutely. Look at our actions. Don't just look at  our words, look at our actions as well. We have complied with the charter of  budgetary honesty, all the way through. We outlined, Senator Wong and I, the  Friday before last in the economic statement, we called it as we saw it and laid it  all out including costings for our plans and included difficult decisions as to how  we will pay them but put them up front before the Australian people.    

 ENDS 

 

 Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111   www.alp.org.au     

 

 Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor, 5/9 Sydney Avenue, Barton, ACT, 2600   

