---
title: "500 more Syrian refugees to be settled in Australia"
date: "2013-10-03"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399544
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2763185%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 500 more Syrian refugees to be settled in Australia 

 A further 500 Syrian refugees will be settled in Australia under the government's  strengthened humanitarian programme which guarantees more resettlement places  for those waiting in desperate circumstances around the world, Minister for  Immigration and Border Protection Scott Morrison announced today. 

 A decision on granting additional places to Syrian refugees was flagged at the  government's Operation Sovereign Borders briefing on September 30. Australia's  commitment is in response to the UNHCR's call for coordinated international efforts  to resettle Syrian refugees. 

 'The Australian Government will work with the UNHCR to identify those offered the  resettlement places, which will be targeted for highly vulnerable people in urgent  need of protection,' Mr Morrison said. 

 Resettlement will commence in 2013-14. 

 'The government's policy of denying permanent visas to those who arrived illegally  by boat will enable Australia to continue offering targeted resettlement to those most  in need,' the Minister said. 

 'Australia will also continue to assist the UNHCR in the internationally coordinated  response to the Syrian crisis. 

 'Australia has so far provided more than $100 million in humanitarian assistance to  the Syrian crisis, including $45.5 million to support humanitarian activities in  countries neighbouring Syria. 

 'Our funding has supported UNHCR and other agencies to provide shelter, food and  clean water to refugees and host communities. 

 'Australia has long supported the resettlement of genuine refugees through its  offshore refugee programme, working in close cooperation with the UNHCR, and will  continue to do this. 

 'The Australian people's generous support should not be interpreted as an  encouragement to those seeking to enter our country illegally. 

 'People who arrive illegally by boat will not be resettled under our humanitarian  programme, regardless of their country of origin. 

 'They will be subject to the policies the government has established under Operation  Sovereign Borders,' Mr Morrison said. 

 The government is meanwhile also continuing to progress the issue of humanitarian  visas for Afghan interpreters and other locally engaged personnel who have offered  crucial support to Australia's personnel serving in Afghanistan. Mr Morrison said  further updates would be provided soon. 

 Thursday, 03 October 2013  

 

