---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 14 August 2013:discusses Asylum seeker policy; update on implementation."
date: "2013-08-14"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "discusses Asylum seeker policy"
  - "update on implementation."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398856
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2664340%22
---

 

  Campaign Transcript 

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF MINISTER TONY BURKE  PRESS CONFERENCE  SYDNEY  14 AUGUST 2013  

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________ 

 

 Subjects: Asylum seeker policy; Update on implementation.   _____________________________________________________________  

 

 TONY BURKE:                   Good afternoon. 

 I was wanting to provide you with an update, as some of  you would be aware, I have returned late yesterday from  New Guinea and I was able to have another inspection of  progress on Manus Island while I was there including a  meeting with the Governor of Manus Island. 

 First of all another plane load landed this morning at  Manus Island of 40 people. Yesterday while I was there  39 people landed for processing and ultimately if they  have successful claims for settlement in Papua New  Guinea.  

 The 39 who arrived yesterday landed shortly after me and  we did pass each other on the road at one point. That  operation took place yesterday and another 40 this  morning.  

 The prime purpose was I wanted to check how progress  was going on capacity. The vast majority of staff have  now moved onto the Choules and are living on board the  naval vessel there. A smaller number are remaining living  on site.  

 The progress continues from the contractor Red Sea.  They have now removed what was the old single adult  male compound which was tents and they are in the  progress of turning that into a permanent, they are still  working on the basis that in the month of October, the  permanent accommodation there will be ready to go.  Most of my time inspecting progress was at what used to  be the soccer field and has been worked on by Toll for 

 creating a new site which will be able to take in the order  of 300 people.  

 The large marquees for accommodation have now been  completed there.  

 Sorry, it’s 3 - 400 people that they will be able to take. 

 The marquees themselves are very large marquees  which in total take 80 people with a division down the  middle, so it’s 40 on each side for each of the  accommodation marquees. The accommodation  marquees for that compound are already up, the walls  are being put in place there. There is still more work  being done in completing what will be the area for eating  and a recreational area being completed there as well.  

 Toll had in the first instance intended to have all of that  work completed by today. The site manager advised me  that he believed it would take him through to Friday of this  week before that was ready for people to move in and  that’s certainly with the current pace of plane arrivals onto  Manus island. And means that as I predicted there is  absolutely no problem with capacity continuing to  increase and capacity being able to well and truly outstrip  whatever arrivals people smugglers might try to test our  resolve with. 

 Some people, me included, have raised questions about  wanting to make sure that there was still a recreational  option for people while their processing takes place. The  navy at Lombrum had previously offered for their sporting  oval to be occasionally used for people there for  processing. On Friday of last week, it was used for that  purpose. So while the main soccer field has now been  taken over for accommodation, it’s now the case that  there is an additional place where recreation has been  made possible.  

 I also went and had a look at the East Lorengau site.  There has been some publicity in Australia about whether  that site is immediately adjacent to a school. I inspected it  personally, it is not immediately adjacent to a school.  There is a school a distance away, quite a number of  houses in between and the site itself requires a large  amount of clearing before the East Lorengau site will be  ready to go. It’s a large area, quite some hectares, I don’t  have the precises number of hectares there, I have heard  a range. But the claims that have been made that its  immediately adjacent to a school certainly didn’t hold up  when I inspected it myself.  

 There has also been a bit of publicity about the issue of  waste disposal on Manus Island. There is work that I  asked to be carried out which has now been completed  which involved the covering of the waste which had  previously been exposed. It’s in a better state than it was.  I had a meeting as I had said with Governor Benjamin,  the Governor of Manus Island and one of the two  members of Parliament for Manus Island. He indicated to  me that he wanted us to consider other sites for waste  disposal and I have asked for my department to  investigate that as well.  

 I had the opportunity for the first time to have very  detailed conservations face to face with some of people  there for processing. I did not allow the department or  anyone to select in advance who it would be. I simply  turned to an area and sat down during breakfast and had  conversations with two separate groups of people who  are transferees being processed there on Manus Island.  

 In each case, the two groups I sat with by chance were  Iranians. The first group were people who had not  decided whether or not they were going to go home. At  least one of them was already at sea at the time the  announcement had been made.  So he had no line of  sight whatsoever prior to arriving on Christmas Island  about the new policy.  

 He indicated to me directly that had he known about the  policy he would not have boarded the vessel, now that he  is here he is trying to work out more about Papua New  Guinea before he makes a decision as to whether he  would rather go home.  

 The second group of people I spoke to it was explained to  me that they were already in conversations of the  international organisations of migration and had decided  to go home. Across all the people I spoke to, across the  two groups, in every instance when I asked, the response  was that they were in touch with family and friends in  Australia.  

 Some had direct relatives with brother and sisters who  were already living in Australia. Some had more distant  relatives but in every instance people were in contact with  Australians. I will be up front, the conversations were not  easy as you would expect. But I thought It was important  that given the role I have in the policy, I sit directly in front  of the individuals concerned and I explained to them that  if they were found to have a valid claims that the 

 settlement options form them would be in Papua New  Guinea but not within Australia.  

 When some people put to me that they believed that was  unfair. I explained the issues with the drownings that we  have had in the Indian Ocean. I explained the rationale  for the policy and  also made clear that under no  circumstances was the policy going to change and that  whether they had a valid claim or not would be  determined through the process, but if they did have a  valid claim then their settlement options would not be  within Australia.  

 Over the last few days while I have been away there has  been some debate here in Australia, I have missed a fair  bit of it, but I have had some reports of claims that  somehow there is a different situation in the Torres Strait  as a result of this policy. That’s true the situation used to  be that if you come across the Torres Strait, and were  processed, then if you had a valid claim you would  ultimately be settled in Australia. As a result of the new  policy, that is no longer true. The change from this policy  means that if someone comes across the Torres Strait,  then their settlement options do not involve Australia.  

 The policies that we've announced, regardless of the  what the Leader of the Opposition and the Premier of  Queensland have tried to claim, the policy that we've  announced applies equally to the Torres Strait as it does  to the Indian Ocean. It applies to anyone who comes by  boat without a visa no matter what pathway they choose,  and that is very simply, they will not be settled in  Australia.  

 The four people who have come across the Torres Strait,  now each of them awaiting deportation, the deportation  options will vary for each of them depending on the  validity of the different claims they've put forward. But for  none of those people, will settlement in Australia be an  option.  

 I notice the leader of the Opposition in one of the online  reports has swapped his three word slogan with respect  to the Torres Strait for the four word slogan, where he  says he now has a plan for a plan. Can I just say, I'm not  sure what more with respect to the Torres Strait can be  done than say if you come across the Torres Strait, you  won't be staying in Australia.  

 That is a tougher line than what this Government has had  previously, it is a tougher line than ever applied in the 

 Howard years, and to see the excitement and glee and  anticipation that the Opposition have tried to drum up for  purely political reasons, ignores the absolute cornerstone  of the Government's policy, which is that if people arrive  by boat without a visa they will not be settled within  Australia, and how that involves anything but a  strengthening of the rules across the Torres Strait is  completely beyond me. 

 I'm happy to take any questions. 

 JOURNALIST:                     What's the make up (inaudible) in the last two days, are  they family (inaudible)? 

 TONY BURKE:                    No I don't have that available to you yet, certainly as a  matter of course we release that, I'm getting very close to  being able to send family groups off Christmas Island,  they will probably go to Nauru first, the first family groups,  I expect facilities in Nauru will be ready before facilities on  Manus Island, but I know some people have tried to  anticipate that maybe we won't send family groups and  we won't send unaccompanied minors - we will, we will. 

 And it is not long before family groups can begin to be  sent to Nauru, and the PNG Government have  specifically raised with that they would like family groups  and unaccompanied minors to start being sent to Papua  New Guinea as well, and it will be a little bit longer than  Nauru, but it won't be long before we have family   accommodation available in PNG.    

 JOURNALIST:                     How long, when will you transfer the first families into  Nauru?    

 TONY BURKE:                    Look we're talking the outside edge of the next couple of  weeks with respect to Nauru. We've actually, with Nauru  as you'd respect, the configuration of the site has become  more difficult because of the riots that took place. Where  we were nearly ready to send families has actually  become the main area for housing, there is a new site  that is an open area that has been agreed to with the  Government of Nauru, and that will be where the families  go to. 

 

 JOURNALIST:                     I'll be able to give more reports on that when I've had a  fresh conversation with the Government of Nauru, so the  information that I'm giving you there on Nauru is a couple  of days old since I was last briefed on where that's all up  to. 

 

 JOURNALIST:                     You describe this as an open site, do you mean an open  site centre that family groups are free -     

 TONY BURKE:                    Yes, yes, yes -  

 

 JOURNALIST:                     As I understand it, the problem is that the visa  arrangements on Nauru don't allow for that, is that the  case or am I wrong? 

 

 TONY BURKE:                    Well the Nauruan Government have indicated that they  will have an open centre and that they're okay for it to be  an open centre for family groups, their view of the visa  arrangements as I understand it applies to what happens  to people post settlement if they're found to have a valid  claim. You need to remember that before we had the new  agreement with Nauru, which is what gave rise to the  discussion of an additional visa category, they had  already commenced discussion with their own community  about shifting to an open centre. 

 

 JOURNALIST:                     My first meeting with the Nauruan Minister for Justice,  he raised with me that they were wanting to switch to an  open centre, now obviously the support among the  people of Nauru and the Government of Nauru for that  had to be readjusted following the riots. Certainly you  could not expect single adult males to be in an open  centre if they'd been involved in the disturbances that  occurred, so there was some readjustment of that in  everybody's thinking, including mine, but certainly in  respect to family groups, it's the, we've been working on  the timeframe that I've described and the suggestions for  that were initiated by the Nauruan Government, so I'd be  surprised if there's a visa problem while they've put that in  process.  

 

 JOURNALIST:                     (inaudible) The Nauruan centre, who is the operational  manager for the centre?    

 TONY BURKE:                    You have a different structure there, with each of the  centres, you have someone who is in charge of the  operations from my department. They play a significant  leadership role in the management of the centres.  Ultimately, you are talking about centres that are within  country, and centres where the Government Ministers I  respect as having principal authority  

 

 JOURNALIST:                     But there is a titled 'Operation Manager', quote unquote,  as named in the governing act?    

 TONY BURKE:                    Look you're wanting to know governing act, specific title,  I'll get the information for you Paul, but as you know, for  all of these media conferences when there's something  as specific as that, I'm always going to be absolutely sure  that at no stage am I giving you information that isn't in  the absolutely strictest sense the correct terms. You've  asked for the correct terms, and we will get that to you  today. 

 

 JOURNALIST:                     And the individual's name, if you could.    

 JOURNALIST:                     Just with regard to Torres Strait, there is some concern  from the Opposition in regards to resourcing there, is  there a need for more resourcing (inaudible)? 

 

 TONY BURKE:                    There have been two vessels, each containing two  people, each has been intercepted. You had periods  during the Howard Government years when there were  vessel movements well beyond that, some of which were  not intercepted. So I'm yet to see an argument other than  a hysterical reaction from the Opposition, I'm yet to see  an argument that actually says we have anything other  than a strengthening with the new policy.  

 

 JOURNALIST:                     What do you know about those two Somalians, they  would have been debriefed by now and have you been  briefed? Where did they come from, what are their  circumstances, have they lodged asylum claims, how did  they end up where they ended up? 

 

 TONY BURKE:                    The information which I have, has been given to me in a  guarded fashion because they weren't happy with the  status of the interpreter, for some of that information, so it  can be liable to shift. Certainly the commencement of the  voyage has been described as occurring from Indonesia,  exactly where the stop-offs were along the way, there  was some doubt about the information that was provided  on first briefing, and for that reason I'm happy for the  department to pass on the latest, but I don't want to be  out affirming anything when I've specifically been told that  the quality of the interpretation they had at first cut, they  didn't think was great.  

 

 The situation for each of them though is that the intention  will be for any asylum claim that they may make, for that  to be assessed in Papua New Guinea or Nauru, probably  Papua New Guinea. The other vessel which had a PNG  national and someone whose nationality was Indonesian  from the West Papuan Province, to the extent that the  PNG national seeks asylum, on the first part of 

 information I had there, there was a prospect that this  was someone who had been to Australia previously and  been returned previously. That doesn't change the fact  that there might be a valid claim, so you still have the  conversation, but it simply means that either there is not a  valid claim, in which case our protection obligations are  not activated and he would simply be returned to Papua  New Guinea. If it was found that there was a claim to be  heard, then he would be sent to Nauru.    

 JOURNALIST:                     Have the Somalis indicated why they chose (inaudible)  Torres Straits?    

 TONY BURKE:                    The information that I have is not of that quality.     

 JOURNALIST:                     Tasmanian Senator Lin Thorp, there's been some  reporting out of Tasmania that has indicated not  everybody in the Labor Party is happy with the asylum  seeker policy, and that it could change if Labor was re-elected on September 7. Is there pressure that there  could be some change? 

 

 TONY BURKE:                    I feel no pressure at all. I respect that there will be  members of Parliament who put different views, I think  the Coalition are well used to some of their own  backbench putting different views on this policy area,  there would have been no Petro Georgiou were that not  the case.  

 

 But certainly I feel no pressure on this at all, and I think it  needs to be remembered that this was one of the issues  which the Prime Minister squarely put on the agenda for  the Caucus meeting for us to have a discussion about,  and during that discussion there were different points of  view that were put at the Caucus meeting, but I have no  doubt at all that the vast majority of Caucus members  have the same view that I have.    

 ENDS 

 

 Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111   www.alp.org.au     

 Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor, 5/9 Sydney Avenue, Barton, ACT, 2600   

