---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 07 May 2013: bridging visas for irregular maritime arrival families; Darwin Airport Lodge; 457 visas; Budget"
date: "2013-05-07"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "bridging visas for irregular maritime arrival families"
  - "Darwin Airport Lodge"
  - "457 visas"
  - "Budget"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435796
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2427098%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP    

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  4 TREASURY PLACE, MELBOURNE  TUESDAY, 7 MAY 2013  11.45AM    

 SUBJECTS: BRIDGING VISAS FOR IRREGULAR MARITIME ARRIVAL FAMILIES; DARWIN AIRPORT LODGE;  457 VISAS; BUDGET 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  [Recording begins] … we place people into detention for a certain period. We  place people into community detention and also we place people on bridging visas. Today we're going to  include in the bridging visa cohort families. We believe that families after going through the mandatory  requirements of identity, health checks and security are certainly eligible to be placed in that form of  accommodation. 

 We do this to ensure a cost effective means to provide care for irregular maritime arrivals. We do this, not  changing the no-advantage principle, namely that if the regular maritime arrivals arrived after 13 August  last year, they will not be processed any quicker than they would have been processed if they were in a  refugee camp somewhere else around the world. 

 And we do that because we want to deter people getting on vessels and endangering their lives. We do  that because we want to ensure that the humanitarian places that we have - 20,000 in all - are there for  those people genuinely seeking asylum. 

 Also, I need to indicate that we will create or deem Alternative Places of Detention for a part of the Curtin  centre in Western Australia and at Wickham Point in the Northern Territory. 

 These are purpose built centres that can be quickly adapted to the needs of families. They are centres  that will be adapted to ensure that families are given sufficient, adequate amenities, enabling, for  example, children to be educated, ensuring that there are decent recreation activities, that the food and  accommodation are of a good standard, and I guess most importantly that the providers of care - the  specialists who care for families and children - will be in attendance to look after those families. 

 And most importantly I say in relation to the families that will be detained that they will be detained there  for only the period whereby they need to be considered for security, identity, and health purposes. 

 Currently that's on average 120 days, after which we would expect those families to be accommodated in  community detention or provided a bridging visa where they can of course be in the community and  indeed engage in some cases with families or people they may know to provide support to them. 

 In doing that, of course, we'll provide support comparable to the support provided to single adults who  have also been on bridging visas. But of course we need to cater for particular needs of children, and  therefore, there will be education facilities, indeed, education opportunities for any children who may be  with their families on bridging visas. 

 This is done to ensure, as I say, a cost-effective means to maintain the network. It's also done to ensure  that we do not keep children in detention other than for mandatory requirements of health, identity, and  security. 

 This is a response to, I think, advocates who've called for ensuring that people are treated properly. This is  a response to the Government managing the network properly, and we do that, ensuring that we provide  sufficient care. 

 But of course we are still engaged with the Parliament and we continue to call upon the Parliament to  realise the recommendations outlined in the Houston Panel report - the 22 recommendations, some of  which are still yet to be enacted, that will help deter vessels coming to Australia. 

 To date, we've had no support from the Opposition. Indeed, the Opposition has opposed us for more than  12 months originally in preventing processing centres and indeed, has opposed other recommendations,  including introducing the Malaysian arrangement, and that has been very cynical politics, putting the  political interests of the coalition ahead of the national interest. 

 Because it is in no one's interest in the end, certainly not in this country's interest or the interests of  people seeking asylum, that they endanger their lives at sea by being lured onto these dangerous,  unseaworthy boats and finding themselves in great danger. 

 So we continue to call upon the Parliament, but in particular the Opposition Leader to listen to the  experts and give the Expert Panel recommendations a go so we can see a reduction and hopefully a  cessation of vessels arriving in our waters. 

 Finally, I want to add in relation to the ongoing flow of vessels, the facts are internationally we're seeing a  rise in asylum applications around the world. But the rise in applications in people seeking asylum is  largest in our own part of the world. 

 Conflicts in our region of course will ensure that people are being displaced. There are literally millions  upon millions of people being displaced around the world. And I've said this once and I'll say it again, we  have a very fair humanitarian program which is second to only the United States in total numbers and first  when considering the population of this country. 

 So we do our fair share, but we won't do more than that, and we do not want people smugglers to be  profiting from the desperation of others. Nor do we want to see people fill those places who are not  genuine refugees. They may be economically motivated, we might have sympathy for their cause, but we  will fill those 20,000 places with people who are in need of our care as we have done for many a year over  the time since World War II. 

 Just remember this - there's been seven and a half million immigrants to this country since World War II  which have helped build this nation and 750,000 of which were refugees. Ten per cent. We have a  humanitarian program where about 10 per cent of our immigration intake is taken for refugee places. 

 That's a consistent theme of this country's response to people that have sought asylum, and there are so  many magnificent stories. You only have to look at the extraordinary efforts of people, the welcome by  this nation, and the way in which they've helped build this nation to show that over time, refugees have  played a significant part to the building of this country. 

 But what we will not allow is people smugglers to continue to lure people on these vessels, and that's why  we must put in place the Expert Panel report - 22 recommendations in all, and it is now time for the  Parliament to make that decision so that we can, as I say, see fewer risks of men, women, and children  dying at sea, fewer deaths at sea, and people smugglers getting the message that they cannot lure people  in that manner. 

 Happy to take questions. 

 QUESTION:         When will this begin for the families at Curtin and at the Darwin Wickham Point? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Look, as soon as it can be done administratively. The Department will be engaged  in adapting the facilities so that they are catering for families, making sure that there is adequate  accommodation, ensuring that the accommodation is suitable. Providing sufficient privacy for each family,  we can do that with temporary facilities in that way, ensuring that for example they've got their own en  suite area. These are purpose built temporary amenities that are very suitable, and we'll be doing that as  quickly as we can in both Wickham Point and in Curtin. 

 Wickham Point is up, Curtin at the moment already has other clients, but this will be a totally cordoned-off area completely separate from other clients that are there currently. And we've got very good  providers of care there that we'll need to include in that - teachers and others who can provide the sort of  care we would expect to provide to children. 

 QUESTION:         How many families are you expecting to have to care for at these? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Look it will depend - it can cater for hundreds of families if required, but it will  depend upon the need. What we need to do though is have that potential there, remembering this - that  we don't want to keep people - families - there for long periods of time. We do need to however assess  their health situation, for themselves as well as for the public, ensure that we understand their identity -  know who they are - and also ensure that our agencies check for security purposes. Once that's done we  will release the families into either community detention or on bridging visas. 

 QUESTION:         Will you be moving families away from Manus Island? Taking them off Manus Island? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  There's been no decision to change the composition of Manus Province, or indeed  Nauru. When wemade the decision to have regional processing centres, the advice we received was that  if we restricted the composition to a particular demographic we would see those that we don't place on  that centre coming on boats. Namely if we had a complete ban on having children in the processing  centres we would see a significant increase in children being on those vessels. 

 That's the constant and consistent advice that we've received, and for that reason we are of course  concerned about that issue. That is, creating the incentive for people smugglers to sell a message that  families and in particular children, should get on vessels because they'll get to Australia. Now that is an  issue. 

 Now having said that, we'll always attend to anyone who has particular health needs, and of course in  particular, children. And the composition of either Manus Province or Nauru, whilst it may not change -  the parameters may not change - the composition may change from time to time operationally. Because  in the end what we want to do is deter people endangering their lives, and we also want to make sure  that people who are not genuine asylum seekers return home. 

 QUESTION:         But doesn't this still send a signal to the people smugglers - and to people who want to  come here - well look: they're now building these special places for families in Curtin and Wickham, on  the Australian mainland? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well we have we have -. 

 QUESTION:         [Indistinct] 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: - We have people, we have for example unaccompanied minors in centres. We  have of course a significant proportion of families in Alternative Places of Detention on Christmas Island,  but we have them also here. There's no change to that other than Curtin has not been used in this  manner for some time, and I thought it was important that I announced that, and Wickham Point has not  been used in this manner. 

 QUESTION:         So is this an expansion of the two facilities then? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Yes, insofar as the current arrangements for Curtin is that there are single adult  males in an area, they'll be completely cordoned off from this area. 

 But what we want to make sure is we have the right services, the right providers and the right amenities  for those families. And remember we also want to make sure they're only there for as long as we need  them to be there - for their sake as well as the sake of the public - and then they can be released on  community detention, or indeed on bridging visas. 

 QUESTION:         How much have you budgeted for the expansion of the centres? What's [indistinct] 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well I think, given that that will be somewhat announced over the course of the  coming weeks, certainly on Tuesday there will be announcements in all areas of Government expenditure,  we don't need to go there other than to say the per capita costs of having someone on bridging visas is  significantly lower than having people on detention. 

 I mean in the end, our decision is one of security - national security - and health reasons, why we would  detain people for the purposes of the things I've just mentioned. But it is true to say too that it is less  expensive to place people on bridging visas than it would be to detain them indefinitely. Apart from the  fact that it's wrong to detain people in those circumstances indefinitely if you don't need to, it's also more  expensive. 

 QUESTION:         You mentioned that there's an influx - or maybe not an influx - but a certain rising in  applica- the number of applications around the world, particularly in our region. What does that mean for  Australia's Budget? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well I think of course you're looking to challenge it, but you can find ways to  reduce costs. One of course is the way in which you manage the detention network, and I just pointed to  the fact that you can reduce per capita costs in certain ways. Two, of course we need to continue to find  ways to deter people, or return people. In the last four or five months we've returned over 1,100 people  to Sri Lanka, so we have a bilateral arrangement there which has been very successful, and I think we'll  continue to deal with people who can be screened out who are not afforded protection. 

 If they are possibly afforded protection pursuant to our refugee convention obligations of course we will  screen them in, but that has led to a very significant return. 

 And there is no more powerful message than flying someone back to their country of origin to others who  might be thinking to do the same - that is, waste their money giving it to a people smuggler, getting on a  vessel that may or may not make it to Australia. And so that's been a very good result and we've been  looking to do similar things with other countries under the auspices of the Bali Process, so we have a  regional framework and architecture to our approach. 

 We just need to continue to work with countries of origin, transit and destination to find the most  effective means to deal with what is a regional challenge. The notion that you can stop the boats because  you say “I’ll stop the boats” is clearly absurd. What you need is a comprehensive approach, and what you  need to do is listen to the experts. 

 And that's why I do call upon the Opposition [Leader], who recently came to the party - belatedly - but  came to the party sincerely to say he wants to respond to disability care, and he should be commended  for that. He has an opportunity here to listen to the experts and actually put in place the  recommendations that will reduce the likelihood of people getting on vessels and endangering their lives.  Or also you know, endangering the lives of our customs and naval personnel, who have the very difficult  challenge of interdicting these vessels, in some cases in very high seas at night, in very difficult  circumstances. 

 I just think it is now about time - I think the Australian public, they are sick to death of the major parties  not agreeing on this issue. It is in the national interest that you listen to the likes of the former chief of  Defence, Angus Houston, who has 30 years’ experience on border protection and such matters; Paris  Aristotle, who is of course an eminent Australian who has 25 years of refugee settlement understanding;  and Michael L'Estrange, who of course is a very senior, former senior diplomat and the former secretary  of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. 

 Now if these three people with 75 years’ of experience are telling us we should take a particular path,  then I think it is incumbent on the Opposition to seriously consider it. What seems to have happened  today is there is extraordinary cynical politics involved, where there is a hope that boats will continue, and  so that they do not allow us to put in place those recommendations, and then they blame the  Government for the boats continuing. 

 If they don't believe the recommendations [indistinct], I think it is now incumbent on them, at least, to  make sure they give it a go because their current alternative policy is, quite frankly, a joke. It is a slogan  without any plan whatsoever and no expert will support it. 

 QUESTION:         Considering that the influx of asylum-seekers to Australia is increasing, on the rise, what  will that mean for Budget costs and how does that affect families that are paying taxes to support the  Budget? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  As I say, we'll continue to look at how we can reduce costs. The best way to do  that is to reduce the flow of vessels. The best way to do that is to put in place the 22 recommendations.  But even while we're maintaining people through the network, the support we provide to families will be  adequate. It's not generous, it's adequate. That is a deliberate decision. You know, we do not want to  provide any incentive for people to get on vessels. But it's also a cost-effective way to manage the  network. 

 But I say to you, the best way to reduce costs for this nation is to implement the recommendations of the  experts and see a reduction in vessels, which of course ultimately will see a reduction in the expenditure. 

 QUESTION:         And could I just ask about the escape of asylum-seekers in Darwin. What's the  Department doing about those four Vietnamese refugees? I believe they're refugees, I don't know if  they've been classed as that, but certainly asylum-seekers. 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Sure, as I'm advised - and I've just heard this - they are looking - obviously they've  engaged law enforcement agencies there. It's happened before. It happened under the Howard  Government. It happens from time to time. These are very low risk people, but of course we want them  apprehended, and I know that the NT Police are dealing with the Department. And I know also the  Department is providing all the information they can to the authorities to ensure we get an immediate  apprehension. 

 QUESTION:         If it's happened before, what does it mean for those four individuals once they're  apprehended? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Look, it depends on the circumstances, and I wouldn't want to suppose at this  point. There were, as I say, in 2002, in Woomera, there were big breakouts where there were up to 50  people leaving - breaking out. This is still an important issue but in the scale of things it's nothing like  we've seen before, either under the Howard Government or other governments. 

 But, of course, this will have some potential impact on the way in which they will be considered, as  always. I mean, as you know, it was this government that brought in particular penalties if a person was in  any way destroying property in a centre. We did that because we wanted to deter bad behaviour, and we  wanted to prevent people acting in that manner. Well, equally, we don't think this is reasonable 

 behaviour, but I'll wait until I get all the facts before I can publicly explain what we may do in this  circumstance. 

 QUESTION:         What does it mean for the arrangements there at, what I understand, is a low security  facility? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Look, it is a low security area because it's for families and for unaccompanied  minors. So that's the reason why it's low security and, of course, if they were of a different character, or if  there was a greater risk, they would have been in a detention centre, which would have had the  appropriate arrangements. But in this case, we're talking about families and young people under the age  of 18, as well as families. 

 So I think that's quite an appropriate place. But obviously we want to have them apprehended. That's why  we've engaged the NT Police and I'll get a report on that as soon as possible. 

 QUESTION:         On 457 visas, you said that there are 10,000 - well, forecasting10,000 cases of abuse.  What's the evidence for that figure? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, I've been asked this question a number of times. I didn't say there was illegal  use of 10,000. I said that, in my view, when we looked at the data - that is look at the amount of increases  in 457s in one year, 19 per cent from this month to the month of March last year, that is a very significant  increase when total employment growth is running at about one per cent. And then I went to a number of  occupational groups where there were literally 75 per cent or 100 per cent increases in those sectors in  those occupational groups, which does not accord in any way with the employment demand. 

 On top of that we saw that occupational groups in certain sectors of our economy are falling in real wages  as a result of the increased use of 457s. What does that say to me? You don't have wages falling when  there's a skill shortage. Wages go up or at least stay the same, if you've got a high demand for that skill.  What it says to me is there's been a deliberate misuse by a minority of employers. 

 But when I was asked the figure, my view is it is closer to 10,000 than the 3,000 or 4,000 that was  mentioned recently by Professor McDonald. My view is that it's higher than that. That doesn't mean  necessarily that there's been an unlawful use in those circumstances. My point is that it is illegitimate, in  that it does not comply with the intentions of the visa scheme that is to respond to genuine shortages.  That's why we need to put in place the reforms. 

 Now I understand that the Opposition suggests they might support these reforms now, which is very  interesting because in August last year to the AMMA Conference, the Shadow Minister said he wanted to  remove the protections that were put in place in the 2009 legislation and increase the access to 457s.  Now he said that in the month when there was the highest 457 visas ever issued in the entire time that  the scheme has operated. 

 That was his message to the AMMA Conference. He wanted to remove those protections. Apparently now  he has a change of mind, but we'll see what happens when we introduce the legislation into the  Parliament, whether in fact the Opposition are fair dinkum in supporting local workers first and ensuring  that the demands - that is, the shortages - are genuine. 

 All we're suggesting is that we respond to genuine shortages and you do not get to use the 457 when  there are no shortages, or when you are trying to mischaracterise a job. That is to call it one thing but  change it once the applicant turns up. Now insofar as the 10,000, that is an extrapolation based on the  data, but I've always said it is a forecast or an estimate. And people can have a different view on that, I  don't mind. 

 In the end, though, the most important thing is that we reform this visa class. It's an important scheme.  We need a flexible scheme to respond to genuine skill shortages, but it shouldn't be open to abuse, and  I've seen too much abuse in recent times, and I'll be saying more about that soon. 

 QUESTION:         And are you aware of the arson attack on Michael Keenan's office today? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  I'm sorry? 

 QUESTION:         Are you aware of the arson attack on Michael Keenan's office - on the billboard, sorry,  following the - this follows on from the vandalism attack last week. 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  No, no. 

 QUESTION:         Just on the matter of the asylum seekers, rise in the area, do you think the message is  getting out there not to get on the boats? Is that a message that has been well-received? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  I think there are still ongoing challenges, clearly, but we've seen an incline in  people seeking asylum around the world because there are so many conflicts. You've seen the problems  in Syria, millions of people fleeing parts of the world in our region, and that leads to the greater likelihood  that people might take the chance of getting on vessels. 

 What we need to do is work with the countries in the region, work with the IOM and UNHCR, fill our  places that we've actually put forward, as do other first world nations, for genuine refugees, and find a  better way to deter people getting on those vessels. 

 We have now too many people die at sea. The first huge tragedy we saw was in 2001, in October, with  SIEV X, where hundreds of women and children died. We've seen too many tragedies since then, and we  need a better way of responding to that, and the best way to respond to that is not slogans. It really is  engaging fully with countries of origin like Sri Lanka, countries of transit like Indonesia and Malaysia, and  countries of destination - that is, first world countries that will take people that are genuinely seeking  asylum. 

 And, I have to say, it does concern me that, in all of this, the public debate has caused some harm with  those transit nations, our neighbours, Indonesia, our friends, Indonesia and Malaysia. I think the  Opposition's attack and assault on Malaysia's reputation - I mean, having the shadow minister fly into  Malaysia and traduce the reputation of that country means that their relationship with Malaysia is at an  all-time low, and if they think that they're going to treat Indonesia in the way they do, suggest that they're  going to turn back boats, but when the Opposition Leader meets with the President of Indonesia he  doesn't even mention the turn back boat policy, then I think he must really be underestimating the  resolve of Indonesia. 

 That is not the way you engage with your friends. The way you engage with your friends and neighbours is  say this is a problem that we all confront. Indonesia and Malaysia confront it in terms of people coming  through their country in a way which they don't prefer, quite frankly, and they don't want to be launching  pads either for people. 

 And, of course, countries of origin want to deal with their issues as well. Now, that's not to say we will be  able to do that in every case, because there'll be people fleeing asylum, but if we use the Bali Process  effectively and continue to also engage bilaterally, like we have with Sri Lanka, then I think you can see  better results. 

 But we should just give up on this notion that you can use a slogan and the boats will stop. In fact, some  time ago the shadow minister gave an interview with I think it was with Andrew Bolt on radio. Five times  Mr Bolt asked Scott Morrison when he would stop the boats, and on five occasions he did not give an  answer. In fact, he couldn't say whether it'd be in the next Parliamentary term, he wouldn't give how 

 many years it would take and, of course, the Opposition Leader has also done the same. He's now saying  he might make a difference by the end of next term. 

 Now, this is a far cry from stop the boats. It used to be stop the boats, now it is stop the boats but we  don't know when; stop the boats but we're not sure what the time frame is. It's not a pithy slogan, but  what it really reveals is the Opposition Leader knows that their own slogan is untrue, and they have to do  better than that. 

 But they could start by listening to the experts, embracing the recommendations that've been put  forward, and implementing those recommendations so we can see fewer lives lost at sea. 

 QUESTION:         Minister, with respect, you haven't said when these new centres will be open for the  families at Curtin and Wickham. 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  I was asked that - 

 QUESTION:         Yeah, but you didn't exactly say when. You said some time - 

 QUESTION:         Soon as possible, you said. 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Yeah, so, look, the administrative arrangements will be - 

 QUESTION:         [Talks over] And you couldn't say how much it was going to cost. 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  I'm not giving you a starting date. The cost will depend on the amount of people  who'll be detained, and indeed in terms of the BVEs it will depend upon how many people are placed on  bridging visas. 

 So, of course, all of the issues around costs will be, in all areas of government, will be outlined next  Tuesday, and, of course, there'll be estimates where people can also examine these matters as well.  There's public accountability in all of these things. 

 I'm happy to talk about those issues later but, of course, what we're doing today is announcing the use of  those centres, announcing the use of these BVEs for families. I think these decisions are consistent with  our approach, and, of course, as I say, there's a number of ways in which people will clearly identify the  expenditure. 

 QUESTION:         What has brought upon this change in the bridging visas in this announcement? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, there's a variety of reasons for that. I mean, there's been people calling for  more flexibility about how we accommodate families. The fact is, we haven't had families out of  community detention or alternative places of detention and there are families, I think, who are in a  position to fend for themselves - with support, but fend for themselves a bit more than those who might  be in community detention. 

 People feel there is less restrictions on people, and if there are no risks at all to the community I think  that's also something that is reasonable to consider. It's also, as I said earlier, it's a cost-effective means to  manage the network, so I think that's a reasonable thing as well, that we value the taxpayer dollar and  reduce the unnecessary costs associated with maintaining the network. 

 So they're the main reasons, and - 

 QUESTION:         Does this have anything to do with Four Corners [indistinct]? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  No, I don't think so. I don't know how it would relate to Four Corners. 

 QUESTION:         Is this an acknowledgement - 

 QUESTION:         Are you seeing more people coming as a family unit, therefore, to access Australia? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, there has been an increase in families in recent times, and that may ebb and  flow, but at the moment there's been an increase. That's unfortunate, because we don't want to see  anyone endanger their lives, but least of all do we want to see children's lives at risk. 

 So that's a concern, but we want to cater for families as well as we can and we think this is the best way  to do it. We provide those centres for identity, health and security purposes, and then they're released  either into community detention or into the community on BVEs. I think that's the appropriate approach. 

 Thanks very much. 

 ENDS 

 

 

