---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Senate entrance: 27 May 2013: Senate Estimates; immigration; CFMEU; gambling"
date: "2013-05-27"
creators:
  - "Abetz, Eric"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONS"
subjects:
  - "Senate Estimates"
  - "immigration"
  - "CFMEU"
  - "gambling"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211394847
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2480254%22
---

 

 TRANSCRIPT                SENATOR ERIC ABETZ     Leader of the Opposition in the Senate     Shadow Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations 

    Liberal Senator for Tasmania   

 

 27th May 2013   

 Doorstop Senate Entrance   

 Senator Abetz: Good morning, today’s the commencement of a fortnight of Senate  Estimates.    

 The Coalition will be keeping the Government to account in a whole range of areas.    

 We do kick off this morning in the area of Immigration and the Department and the Minister  in particular will need to explain as to why none of the questions have been answered that  were taken on notice from the last round of Estimates. And a number of questions still  remain outstanding in relation to the October Estimates.    

 This is a Government that has no idea about accountability and transparency and the  country Independents and the Greens that promised us a new paradigm of accountability  where the Parliament would be treated with respect - we now know that that was just hollow  words - didn’t mean anything.  And we see that courtesy of the Government not answering  questions in portfolio’s about which they are hugely embarrassed. Indeed we saw another  three boats arrive just over the weekend.   

 Can I turn to John Setka and the CFMEU. If ever there was a case made out as to why  Australia needs the Australian Building and Construction Commission again, it is the events  of last week which saw the Supreme Court of Victoria determine that the CFMEU had been  in contempt of Court, not once, but twice, but five times. And in the face of that finding John  Setka and the CFMEU are simply saying that as far as they are concerned it’s going to be  business as usual.    

 What is disturbing is that the Victorian Leader of the Opposition found it so difficult to  condemn the CFMEU.    

 We still haven’t heard from Bill Shorten and the Prime Minister in relation to this issue. And  Ms Gillard, the Prime Minister, will be addressing the Victoria Trades Hall shortly in  circumstances where the Vice President of that organisation is part and parcel of the  CFMEU which now has established links with bikie gangs and is in breach of Supreme Court  orders, is in contempt of Court.   

 The rule of law has to apply in Australia. The Prime Minister has a duty and responsibility to  support the rule of law and her flirtations with the CFMEU clearly sends a message that if  you are a friend of Labor you don’t have to abide by the rule of law.   

 The Prime Minister and her Minister for Workplace Relations have to step up to the mark  and accept that their role is one of dealing with the national interest, not the sectional interest  of Trade Union officials and extreme ones at that.   

 Journalist: Has the Government gone far enough on the proposed restrictions on on-stream  gambling?       

 Senator Abetz: The Government’s move in this area is to be welcomed noting that Tony  Abbott came out on this some time ago. So Labor are now trying to play catch up. And as is  the want with all of Labor’s announcements you’ve got to have a look at the detail to ensure  that what they say will actually be implemented. But at least they are going down the right  track and yet again are seeing the sense in Coalition policy.    

 Journalist: Would the Coalition Government go further?   

 Senator Abetz: The Coalition has announced its policy. We believe that the public should be  protected from the sort of gambling/betting advertisements that we’ve been submitted to in  recent times and I think the community is right behind that push and it is for that reason that  Labor have now sought to follow suit. And on that point of view Labor’s initiative is  welcomed, albeit it’s a copycat of the Coalition’s approach.   

 Journalist: inaudible.   

 Senator Abetz: Well as is the want with Labor it’s a situation of them trying to catch up with  us and then try to make a small difference but at the end of the day what the community  wants is the direction announced by Tony Abbott and now basically copycatted by Julia  Gillard and Labor.   

 Journalist: inaudible.   

 Senator Abetz: The future of Julia Gillard is clearly something for her and the Labor Party to  determine, I don’t want to be in the game of telling the Prime Minister what her personal  decisions ought to be in that regard and I don’t want to predict the outcome of the election.  We are focussed on providing a good alternative Government for the people of Australia to  decide upon on September the 14th.  And what might happen after that is a matter for other  people to comment on.   

 ENDS   

 

 Media Contact: David Allender 0457 590 881  www.abetz.com.au 

