---
title: "UNSC on humanitarian situation in Syria"
date: "2013-04-22"
creators:
  - "Carr, Bob"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211393792
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2389871%22
---

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  Senator the Hon. Bob Carr  April 22, 2013    

 UNSC ON HUMANITARIAN SITUATION IN SYRIA    

 Foreign Minister Bob Carr welcomed remarks delivered by Rwanda on behalf of all  United Nations Security Council members, including Australia, on Syria.    Senator Carr said this is the first time Security Council members have collectively  addressed the human rights and humanitarian situation in Syria this year.     

 “Australia played a lead role in securing this outcome,” Senator Carr said.   “The situation in Syria is dire and having a negative impact on regional stability.  “On April 18 all members of the Security Council condemned the widespread  violations of human rights and underlined the need for a political process leading to a  political transition.”   

 Security Council members called for all parties to the conflict to enhance access for  aid organisations, facilitate more effective delivery of humanitarian assistance, to  ensure the safety of humanitarian personnel, and refrain from attacking medical  facilities and personnel.   

 Senator Carr said Australia called on the Syrian authorities to fulfil their responsibility  to protect civilians and respect international human rights and humanitarian law.  “I am pleased that Australia’s initiative to protect medical workers and maintain  access to hospitals for families caught up in the violence in Syria has been positively  reflected by Council members,” Senator Carr said.   

 Security Council members also called for further support to neighbouring countries  and affected communities for hosting and supporting refugees.  They condemned  incidents of sexual violence as well as grave violations and abuses against children.  The remarks were delivered by Rwanda as Security Council President for April on  April 18 after four senior United Nations officials publicly briefed the Security Council,  following a request by Australia.     

 These officials were Valerie Amos (head of the Office for the Coordination of  Humanitarian Affairs), Antonio Guterres (UN High Commissioner for Refugees), Leila  Zerrougui (Special Representative of the Secretary General on Children and Armed  Conflict) and Zainab Hawa Banguru (Special Representative of the Secretary  General on Sexual Violence in Conflict).   

 The conflict in Syria has seen over 70,000 people killed, created 6.8 million people in  need, internally displaced over four million people and created more than 1.3 million  refugees in neighbouring countries.    

 Media Contact: 02 6277 7500   

