---
title: "Desperation lead to MITA hunger strike, compassion needed to solve immigration crisis"
date: "2013-04-16"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211393518
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2377702%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE- Senator Sarah Hanson-Young   

 Tuesday, 16 April 2013   

 Desperation lead to MITA hunger strike,  compassion needed to solve immigration crisis   

 A hunger strike being carried out by refugees who are being held, potentially forever, because of  adverse ASIO assessments is an unavoidable result of the government’s ruthless policy of  indefinite detention without trial or fair process, the Australian Greens say.   

 “These people are being driven to the very brink of what the human mind is capable of suffering  and now we are seeing the results,” the Greens immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah  Hanson-Young said.   

 “All of those on hunger strike are genuine refugees but, instead of offering them safety, the  government has locked them up and thrown away the key.   

 “With news of more medical emergencies emerging from MITA I’m concerned that the  Australian Government is pushing vulnerable refugees, including families and children, to their  absolute limits.   

 “It is shocking that people are being locked up in Australia, potentially forever, without access to  a fair legal system while others are being shipped off to island prisons offshore.   

 “It is also concerning that we have seen today the Immigration Department criticising its own  Manus Island detention centre.   

 “When the Department itself slams conditions on Manus Island it is clear that it needs to be shut  down.   

 “We need to bring everybody, including the families and children, to Australia so that they can  have their claims for protection processed in accordance with our obligations as signatories of  the refugee convention.   

 “Australia is a country built on a strong foundation of fair and proper process but that is being  ignored as the government continues to lock people up potentially forever.   

 “Whether a person is from Afghanistan, Iran, Sri Lanka or Australia they deserve access to a fair  and just legal process, but currently that is not the case in our own country.”   

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

 

