---
title: "Transcript of press conference: 1 August 2013: people smugglers"
date: "2013-08-01"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398035
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2643045%22
---

  1 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  The Hon. Tony Burke MP 

 

 Transcript   

 PRESS CONFERENCE    

 THURSDAY, 1 AUGUST 2013 

 

 

 

 

 TONY BURKE:                        People started questioning whether, at the  core of this, people smugglers still had a  product to sell. As of now, there are the  first 40 people in Papua New Guinea who  are realising that people smugglers no  longer have a product to sell. But the  promise of living and working in Australia,  which is sold by people smugglers before  they push people onto the high seas, is no  longer a product available.  

                                                Last night, at about 11.30, the plane took 

 off from Christmas Island. As you know,  there'd been an intention for that to  happen the night before, but aviation  safety rules hadn’t allowed because of  weather conditions. That took off at 11.30  last night. Travelling with the 40 

 individuals, predominantly of Iranian and  Afghan origin, were staff from my  department, members of the Australian 

  2 

 Federal Police and medical staff. That  landed at around - a bit after 7.30, I think it  was 7.45 this morning, at Manus Island.  The individuals are escorted from the  plane, they go through a brief induction  period and then will be housed in the  Lombrum centre.  

                                                At Lombrum, we are now in the process of 

 expanding that to 2000 places. The  permanent centre is being expanded to  1000 places. More places will be provided  as more places are required. As many  people as test our resolve on this will find  that the rules for each and every one of  them are the same, that anyone who  arrives by boat without a visa won't be  settled in Australia. People smugglers no  longer have a product to sell. There is no  point getting on a boat anymore. Among  the places that are being designated for  expansion now are places that will be  designated for family groups. I've seen  some pretty disturbing language in today's  press in particular from Scott Morrison,  claiming that there's some reason for  women and children to now be testing our  resolve.  

                                                 Let me say right at the beginning of this 

 discussion, after the arrangement was put  in place with Papua New Guinea, I asked  for a level of responsibility from the 

  3 

 Opposition. I asked for - I made similar  requests of the media to understand that if  the message is put out that we are not  serious about this, then it will encourage  people to test our resolve and with the  inevitable consequence that more people  put their lives at risk on the high seas. How  people respond to that claim - that request  from me is completely up to them, but I  don't think anyone doubts that it's true. It  never occurred to me that Scott Morrison  would then specifically create an 

 expectation that might encourage women  and children to get on boats.  

                                                I took women and children off Manus Island 

 because I believed the facilities were not at  standard. That was not a permanent  criticism of Manus Island. It was so that the  facilities could be brought up to standard. I  have met with the people from Toll  Holdings on Manus Island who are building  and constructing the expanded sites. Part  of the expansion that is going on is 

 specifically to make sure that family groups  can be transported across. 

 Accommodation will be appropriate,  services will be appropriate. We'll be  making sure people are safe, but there is  no way in the world we are going to create  a situation which encourages people  smugglers to fill boats with women and  children, and I would caution Scott 

  4 

 Morrison and others of his party about the  real life implications of some of the  expectations they're starting to set for a  particular political agenda. 

                                                The strongest connection to the pipeline is 

 from people within Australia. That's why  our advertising campaign is focused so  heavily within diaspora communities  within Australia. The messages that are  spoken here are communicated directly by  social media, by mobile phone, by text  message, and I want the message to be  absolutely clear.  The fact that facilities for  women and children were not there a few  weeks ago does not mean that they won't  be there in a few weeks’ time, and we have  people on the ground doing it.  The rule  that will be applied applies across the  board. People who come by boat without a  visa won't be settled in Australia. The  people smugglers no longer have a product  to sell. There is no point getting on a boat  anymore, and the first group that has gone  across under the new rules have this  applied to them. In the coming days, there  will be more and more who are flown  across and, over time, every single person  who arrives under these new rules will find  that the Government is true to its word  and they will not be settled in Australia. 

  5 

 QUESTION:                            What is being done on Manus Island to 

 update those facilities that you're happy  with for women and children? What is the  facilities like - what has Toll said to you  that they're going to do specifically that'll  make it able to house women and children  to your standard? 

 TONY BURKE:                        The most important thing is actually the 

 configuration of the site. I think it's  particularly important to make sure that  you have a clear - a very clear definition  between where family groups are and  between where you have the single adult  males. I think that's extraordinarily  important.  

                                                 There's some specific issues with services 

 and welfare services where it's not a case  where you're talking about services, you  know, way in excess of what's available to  the rest of the community in Papua New  Guinea or anything like that, but where  you have some families who may have an  experience or torture and trauma or  something like that, there are some very  specific mental health services that I want  to make sure that are available. I want to  make sure that we've got some very  appropriate processes in place for children,  and I also want to make sure complaints  mechanisms, where if there's conduct that  people believe is going on that they want 

  6 

 to make sure that they can report, that the  lines of communication reporting and  action are very clear. 

                                                The new configuration of the sites I believe 

 delivers that, and it won't be long, and  that's why anyone, be they politician,  journalist, commentator, anyone, would  hold out some hope that there might be a  fresh incentive for women and children to  risk their lives in the high seas is quite  beyond me. 

 QUESTION:                            Do you think the [indistinct] the Coalition is  actually starting to gamble with people's  lives [indistinct]? 

 TONY BURKE:                        They're using language that I certainly 

 would never use if I was in the same  position - never. We - everybody, I think,  now understands the direct connection  between views that are expressed in  Australia and expectations that are held  throughout the pipeline here. I think  everybody also understands that part of  and an automatic consequence of people  smugglers operating throughout the Indian  Ocean is that we will see continued loss of  life, and I think we also all realise that  whoever the description is, be they single  men, be they families, be they children on  their own or minors on their own, if that's  the group that thinks they can get around 

  7 

 the system, then it'll be a subsection of  that group that drowns. 

                                                The consequences are crystal clear, and I 

 have no argument with the Opposition  wanting to have a political argument with  me on a whole lot of things. Why they  would run this line, I genuinely don't  understand. In terms of their motivations,  you'd have to ask them. I certainly know in  the same situation it's not a political  argument I would run. 

 QUESTION:                            You're thinking a lot about [indistinct] 

 seems to be a lot of confusion, particularly  in Indonesia, where people who are maybe  getting to that country and now don't  know whether to continue on or not. Is  there anything being done from the  Australian Government's point of view to  help those people eventually maybe gain  settlement in Australia, or at least give  them a better quality of life [indistinct]? 

 TONY BURKE:                        There's support that we give to the 

 UNHCR, the United Nations refugee body.  There's also a direct number of people,  which has increased significantly, where  we assist with a level of processing and  then take some people directly from  Indonesia. Some people say, well, what's  the difference between a boat and a  plane? The difference is simple. People 

  8 

 who come on planes don't drown and  people who come on planes come in an  organised fashion where we have  identified them before hand as being as  being genuinely in need. 

                                                So there's a level of work that we do there. 

 It has to be done in consultation with  Indonesia. Obviously Indonesia don't want  a situation where so many are being  processed from their own soil that they  effectively become a magnet, but for  people who are already there, there have  been good discussions with the 

 Government in Indonesia over a number of  years now, and we have increased the  numbers that come from there. 

 QUESTION:                            What about the advertising campaigns in 

 the country, because they don't seem to  know what's going on? What specific  advertising [indistinct] in Indonesia has  [indistinct]? 

 TONY BURKE:                        The immediate campaigns were done 

 through social media, and they're social  media references that are done very  directly. And the good thing about social  media, it's probably one of the easiest to  target things that you can do. The vast  majority of people in Indonesia have no  involvement with Australia, the vast  majority, neither as people running it nor 

  9 

 as potential customers, so to just do a  blanket advertising campaign across the  whole of Indonesia would achieve  relatively little. It has to be much more  targeted than that. It's done through the  posts, and there's a number of different  pathways that are chosen. 

                                                But, very simply, if you look at the stories 

 today, which to me look very accurate of  people saying they are confused about  what the rules are, it's because they're  getting one message that we're putting out  there and a different message from people  smugglers. If they test our resolve, they'll  discover it was our message that was right. 

 QUESTION:                            The PNG Prime Minister Peter O'Neill has 

 come out yesterday and said that it's going  to cost $489.5 million as part of the extra  aid Australia will give PNG to take asylum  seekers that arrive by boat. Is that figure  accurate? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Those figures will be dealt with in the 

 Budget update, which the Treasurer's  flagged. As you'd appreciate, they go  through a different budget to mine,  different ministers responsible than to  mine. I'm not going to directly argue with  the figures that have been put out there.  I'm dealing with a different part of this  policy, but it will all be put out quite 

  10 

 publicly in that Budget update the  Treasurer's flagged. 

 QUESTION:                            The ABC's repeatedly asked Melissa Parke  for some sort of outline of the figures, how  much it will cost, that extra aid budget. She  repeatedly rebuffs our efforts. Would it be  right to say that it is, a ballpark figure, half  a billion dollars on top of the aid payments  that Australia already spends to send our  asylum seekers to Papua New Guinea? 

 TONY BURKE:                        You'll get more information in the Budget  update. 

 QUESTION:                            Minister, you said it won't be long until the  facilities that are upgraded to the standard  that you want. What specific actions have  been taken and completed to bring the  facilities up to international standards after  the UN report which said they were below  standards? 

 TONY BURKE:                        One of the problems that you have at the -  quite specifically at Manus is because of  the rainfall, extensive drainage work needs  to be done first. Some of the drainage  work on some of the sites had not been  done effectively enough, so what you  ended up with was, very regularly,  situations where you either had people  constantly going through a level of water,  and secondly where buildings had been 

  11 

 elevated, be it on concrete pillars or  anything like that, that, over time, they  found themselves sinking down.  

                                                So the initial work, and this is why, no 

 doubt, if you go around Manus Island at  the moment you'll say, well, I can't see a  whole lot of accommodation. The  earthworks and the drainage work that  needs to be done is actually quite 

 substantial, but… 

 QUESTION:                            That hasn't been completed yet? 

 TONY BURKE:                        When I was there, the work was well 

 underway. In terms of when all of this gets  to the point of additional capacity, it's not  going to be long. It's not going to be long at  all, but the… 

 QUESTION:                            So does that mean that this 40 people who  have been… 

 TONY BURKE:                        Sorry, I'll just finish the answer. It's not 

 going to be long at all, but in any time  frame, all that matters is no matter how  many people test our resolve, the capacity  will be there, and that guarantee is  absolute. 

 QUESTION:                            And that capacity will be up to 

 international standards, as dictated by the 

  12 

 UN? Sorry, my question is are these 40  people that have been transferred today -  are they living in substandard conditions  while we're fixing it up? 

 TONY BURKE:                        No, they're not. The facilities that they're  in - they're in existing facilities at 

 Lombrum. I've inspected the facilities that  they're in. The facilities that they're in are  of appropriate standards. 

                                                I will just flag I have to reject one of the 

 lines within the question that standards  are dictated by the United Nations.  Certainly the report provided by the  UNHCR is helpful. We work through, we  take those issues into account, and I have  no doubt that in Papua New Guinea, the  international obligations are met. 

 QUESTION:                            And - sorry, one more question. The issues  with the water that was written about in  New Matilda this morning, have they been  addressed? 

 TONY BURKE:                        There is easily enough water supply for 

 people being transferred, and as number  go up, water issues have to be increased.  We're not going to send people without  there being enough water for them. I  respect the commentator who's written  that article and I've read a number of  things that have been published on that 

  13 

 site, some of which have made some  curious observations about my motivations  and what I might or might not hope for.  Some of the information they publish is  accurate. Some of it is a very long way  away - particularly when they talk about  my motivations - a very long way away  from where I'm at. 

 QUESTION:                            What do you make of the Greens policy on 

 this? They came out with it yesterday. You  said yesterday that what's quite simple is  that are they also [indistinct]? 

 TONY BURKE:                        I wish it were that simple. I really do, but 

 just do the maths. Millions and millions of  refugees around the world and they're  saying, well, they think they'd be able to  stop the drownings at sea by taking our  refugee quota to 30,000. You do the  maths. That's not going to take away the  incentive that's there.  

                                                 The key issue here is whether or not 

 people smugglers have a product to sell.  Now, some people have wanted to say and  misconstrue the motivations of the  Government, say, you know, cruelty won't  work, this won't work, that won't work. I  agree with those arguments, but one thing  that will work is when a people smuggler  says pay me some money and I'll let you  live and work in Australia, and the person 

  14 

 who's thinking of paying them has had the  message come through to them, either  directly from us or via friends, family or  contacts in Australia, that that offer's just  not on the table, and that's why the  arrangement with Papua New Guinea is  markedly different to what's been  proposed in the past. 

 QUESTION:                            You mentioned social media campaigns in  Indonesia before. Are you assuming that  people in the camps have Twitter, for  example, and that's how they find out  about the new policy? 

 TONY BURKE:                        The thing that I think will surprise you - it 

 certainly surprised me - was the - I actually  think in terms of social media Twitter's  quite limited in this capacity. There are  specific websites for many communities  that they go through where lots of  published information's shared, and for a  particularly vulnerable community, those  sort of sites are quite common.  

                                                 It's also the case that for - even if you go to 

 the processing centres within Australia, the  - you go to the - there's a computer room  where people get limited computer time  each day and you go there, almost every  screen will be on Facebook. They haven't  just discovered Facebook the day they've  arrived in Australia. Social media and 

  15 

 various forms of electronic 

 communication, and the use of smart  phones are widespread. 

 QUESTION:                            I want to go to that half a billion dollar 

 figure that Peter O'Neill has touted, even  this morning - he's stood by that figure  that Australia will be contributing half a  billion to update universities, hospitals. Do  you concede that that is an exceedingly  high figure, or an inducement to PNG to  take our asylum seekers? 

 TONY BURKE:                        I'm not going to add to the answer I gave 

 before in terms of the money. The financial  issues will be covered in the Budget  update. That's been my answer for a long  time, the Budget update's getting closer.  And the answer's not going to change this  morning. 

 QUESTION:                            From your point of view as Minister for 

 Immigration though, you must be aware of  estimates that stand in the Manus Island  facility at least. If we take the aid program  out of that, have you been given estimates  - on Nauru, for example, the estimates  were about $280 million for a centre that  held about 600 people from memory? So  Manus Island must be in that vicinity? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Look, part of it depends on the 

 configuration of temporary facilities versus 

  16 

 permanent facilities. If this has the impact  that we hope, then the vast bulk of  expanded facilities will only ever need to  be temporary facilities. There'll still be a  permanent facility available because  people will come back to test your resolve  from time to time in the years to come. But  the initial surge - is people smugglers  thinking, can they overwhelm this? And so  that's when you need to get your tents and  marquees up quickly.  

                                                 But before long, they discover that they 

 couldn't overwhelm it. Now that doesn't  mean the people smugglers concede, what  it means is their customers stop buying,  and that is what makes the difference in  the extent to which you have permanent  capacity required. So the figures that  you've referred to there, refer to the  significant cost when you're building  permanent capacity. I don't think anybody  would argue that a surge capacity should  be dealt with through permanent  structures. 

 QUESTION:                            The Department of Immigration has come  under fire for spreading on social media,  and on their media website, images and  vision that the media uses because that's  all we've got in the end. Will the - will your  department continue to release those  images of every boat that comes, that - 

  17 

 that file footage of, you know, planes going  over to Manus Island, will that - will the  Department of Immigration continue to do  that? 

 TONY BURKE:                        I hope so. The media strategy is in their 

 hands as to what they do as a department.  What we do as a Government, in terms of  what I directly approve, is different. But I  give a high degree of independence to the  media unit within my department. And  that has meant, for example, that you saw  overnight how quickly you were able to be  updated on issues as they occur. I think  that's right and proper. And I would rather  be in a situation where you're asking me a  question about should we be providing the  information, than have you ask me why on  earth are we not. 

 QUESTION:                            There was an image, a very publicised 

 image, of a woman holding her head in her  hands when she was told she was to be  settled in PNG if her asylum seeker process  was genuine. Those sort of images, as a  person, does that bother you? When you  see somebody in despair, and they realise  they will not be settled in Australia -  because I can say now that amongst all of  our friends and family who see those  images, it's gut wrenching to watch those  images. Are we not getting involved in a  little bit of asylum seeker pornography? 

  18 

 TONY BURKE:                        If - well, I'm just going to ignore the final 

 part of that question. To deal with the rest  of it, if the only impact of those images was  for people within Australia, I would never  support their release, never. Truth is, those  images have ricocheted all around the  pipeline and around the world. Those  images have been one of the most  powerful messages that we are serious in  our resolve on this policy. And if a message  that powerful is going to have an impact  on the number of people who drown in the  Indian Ocean, is going to have an impact  on whether or not we can get back to  choosing the most vulnerable people in the  world in consultation with the United  Nations, rather than having them self-selected by people smugglers, and if that  image helps get us closer to being a nation  where we can actually welcome more  refugees, not fewer because we've got the  system working as it's meant to, then I'm  willing to have them released. 

 QUESTION:                            Minister, how much does the election 

 date, or speculation over the election date,  impact this situation considering, I mean,  this policy's only been around for a few  weeks, and should there be, you know,  potentially a change in some way in a few  week's time, how will your resolve be  tested, you know, further beyond that? 

  19 

 TONY BURKE:                        I don't see how the election date makes 

 any difference to the actions of people  smugglers on this one. I don't. 

 QUESTION:                            On a different matter then, the front pages  are all about the Labor Party and it must  despair you to see those sort of headlines,  and also being from New South Wales,  what's your position? 

 TONY BURKE:                        It's the most appalling, awful story you can  imagine. As a member of your party - now  look the - in terms of someone who joined  the Labor Party as a teenager, to see a very  small number of people, but nonetheless  it's significant, who have used the name of  the party and a cause I passionately believe  in for personal benefit is offensive and  wrong, and I'm glad the Prime Minister  took the action he did in terms of changing  some fundamental rules of our party. And  I'm glad he's also left the window open to  go further if required. 

 QUESTION:                            And the former premier was on ABC last 

 night, he said that this Eddie Obeid, Ian  Macdonald…  

 TONY BURKE:                        Can I ask which former premier? I didn't 

 see this. 

  20 

 QUESTION:                            Oh sorry, Nathan Rees, apologies. Nathan  Rees was on at 7.30 last night saying that  this scandal could impact the federal  primary vote by as much as two to three  per cent. It's because he goes out and talks  to constituents and they say to him yes it  does affect the way I vote across Australia.  You are of course from New South Wales  as well, is that a similar sense that you get  from your constituents, that when you talk  to them they may mention things like the  Eddie Obeid scandal and that may affect  their vote to such a high degree? 

 TONY BURKE:                        It probably won't surprise you that 

 constituents in my electorate at the  moment, when they're coming up and  talking to me are talking about one very  specific issue, because that's what they're  seeing me communicate to the Australian  people very strongly. So I don't want to  pretend that the issue's not relevant,  because it is, but you've asked what are  people saying to me and the truth is the  conversations I'm having with people, that  they're raising with me, have been very  much on the immigration issues. And that's  also probably partly the nature of the local  area that I represent. 

 QUESTION:                            Do you also concede that this has an 

 impact on the Federal Labor Party as well,  this dirty scandal at the ICAC? 

  21 

 TONY BURKE:                        Oh in terms of vote, anything where 

 somebody misrepresents the values of  your party, of course, the impact follows  through. In terms of has the Federal Party  behaved exactly the right way in dealing  with it? I think absolutely. You mentioned  Nathan Rees, Nathan Rees took to the  state conference a resolution that allowed  him to sack Ian Macdonald as a minister.  The member from the Federal Party who  stood up in support of the premier on that,  in that debate, was me. The Federal Party  has taken a very strong line in - and  particularly under Prime Minister Rudd, in  cleaning this up. 

 QUESTION:                            Sorry Minister, just to go out to Manus 

 Island for a moment. Given that 

 homosexuality is still considered a crime in  PNG, but our Government has pledged to  transfer all asylum seekers regardless of  their sexuality, what efforts have been  undertaken to make sure that those  transferred will not be persecuted for their  sexuality, either as detainees, or if they are  then settled in PNG? 

 TONY BURKE:                        In the first instance we have no part of the  caseload so far where this issue has arisen,  no part of the caseload where this has  arisen. In… 

 QUESTION:                            So does that mean… 

  22 

 TONY BURKE:                        Please, please, when other people were  talking over you I made sure you got the  run so allow me to answer your question. 

                                                I've been very careful throughout all of this 

 to not carve out any exclusions from the  policy. And I explained the implications of  that with the specific reference to what the  Opposition have attempted to do with  women and children. There are very deep  implications if we start carving people out.  And if you do that, you are by no means  taking a - I'm saying you, but anyone doing  that is by no means taking a 

 compassionate response because of the  automatic reaction that people smugglers  will engage in. 

                                                My language on this has not changed, 

 which is people will be sent when we are  confident they will be safe, when we are  confident that appropriate 

 accommodation and services are in place,  and I'm not going to define it further than  that. 

 QUESTION:                            How much money have you actually spent  on the advertising campaigns in Indonesia,  apart from social media? What is the  outlay? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Oh look the - there is a budget which, you  know, initially the domestic budget that I 

  23 

 announced was 2.1, I'm making decisions  about expanding that at the moment. The  international budget was a higher figure,  It's run out of a different department, we'll  be able to get that for you. But it's a higher  figure. It takes longer to put the 

 international one in place because you  often have to negotiate with host countries  because of foreign - for many countries,  another government advertising in their  country is a significant issue and you need  to go through a process of negotiation. 

                                                So some of the things for example that 

 we're doing - I've referred to social media,  there'll be other countries for example  where we're negotiating for me to direct  news interviews and get it up as a straight  news story and explanation as to what the  policy is in certain countries. As any of that  happens, we'll make sure that you're  informed and kept abreast of it. 

                                                Thank you very much. 

 

