---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: House of Representatives [Parliament House, Canberra]: local government referendum; Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security inquiry into complex asylum seeker cases; federal election"
date: "2013-06-06"
creators:
  - "Dreyfus, Mark"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
  - "Parliament House"
  - "Canberra"
  - "Parliament House, Canberra"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395470
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2503762%22
---

 THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management  Special Minister of State  Minister for the Public Service and Integrity 

 

 TRANSCRIPT 

 

 6 June 2013 

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW - HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES   

 SUBJECT: Local Government referendum; Inspector-General of Intelligence and  Security inquiry into complex asylum seeker cases; Federal Election.   

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 DREYFUS: Yesterday was a very significant day in the Australian Parliament because the  constitutional amendment act has passed through the lower house, and by a vote of  134 to two, the Australian Parliament has approved an amendment to our Constitution  recognising local government for the first time in our Constitution.    

 I'm looking forward to the bill going off to the Senate when the Senate commences its  sittings next week, and I'm looking forward to it passing with the support of the Federal  Opposition, as we saw yesterday, through the Senate and then getting on with the  campaign, which will commence as soon as the Senate passes the legislation.    

 The other matter I wanted to deal with is the matter that was raised yesterday about  the individual who's been in immigration detention, and I want to make it clear that that  individual has been in immigration detention since he arrived in Australia.    

 He's been at all times in immigration detention. He is still in immigration detention, and  I'd add this: the individual in question has committed no offence, there's no evidence  that he's committed any offence, there's no allegation that he has committed any  offence while he has been in Australia. And I repeat, he is now in immigration detention.   

 QUESTION: But he was in immigration detention in Inverbrackie, where there's just a  pool fence that separates the community from asylum seekers. Is that really the way to  detain a terrorist?   

 DREYFUS: The point here is that he is in immigration detention and monitored at all  times and, I'd repeat, there's no evidence that the individual concerned has committed  any offence while in Australia. 

 

 QUESTION: [inaudible] other people who've been convicted of terrorism offences being  housed in the detention…   

 DREYFUS: It's, at all times, a matter for the Department of Immigration to make  decisions about what is the appropriate form of detention for people who are in  immigration detention. They've made a decision that he should now be housed in a  higher security detention, and that's what's occurred.   

 QUESTION: Should the Inspector General have been brought in earlier to investigate this  and other complex asylum seeker cases?   

 DREYFUS: That's entirely appropriate that the Prime Minister has done what she has  done, which is to call in the Inspector General of Intelligence and Security to investigate  the way in which the Department of Immigration has handled this particular complex  security case, and to make recommendations about how in future there can be  appropriate communications between all of the Commonwealth's agencies.    

 But I'd say this, in answer to your question: we've seen yesterday, with the absurd  propositions put forward by Scott Morrison, that he does not understand national  security.    

 He so much doesn't understand national security that he thinks that the Inspector  General of Intelligence and Security is a man. She is, in fact, a woman and her name is  Vivienne Thom. I'd suspect that Scott Morrison probably doesn't know that either.   

 And he also asserted, completely wrongly, that the Inspector General of Intelligence and  Security does not have the authority to investigate the Department of Immigration.  That's false, and it shows how little Scott Morrison and the Opposition know about  national security.   

 QUESTION: Just to be clear, are you comfortable with the fact that this man was kept in  [indistinct] detention in Inverbrackie for almost a year, and for seven months after ASIO  first alerted the Department?   

 DREYFUS: This individual was in detention at all times. There is no evidence that he's  committed any offence while in Australia. That's the important thing.   

 QUESTION: No, but you're…   

 DREYFUS: No, that's the important thing. You need to focus on this, that he was in  detention at all times, he was monitored and there's no evidence that he has committed  any offence.   

 QUESTION: Sure, but can you answer the question as to if he was - you personally,  uncomfortable with him being held in Inverbrackie?   

 DREYFUS: It's a matter for the Department of Immigration to manage the detention  system, and I think we need to focus, when we're listening to the Opposition, with their  campaign of fear, their campaign of hysteria, trying to drum up, out of national security,  a political plaything, something for them to score political points with.    

 National security is much more important than that. It's not something to score political  points with, and what Australians are concerned with is that this man was in detention  at all times since he arrived in Australia. There's no evidence that he's committed any  offence, and he is now in a higher security detention facility.   

 QUESTION: [inaudible] indicating that there's not really a problem with the way that  he's housed. Why, then, has the Government launched this inquiry?   

 DREYFUS: We've got an inquiry because we want to make sure that there is adequate  communications between ASIO, the Australian Federal Police and the Department of  Immigration. We've got the integrity officer, who's charged with overseeing the whole  of the intelligence community, overseeing our national security issues, now going to  conduct an inquiry at the request of the Prime Minister. That's entirely appropriate, and  I look forward to receiving Vivienne Thom's recommendations as to how to make sure  communications can be as good as they can possibly be.   

 QUESTION: Mr Dreyfus, two Labor MPs have just confirmed to the ABC they've already  packed up their offices here at Parliament House. How helpful is it for them to be saying  this?   

 DREYFUS: I don't think you should make anything out of people packing a box. Next  question.   

 QUESTION: But Alan Griffin is your neighbouring MP in South West Melbourne - South  East Melbourne, I should say - and your chances of re-election aren't looking too good  yourself, according to the polling out this week. Are you concerned?   

 DREYFUS: There's been a lot of polls, and they show that we've got a lot of work to do,  but I am looking forward to the contest that we now have and the choice that the  Australian people will be making at the election in 100 days from now, and it's a choice  between a Labor Government that has a record of very considerable achievement, going  into this election with a strong economy, against a Coalition which has no policies, and  you asked them what their policies are, they run away. That's basically what Tony  Abbott does from those press conferences.    

 They've put forward, I think, this year a second rate National Broadband Network policy,  they've got practically no policy on climate change, they don't want to say what their  policies are on industrial relations, and it's clear that they are hiding a massive agenda of  cuts to services, which is what we've seen and what people in New South Wales, in  Queensland, in particular in Victoria have already seen from those conservative  governments. That what we can expect from an Abbott Government, if there were one  to be elected.   

 QUESTION: Is it true that you're facing a 15 per cent swing against you though, in your  seat?   

 DREYFUS: As I said there's been a wildly inconsistent poll conducted in South East  Melbourne which produced wildly divergent results between the electorates, my  electorate Chisholm and Melbourne Ports. I've said we've got a lot of work to do and  we've got a choice that the Australian people will be making at the next election  between the Coalition without policies and a government with a very sound record of  achievement and lots more to do in the areas of school funding reform - the bill passed  through the Parliament yesterday - National Disability Insurance Scheme, I'm looking  forward to that being implemented and a whole range of other reforms.   

 QUESTION: So you won't be shuffling anything around your desk or packing it up before  Parliament closes.   

 DREYFUS: I'm going to go on governing as we have been since the last election and  looking forward to more of our bills passing through the House of Representatives this  week, looking forward to them passing through the Senate in the remaining two weeks  of the Senate sittings.    

 QUESTION: Does it make harder for you to sell that message about Labor though when  some of your backbenchers are clearing out their offices and comparing [inaudible]   

 DREYFUS: As I said I don't think you should make too much of someone packing a box.  Can we have another question?    

 QUESTION: On the question of Egyptian asylum seeker. What advice do you have for  authorities on the legitimacy of that conviction recorded against that man considering it  was under the Mubarak regime?   

 DREYFUS: Yes, I've seen questions asked today about the fact that this was a conviction  in absentia some more than a decade ago, back in I think in 1999. And what that  demonstrates is that you need to investigate.    

 We're a country with a rule of law and what we do in Australia is investigate. We don't  jump to conclusions. We don't speak first and think later, which seems to be what the  Opposition is doing here.    

 Everyone is entitled to have their claim assessed. Everyone is entitled to have our  national security agencies investigate their circumstances and that's what will be  occurring. That's of course what the Opposition doesn't want to have. They just want to  continue with their campaign of fear and hysteria.   

 QUESTION: There's risks for national security though [inaudible] Government's  responsibility to ensure there is as little risk as possible [inaudible] mitigate those risks  entirely if [inaudible]?   

 DREYFUS: Well, of course it's the Government's responsibility to make sure as your  question suggested, David, that there is as little risk as possible. That's why the Director-General of ASIO, when he was giving his evidence to the Senate Estimates Committee  last week, talked about minimising risk. He didn't say that we can eliminate all risk.    

 He said we've got a system of minimising risk. He talked about the triaging that occurs  with security assessments. He said that in his opinion, we've got an appropriate system  that is minimising the risk to Australia, and I'd point out that the Parliamentary Joint  Committee on Intelligence and Security in its report, tabled last week in the House of  Representatives, it's an all-party committee and it was a bipartisan report agreed on by  all members of the committee said, that we have appropriate arrangements for visa  security checking, as has been confirmed by the director general of ASIO.   

 QUESTION: And is it workable for the Immigration Minister to potentially review every  case?   

 DREYFUS: Well, I don't know that the Immigration Minister is personally, actually poring  over every single case. He acts on advice from his department. His department acts on  advice from the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation and from the Australian  Federal Police. It's a matter of joint effort by a whole range of agencies, as well as the  Minister.    

 Thanks very much.   

 ENDS   

 

