---
title: "Crisis in Syria"
date: "2013-08-23"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399397
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2686722%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER 

 

 

 CRISIS IN SYRIA   

 The Australian Government is deeply concerned about the allegations that chemical  weapons have been used in Damascus, killing hundreds of people.    

 Australia strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons by any party.    

 The escalating crisis in Syria is a tragedy of unspeakable proportions. The United  Nations (UN) estimates that over 100,000 people have lost their lives and  approximately two million refugees have fled to neighbouring countries.     

 The Prime Minister today spoke with the UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to  express Australia’s grave concern at recent developments, including the alleged  chemical attacks on civilians, and to discuss what next steps the international  community should consider in response to this crisis.     

 The Prime Minister welcomed the Secretary-General’s decision to deploy his High  Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms Angela Kane, to travel to Damascus  immediately.   

 The Prime Minister offered the Secretary-General Australia’s support for an  immediate and thorough investigation into recent reports of chemical weapons use.      

 Australia calls on the Syrian Government to respond positively to the Secretary-General’s call for cooperation and that it provide full and unfettered access to UN  inspectors currently in Damascus.    

 Australia and other members of the United Nations Security Council agree that any  use of chemical weapons would violate international law and constitute a crime  against humanity. Those responsible would need to be held to account.     

 As a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council (UNSC) Australia will  continue to consult with other members of the international community on  appropriate steps to address this crisis.    

 Australia has consistently opposed the use of chemical weapons and other weapons  of mass destruction, including through support of the Chemical Weapons  Convention, Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, the International Commission on  Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament (ICNND) and the cross-regional Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI).     

 As part of its efforts, Australia chairs the ‘Australia Group’, an informal grouping of  countries that seek to minimise the risk of assisting chemical and biological weapons  proliferation. All states participating in the ‘Australia Group’ are parties to the  Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons Convention and  strongly support efforts under those Conventions to rid the world of chemical and 

 biological weapons.   

 

 MELBOURNE  23 AUGUST 2013   

 PRESS OFFICE (02) 6277 7744   

