---
title: "Just one in six illegal boat arrivals from Sri Lanka returned by Labor"
date: "2013-04-04"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392852
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2382200%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison  

 Just one in six illegal boat arrivals from Sri Lanka returned by Labor 

 Thursday 4th April 2013 

 The Labor government’s announcement that 20 people who arrived illegally by boat have been returned to 

 Sri Lanka, means just one in six arrivals from Sri Lanka so far this year have been returned, Shadow 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.  

 

 “While the Government trumpets the return of 20 illegal boat arrivals to Sri Lanka they failed to mention that 

 they have allowed more than 100 to stay. This leaves the odds firmly stacked in the people smugglers’ 

 favour,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “Labor’s half hearted approach to ‘send backs’ leaves the door open to illegal boat arrivals and is in stark 

 contrast to the Coalition’s policy of seeking to prevent any boats from Sri Lanka illegally entering Australian 

 waters, with all passengers to be transferred back to Sri Lanka.  

 

 “At the same time Brendan O’Connor has announced that a grand total of 20 people have now been 

 transferred to Manus Island, lifting the suspension that has been in place since early February.  

 

 “So far in 2013 less than 200 people have been sent to either Manus Island or Nauru. During the same 

 period almost 4,200 people have arrived illegally by boat.  

 

 “Given that an average of 62 people have arrived on every boat this year, this means the equivalent of just 

 three of the almost 70 boats that have turned up have had their passengers sent to Nauru or Manus Island.  

 

 “This means people smugglers can sell the odds that less than one in twenty boats is likely to have their 

 passengers end up on either Nauru or Manus Island, while the rest will join the thousands of others being 

 released into the Australian community on welfare.  

 

 “The only message that people smugglers and those getting on boats will understand is if they are denied 

 entry to Australia, wherever physically possible, and if they do manage to get through, then permanent 

 residence is not on offer.  

 

 “Labor have consistently rejected these proven measures, as a result the people smugglers have their 

 measure and are currently sending more than 2,000 paying passengers per month,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

