---
title: "Australia's day of refugee shame"
date: "2013-07-22"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397420
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2609607%22
---

 Australia’s day of refugee shame   

 Prime Minister Rudd’s refugee announcement is Australia's day of refugee shame, Greens Leader  Senator Christine Milne said.   

 “A rich country like Australia paying off a poor country to take our desperate refugees is passing the  buck and an abrogation of our responsibilities to people and the international community,” Senator  Milne said.    

 “It’s not a regional solution, but a radical, right-wing, hard-line response. Manus Island will be  Australia’s gulag in PNG.   

 “Many people will feel ashamed and disappointed at the decision to dump some of the world’s most  vulnerable people on one of the world’s most impoverished countries.   

 “Once again Labor has failed to have the courage to stand up for what is right.”   

 Greens Immigration spokesperson Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said Kevin Rudd’s hard-line means a  ‘horrible line’ for refugees.   

 “This is a rush to the right, a rush to refugee cruelty so that Kevin Rudd can rush to the polls,”  Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “This heartless policy will cost Australian taxpayers billions of dollars at the expense of our values of  fairness and compassion.     

 “Permanently resettling refugees in Papua New Guinea is no way to respond to people seeking  protection.    

 “The government can't have it both ways. It has already said it's sending people to PNG as a cruel  punishment, now it wants to say it is an appropriate place to permanently resettle refugees.    

 “What Mr Rudd should have announced today is commitment to a genuine regional approach that  cares for refugees with the kind of political leadership shown after the Vietnam War.    

 “While PNG have signed the Refugee Convention, their commitment to it in practice and their  capacity to implement it is fraught. 

 Media Contact:          Senator Milne, Georgie Klug 0438 376 082                                      Senator Hanson-Young, Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760 

 

