---
title: "New Greens' advertisements give SA another voice"
date: "2013-08-12"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398668
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2660174%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Monday, 12 August 2013   

 New Greens' advertisements give SA another voice   

 South Australians will hear that there is another way, a real alternative to the constant  negativity of the old parties over the coming weeks, as the Greens launch their first  television advertisements of the official election campaign tonight.   

 "Voters in South Australia will play a huge role in this election and I'm proud to be  standing as a strong alternative voice to Kevin Rudd, Tony Abbott and their continued  race to the bottom," South Australian Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 "South Australians are telling me every day that they are fed up with the old parties.  They're feeling the pressure from the government's failure to stand up for the people.   

 "With cuts to university funding, cruel refugee policies and a lack of support for struggling  families, many people feel like the old parties have let them down.   

 "This advertising campaign will tell people that there is another option, a strong voice  that will keep an eye on the old parties.   

 "We want all South Australians to know that the Australian Greens will help people to live  in a more secure and caring society.   

 "The ads will air for the first time tonight and they will remind South Australians that the  Greens stand for a better way of life, now and long into the future.   

 The two commercials launched today can be seen here  and here.   

 Media contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

