---
title: "September 7 gives Australians the chance to stop the boats"
date: "2013-08-04"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398160
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2643148%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 September 7 gives Australians the chance to stop the boats 

 Sunday 4th August 2013 

 Two more illegal boats have arrived, with a total of over 130 people on board, as Australians are given the 

 opportunity on September 7 to stop the boats and draw a line under six years of Labor cost, chaos and 

 failure on our borders by electing a Coalition Government, Shadow Minister for Immigration and 

 Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael 

 Keenan said today. 

 “More boats, more cost, more chaos and more failure will be the consequences of the guilty party on border 

 protection led by Kevin Rudd being given three more years of failed border protection policies,” Mr Morrison 

 said. 

 “All Kevin Rudd can offer is more talk and a PNG election fix that continues to unravel by the day, with over 

 1,700 people having now arrived on illegal boats since it was announced a little over two weeks ago. 

 “For all of Rudd’s tough talk and over $30 million in taxpayer advertising over his PNG election fix his 

 government is building two new detention centres to house thousands of illegal boat arrivals here in 

 Australia. 

 “Despite Kevin Rudd’s big, bold claims on stopping boats Australians know he can never back them up. 

 “Kevin Rudd will do a lot of talking on stopping boats this election campaign but that is all it will be - more 

 talk. Kevin Rudd is all talk, no delivery. 

 “The Coalition if elected will implement our full suite of proven border protection measures under Operation 

 Sovereign Borders to stop the boats including turning boats back where safe to do so, proper, rigorous and 

 expanded offshore processing, temporary protection visas and a focus on regional deterrence. 

 “Kevin Rudd and Labor have been responsible for years of cost, chaos and tragedy on our borders. Three 

 more years of Labor will mean more of the same,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “As Kevin Rudd announced the election date the boats continue to stream across our 

 borders. 

 “This election, the people smugglers will be hoping for a Labor victory so that their lucrative trade can 

 continue to boom at the expense of the Australian tax payer. 

 “There have been nearly 50,000 people arrive in Australia illegally by boat since Labor came to power - we 

 cannot afford another three years of Labor. 

 “The Coalition will implement the tough but necessary border protection policies to put an end to the 

 insidious trade of people smuggling,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

