---
title: "Australian Greens leadership ballot re-elects Christine Milne and Adam Bandt"
date: "2013-09-23"
creators:
  - "Bandt, Adam"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211442353
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2742724%22
---

 Australian Greens leadership ballot re-elects Christine Milne and Adam Bandt   

 The Australian Greens held a leadership ballot this morning re-electing Senator Christine Milne and  Adam Bandt MP as Leader and Deputy Leader unopposed.   

 The leadership ballot happens after every general election.   

 Senator Christine Milne said the Australian Greens return to parliament as a united team.   

 “The Australian Greens have held our seats and won one more despite the unprecedented attacks  on our party in this year’s federal election,” Senator Milne said.   

 “Tony Abbott and Kevin Rudd spent as much time attacking the Greens as they did each other,  working together to shut us out, making secret preference deals or openly attacking us in the media.    

 “But we’re not surprised because they are the past and the Australian Greens are the future.    

 “The good news is that we have proved everyone wrong with Peter Whish-Wilson back in Tasmania  and Sarah Hanson-Young holding onto her spot in South Australia. Scott Ludlam is also on track to  win in Western Australia, while Simon Sheikh is still in the race in the ACT having run a very strong  campaign.   

 “We’ll soon have Janet Rice joining us as a new Senator for Victoria increasing our numbers to  record levels.    

 “One of the stand out stories of this year’s election was Adam Bandt, who made history for the  second time increasing his vote in the seat of Melbourne by 6.73 per cent to 42.32 per cent.    

 “Adam and his team have proven that people power wins elections, with 584 active volunteers and  12,588 supporters door knocking on 42,219 doors across the electorate and phoning 23,273 people.  Melbourne is now a beacon of hope for the rest of the nation.    

 “It is now more important than ever to have a strong Greens voice in the parliament to hold Tony  Abbott to account and to stop his extreme agenda.    

 “I am looking forward to working with my team to stand up for issues that matter including  compassion for refugees, taking real action to cut the pollution that drives global warming,  campaigning for marriage equality, protecting public service jobs and supporting single parents and  those in need.”   

 Media contact: Peter Stahel 0437 587 562   

