---
title: "Close the camps of cruelty: Greens"
date: "2013-07-12"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397040
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2593119%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Friday, 12 July 2013   

 Close the camps of cruelty: Greens   

 The UNHCR's scathing report on the Manus Island detention centre shows that the government’s  offshore camps still don’t meet international protection standards for the treatment of refugees, the  Australian Greens have said.   

 "Australia's camps of cruelty need to be shut down," the Greens immigration spokesperson, Senator  Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “The UNHCR has said that these camps are inadequate and Australia is failing its international legal  obligations.   

 "These island prisons are factories of mental illness and the government’s indefinite detention of  refugees is creating a damaged generation.   

 "These are Australian run, Australian funded detention centres. The media and the Australian  Human Rights Commission should be given full and frank access to report on the camps’ conditions,  but the government has barred them.   

 "Billions of tax payer dollars are being wasted on these island prisons which haven't saved lives at  sea.   

 "If people feel as though a dangerous boat journey is their only option when fleeing war and  persecution, that is a humanitarian crisis and we should respond by offering people safer ways to  reach protection.   

 “An emergency intake of up to 10,000 people from Indonesia and the surrounding region would give  refugees a lifeline to Australia and a much safer option than a journey on a leaky boat.   

 "The Greens will continue to stand up for vulnerable people in our region. These camps of cruelty  must be shut down."   

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

 NOAH SCHULTZ-BYARD  MEDIA ADVISER   

 OFFICE OF SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA 

 

 Level 7 / 147 Pirie St, Adelaide, SA 5000  TEL  +61 8 8227 0425   |   MOB  +61 427 604 760   |   FAX  +61 8 8227 0426     

 

 

 

