---
title: "Queenslanders unite to celebrate Refugee Week 2013"
date: "2013-06-20"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396074
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2802580%22
---

 

 

 Queenslanders unite to celebrate Refugee Week  2013  Thursday, 20 June 2013 

 Queenslanders will join together to celebrate the contribution of refugees to  Australian communities as part of World Refugee Day 2013 today. 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Brendan O'Connor, and Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, said as well as marking the rich diversity of  refugee communities around the country, there is an extra occasion to celebrate,  with the settlement of 800 000 refugees and humanitarian entrants in Australia since  World War II. 

 Refugee Week, which coincides with World Refugee Day on June 20, has been  celebrated in Australia since the 1980s and in 2013 a wide range of community  events and activities are planned in celebration. 

 Mr O'Connor said the week's celebration - from June 16-22 - was a unique  opportunity to recognise the plight of refugees around the world and acknowledge  the contribution made by government and non-government organisations to assist  refugees to contribute to Australian society. 

 'Australia has a long and proud history as a refugee resettlement country and a  cooperative international partner, which is demonstrated by the settlement of 800  000 refugee and humanitarian entrants under the humanitarian program,' Mr  O'Connor said. 

 'The Gillard Government is committed to ensuring that people settling here have the  help they need to rebuild their lives and become active participants in the  community, and this week is an important time not only to recognise this  commitment, but also the diversity which has grown through the humanitarian  program.' 

 Senator Lundy said Australia's resettlement tradition was integral to providing new  opportunities for those in humanitarian need. 

 'The contributions of people settled under Australia's humanitarian program are  enormous in both economic and social spheres, and this week is an important  occasion to reflect on the amazing impact these entrants have had in carving  Australia's identity,' Senator Lundy said. 

 One of the people who has benefited from Australia's humanitarian program is  Theophil Lazaro, who is of Burundian origin, born in Tanzania and now living in  Brisbane. He said that living in Australia had allowed him to rebuild his life in a  supportive community. 

 'I arrived as a refugee in 2009, and didn't know what to expect or who would  welcome me. I have settled in now and am so excited about becoming an Australian  citizen this week - in fact it will be the first time I have been a citizen of any country,'  Mr Lazaro said. 

 He has been busy giving back to newly arrived communities too by working in  multicultural health education through The Ethnic Communities Council of  Queensland. 

 In Brisbane, two special citizenship ceremonies are being staged, on June 22 and  23, both with about 50 conferees. A total of 24 nationalities are being represented,  including a large number of people coming from refugee backgrounds. 

 In Far North Queensland, Cairns refugee communities will be showcasing cultural  performances and sharing their stories to mark the day on June 20. 

 Australia's contribution to international protection and humanitarian efforts continues  this year, with 20 000 people to be welcomed through the humanitarian program in  2013-14. 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/bo/2013/bo204643.htm  Last update: Thursday, 20 June 2013 at 13:43 AEST 

 

