---
title: "Another boat as Labor's hypocrisy on skilled migration exposed"
date: "2013-03-12"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391839
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2294753%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Another boat as Labor's hypocrisy on skilled migration exposed 

 Tuesday 12th March 2013 

 The  arrival of another illegal boat, with over 100  people  on board, comes as budget  figures reveal 

 Labor are slashing the budget for policing immigration in Australia, Shadow Minister for Immigration 

 and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice,  Customs  and  Border  Protection,  

 Michael Keenan said today.  

 

 “As over 100 more people illegally arrive in Australia on another boat, Labor’s cuts to the budget for 

 policing our immigration system have been exposed in the Parliament,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “Just  as  they  dismantled  the  Howard  government’s  strong  border  protection  regime,  resulting  in  

 over  570  boat  arrivals with  over  33,000  people  on  board,  Labor  has  also  slashed  the  ability  of  the  

 Department of Immigration to police our migration program at home, including the 457 visa scheme 

 which Labor claims to be out of control.   

 

 “Labor have  failed on our  borders  and have  now  been exposed as  walking away  from  policing our 

 immigration laws at home as well.  

 

 “When John Howard left office $74 million was spent on visa enforcement. Now Labor is spending 

 $63.8  million and this  year’s  budget  has it falling to $52 million.  The Prime  Minister can’t  say  that 

 she  wants  to  deal  with  abuses  in  skilled  migration,  when  the  Government  has  spent  the  past  five  

 years slashing the budget that put police on the beat in immigration to enforce the laws.  

 

 “Labor’s  attack  on  skilled  migrants,  who’ve  been  at  the  heart  and  soul  of  building  this  country,  is  

 nothing  but  a  cheap  tactic  to  distract  attention  from  their  biggest  disaster  on  our  borders  - their 

 failure to stop the boats,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 Mr  Keenan  said:  “Another  huge  illegal  boat  arrival,  carrying  105  passengers,  has  been  assisted  off  

 the  coast  of  Christmas  Island  as  the  Gillard  Government  continues  to  focus  internally  on  its  own  

 political problems.  

 

 “There  have  now  been  more  than  11,000  people  arrive  illegally  by  boat  since  the  Government  

 agreed to reopen offshore processing on Nauru.  

 

 “It is clear that Labor’s decision to only implement one of the Coalition’s policies rather than the full 

 suite of proven border protection policies has failed to stop the boats from coming.  

 

 “You  cannot  just  cherry  pick  policies  and  expect  the  same  results  - Labor  must  restore  temporary  

 protection visas and turning the boats back around if they are serious about stopping the boats from 

 coming,” Mr Keenan said.   

