---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Melbourne: 15 November 2013: Australia's damaged relationship with Indonesia; Scott Morrison denies mother access to her newborn baby; Coalition's secrecy on boats arrivals"
date: "2013-11-15"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Australia's damaged relationship with Indonesia"
  - "Scott Morrison denies mother access to her newborn baby"
  - "Coalition's secrecy on boats arrivals"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211400731
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2848527%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO    

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  MELBOURNE   FRIDAY, 15 NOVEMBER 2013   

 Subjects: Australia’s damaged relationship with Indonesia, Scott Morrison  denies mother access to her newborn baby, Coalition’s secrecy on boats  arrivals.    

 RICHARD MARLES: Minister Morrison needs to take a leaf from his own book. The  Coalition promised open and transparent government. They've not done it. The  Coalition promised to turn back the boats. They haven't turned back any. The Coalition  said they would buy boats in Indonesia. They haven't bought a single one. The  Coalition said they would have resolve. They have had none.     

 This is a government which is doing everything other than what it said it would do  before the election. If we look at the figures that have been presented today by  Minister Morrison, three vessels have come in the last week comprising 163 asylum  seekers. In the last two weeks before the election, we were down to one boat arriving  per week. That was a 90 per cent reduction from the number of people who were  arriving at the time of the PNG arrangement. So I call on Minister Morrison and I call on  the Abbott Government today to vigorously prosecute Labor’s PNG arrangement,  because that is what is changing the game and what is stemming the tide in boats  coming to this country.     

 Minister Morrison and General Campbell also confirmed today that during the week a  boat did arrive in Darwin. Now this is a question that was put to Minister Morrison  during Question Time on Wednesday and he refused to answer that question on  Wednesday when we now know that he had that information at hand. What this says is  Minister Morrison has deliberately made himself unanswerable to the Parliament during  Question Time. This is a deeply serious matter. To really understand this, if Minister  Morrison were, for example, to mislead a press conference the result of that is a bad  article. But if Minister Morrison misleads the Parliament he loses his job. That is at the 

 essence of ministerial responsibility. That is why it is so important that Parliament is  able to hold the government to account. And so the fact that Minister Morrison has run  away from the Parliament, has put himself above the Parliament is a matter of  enormous concern.     

 Finally, Minister Morrison today announced there would be a change to the way in  which his weekly briefings would be conducted. This is an admission that the way in  which he has been conducting the briefings up until this point in time has been wrong.  Minister Morrison has been attempting to hide behind Australia’s military. But if he has  had a change of heart, if he now sees that there is a perception of political interference  of Australia's military, well then General Campbell's press conferences ought to happen  at an entirely separate time from the press conferences of Minister Morrison and I call  on Minister Morrison to now institute that from here on in. Are there any questions?    

 JOURNALIST: He said he will do that though?    

 MARLES: Well, all that I understand was said today is that when General Campbell has  finished his component of the press conference, he will leave. If there is genuinely a  concern of political of interference and a perception of that, well then what ought to  happen is the press conference of General Campbell ought to be entirely separate from  the press conference of Minister Morrison. There ought to be no photo at the beginning  with the two of them standing side by side. If this is really Operation Sovereign Borders,  we ought to have the commander in charge of it doing his own pre-conference entirely  separately from that of the Minister.    

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)    

 MARLES: The reasons that we heard today don't stand up to a moment of scrutiny.  They do not make any sense whatsoever. What's been said today is that press releases  whenever a boat arrived in Australia were being used by people smugglers as evidence  of the fact that boats were come to this country. If that is really an issue, then why  would there be briefings at all?     

 The briefings that we are seeing every Friday are providing precisely that information.  But the reality of the matter is that in this day and age, through Facebook, through  connecting with family who are here, people smugglers don't need press conferences or  press releases to be able to tell their clients whether or not a boat has arrived in  Australia.     

 But the Australian people need to hear this. The fact that we've had to wait until today  before we have it confirmed from our own government that a boat did arrive in Darwin,  I believe shows enormous contempt for the people of Darwin by our own government.  So there is no operational reason why you wouldn't let the Australian people know, as 

 soon as possible, when a boat has arrived here and let the Australian people know  about the plain and simple progress of our border security.    

 JOURNALIST:  Shortly before the federal election, Labor changed its policy to be  considerably more hard line on this issue. If  Labor were in government now, wouldn't  they need to use some level of secrecy to maintain that hardline policy?    

 MARLES: Being transparent is at the core of good government, and whatever we  were, we were always transparent with the way in which we conducted our  government. And the farcical situation in the way in which Minister Morrison is going  about his press conference is that there is an implied, actually an explicit criticism of the  former Labor government for being too transparent. What we did, the game changer  was the arrangement Papua New Guinea.     

 In the time that that arrangement came into being until the weeks before the election  we saw a 90 per cent decrease in the number of boat arrivals and I will be able to  supply those figures to you. Now that, I think, is at the core of what we need to do to  stop the stem of boats coming from Indonesia and to stop people perishing at sea and  that is something Labor certainly stands by and will peruse.     

 JOURNALIST: But Labor didn’t really get a very long time to get that policy through,  that was very new, don’t you think that if Labor was still carrying that policy through  now they would need to change the way the communicate the with media and  Australian people?     

 MARLES: No I absolutely don't accept that proposition at all. The policy that has  changed the state of affairs is the arrangement with PNG because what it does is take  Australia off the table. It means there is no product to sell and in fact communicating  that fact to people smugglers is a very important part of getting the message out there.  Being transparent in how many boats are arriving can only be a good thing in  demonstrating that the stem of boats, the boat flow is being stemmed. And so we  would, were we in government today, be just as open as we were before the election,  because that’s not what causes or stops boats form coming here. What is stopping  boats form coming to Australia right now is the arrangement we have with Papua New  Guinea.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you not agree then with General Campbell who says the limiting  information about operations is to protect the integrity of those operations?     

 MARLES: I think the way in which these media briefings have been set up is first and  foremost about trying to slow down the media cycle here in Australia. It is Minister  Morrison hiding behind the Australian military. But if there is an issue about providing  this kind of information and if the Government were seriously concerned that this  information is encouraging these people to get on a boat and come to Australia that it 

 is being used by people smugglers then they wouldn’t be doing the briefings on the  Friday as it is. I mean, what we learnt today is that three boats did get to Australia.  What we learnt today is that there are 163 asylum seekers who made their way to  Australian shores over the past seven days. So this information is being provided by the  Government. But what they are trying to do is slow down the media cycle and they  want to hide the truth.      

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)     

 MARLES: Well look I’ve read the reports about the mother and her child at the Mater  Hospital in Queensland and I am concerned about those reports. Principally because  what was being reported from the hospital itself is that it’s advisable for any mother to  have access to her child as much as she needs, 24/7 and there can be no reason why  you would go against that medical advice. Scott Morrison may pretend to be many  things but what he is not is a doctor and we ought to be taking the medical advice  here, and the medical advice says that a mother should be given access to her child,  then that’s what should happen.    

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)    

 MARLES: Look I’m not aware of that specific circumstance, but what needs to happen  obviously is that if there are people with special needs who are being handled by our  system, well they need to be handled in a way which deals with the special needs that  they have. I think that’s a pretty common sense and plain proposition. It’s certainly how  things operated when Labor was in power and you would expect that it occur now.     

 JOURNALIST: Did you notice a change of tone with the Minister today compared to  other previous briefings since he’s been minister?      

 MARLES: Well we did see a change in the way the briefings are occurring. I think that  signals the beginning of the end of the way in which these briefings are going to occur  and frankly having briefings in this way on a weekly basis needs to change. This culture  of secrecy needs to change. Hiding behind the Australian military needs to change, so I  do hope that we see a different tone from Minister Morrison going forward because  really the way in which he is going about it now treated the people of Darwin with  contempt during the week, utterly treats the Parliament with contempt as he puts  himself above the Parliament and at the end of the day treats the Australian people  with contempt.        

 

 JOURNALIST: About an hour ago Scott Morrison right at the end if his press  conference said like and I paraphrase if you’re a child, if you’re a women, if you have a  health condition, if you’re from Afghanistan, Iraq - if you’re fit to get on a boat, you’re  fit for offshore processing. What do you make of that kind of talk?     

 MARLES: If there are people with special needs I would expect that our system would  deal with the needs that they have. But the arrangement that we put in place as a  government, with PNG, provided that people who came to Christmas Island were  transferred to Papua New Guinea and the fundamental proposition of our arrangement  with PNG is that Australia has to be taken off the table. And so I do think it’s very  important that that principle be very vigorously prosecuted and I call on the  Government again to vigorously prosecute the PNG arrangement which Labor put in  place before the last election because that is what is making a difference. Australia does  need to be taken off the table and that is what is actually going to stem the flow of  asylum seeker vessels form Indonesia. Thank you.         

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524   

