---
title: "Greens leader visits Pontville Detention Centre"
date: "2013-08-29"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211436491
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2693086%22
---

 GREENS LEADER VISITS PONTVILLE DETENTION CENTRE   

 Australian Greens Leader Senator Christine Milne has just returned from a visit to the  Pontville Detention Centre in Hobart, Tasmania. This is what she had to say about  meeting the young asylum seekers.   

 “I was really pleased to see the young children getting on buses and going to school.  This is something the Greens have fought long and hard for, and it is good to see it  happening,” Senator Milne said.   

 “But the question Labor has to answer is why are they only getting 200 kids out of  Pontville and leaving 1800 kids in detention across the country?   

 “The children who I spoke with before they went to school all had the same questions -  why are we in detention, why are we being locked up and how long are we going to be  here?   

 “One boy said the detainees were going crazy because they didn’t know where they  were going to end up or how long they were going to be stuck in detention.   

 “I called them together and I promised I would do everything I could to continue to  pressure Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott to get them all out of detention, not only in  Pontville but right around the country.   

 “In return I asked them to never ever give up hope and I asked them to start chanting  after me ‘never ever give up hope’ - and they did.”    

 Media contact: Peter Stahel 0437 587 562    

