---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 27 July 2013: Nauru; Manus Island; Asylum Seekers."
date: "2013-07-27"
creators:
  - "Bourke, Tony"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Nauru"
  - "Manus Island"
  - "Asylum Seekers."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397725
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2626167%22
---

 

 PRESS CONFERENCE   SATURDAY, 27 JULY 2013   

 

 

 TONY BURKE:                        As you would be aware, very soon after I got  the portfolio, I made the decision that it was  important for me to see firsthand the number  of sites. Within a few days I was at Pontville in  Hobart, and I was also right at the start had  planned the trip that I have just returned from  visiting our centres on Manus Island and also  at Nauru.  

 If I deal with them in reverse order, with  respect to Nauru, I was there yesterday for a  visit. I met with both the President and with  the Minister for Justice and went and visited  the site where the destruction has occurred  following the riots, also met with the staff and  then went to where people were having their  claims processed are now residing and met  with some of them before returning home,  arriving back today. The facilities which had  been destroyed were brand new. 

                                                In terms of the quality of the accommodation 

 that was there, prior to them being burned,  these were good quality facilities. It would be 

 wrong to presume that everybody who has  claims there in Nauru was part of the action.  There are more than a hundred people who  have charges against their names under the  law of Nauru or in the process of being  charged, currently being held but in the  process of being charged, under the law of  Nauru, but that is a minority of the number of  the people who were there.  

 There has been an attempt by some to argue  that somehow the conditions in which people  were housed in Nauru in some way made  action of this nature inevitable and there's  been comments by some that have attempted  to paint the people who were involved in the  destruction somehow as being victims  themselves. 

                                                I have to say I don't hold that view for one 

 minute nor do the majority of people who  were there for their claims to be processed.  The majority of people have gone from a  situation where they were about to move into  massively improved accommodation to now  being in mass accommodation where close to  a hundred of them are sharing a single  marquee. The level of frustration from people  who had had their claims getting close to  finalisation is huge.  

                                                The frustration that they are feeling and was 

 conveyed directly to me and to members of  the delegation who accompanied me was  extraordinary. Certainly the people who were  about to move into better accommodation 

 don't view the people who burnt down their  accommodation as victims, and I want to make  clear that there is no attempt from Australia in  talking to the Government of Nauru that  anything other than the full force of the law of  Nauru will apply. The people who are victims  are not the people who torched buildings,  sprayed fire extinguishers in the eyes of  authorities and turned metal bars into  weapons. That's the action of someone who  has a criminal penalty - or criminal charges to  follow. It's not the actions of a victim. 

                                                But it would also be wrong if people were to 

 characterise these actions as being assigned to  everybody who was there having claims to be  processed. That would be a grossly unfair  characterisation of the majority of people  there. We are now in the process of 

 undergoing a large operation of clearing the  areas that have been damaged, and when I say  damaged, these are destroyed beyond repair.  The staff building where the services are  carried remains in mint condition but the new  accommodation facilities are completely gone. 

                                                No one should think that the Australian 

 Government will respond by saying, well,  that's the end of the facility at Nauru. We will  be re-establishing the facility at Nauru. We will  be going - we have temporary accommodation  that's there at the moment but nobody, I  repeat nobody, will be in a situation where  there is an advantage in engaging in criminal  behaviour and destruction. The penalties for  the different charges that are open to the 

 Nauruan Government involve serious, long  prison terms and whether or not they apply to  specific individuals will depend on the facts as  they're established and will depend on  decisions made through the courts and under  the law and the proper authorities of Nauru. 

                                                But Australia respects the right of Nauru to 

 enforce their own criminal law. Let's not forget  these are offences which would be illegal in  every country of the world and Nauru has  particularly strong penalties as I understand it  for offences such as arson. We then - if I then  refer to Manus Island.  

                                                I wanted to make sure when I originally booked 

 the visit to Manus to make sure that the  facilities were ready to go so that we could  begin transferring people from Christmas  Island to Manus Island as soon as health  checks had been completed. That process  involved as well clearing out of Manus Island  people who had arrived prior to the new  arrangements with Papua New Guinea to  maximise the extent to which we had capacity.  Everybody who can be removed from Manus  Island has now been removed, there is in the  order of 20 to 30 people who remain there  because they have charges pending against  them under the law of Papua New Guinea.  And obviously we're not going to remove  somebody while there's charges being laid  against them. 

                                                But that means we have significant immediate 

 capacity at Manus Island which - and the 

 capacity that we have is a mixture of hard,  more permanent structures and tents and  marquees in different compounds that are  already there. I also went to a number of sites  which have been earmarked for rapid  expansion. I also sat down with officials and  worked through a number of other sites which  had not yet been designated to look at other  areas where expansion might be possible. I  won't be designating what they are yet. We'll  work that through appropriately with the  authorities in Papua New Guinea and on  Manus itself. But nobody should be in any  doubt of this simple fact. The capacity is there  for us to make sure as many people as test our  resolve will be sent to Papua New Guinea for  processing their claims against the convention.  We always said, and the Prime Minister made  clear when the new arrangement with Papua  New Guinea was put forward, people will test  our resolve, people will test whether or not we  serious about this.  

                                                One of the arguments that has been put there 

 as a test is whether or not we would have the  capacity. Be in no doubt the capacity is there  already. Also be in no doubt that people are  on the ground to expand the existing capacity.  We have members of the army who will be  there doing various forms of survey work  preparing particular sites and we've engaged a  logistics company which has been involved in  the construction of mining camps to be able to  do very rapid expansion of that site, so nobody  should be in any doubt. If people want to test  our resolve and we always said they would try; 

 if people want to test our resolve then  whatever capacity is required will be provided  and the new arrangement will be 

 implemented. Happy to take any questions. 

 QUESTION:                            Minister, you say 20 to 30 people remain on 

 Manus Island. Firstly, how many people were  removed from the detention centre and where  did they go? 

 TONY BURKE:                        The people who were - I'll get the precise 

 figures for you from the department. I'd rather  on anything like that we get verified numbers  specifically for you. So I'll ask the department  to provide that to you afterwards. But they've  been transferred back to Australia where their  claims will be processed there. My view is the  absolute priority we have is to make sure that  every single person who arrives subsequent to  the announcement of the new arrangements  with Papua New Guinea is processed in, is  processed offshore for their claims. I think  that's essential. And that's why we've moved  people off. 

 QUESTION:                            When you say Australia, do you mean 

 Christmas Island or the mainland? 

 TONY BURKE:                        I'll get the department to give you the precise  locations. But yeah, we'll be able to turn that  information round to you very quickly. 

 QUESTION:                            And following this, how many people can be 

 sent to Manus Island now? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Well, as many as is required. We have people  on the ground expanding it. It does not take  long once you've levelled the ground and  sorted out the drainage. It does not take long  to provide tents and marquees. It does not  take long at all. There are some changes in  configuration of the site which I've asked to  occur to make sure that we can segregate  individuals if they're involved in any forms of  intimidation among other people who are also  there to have claims assessed. 

                                                So there's some changes in configuration that 

 I've asked for, that’s being done. But the  capacity for expansion there, I've gone to a  number of sites that are ready to go, a number  of sites that are earmarked and agreed to and  I've also started looking at additional sites way  beyond any of the numbers that we're dealing  with at the moment so that if people want to  keep testing our resolve, then capacity will  continue to increase.  

 QUESTION:                            It's not just about facilities though is it? It's 

 also about expertise and UNHCR has raised  concerns about Australia's arrangement  currently with PNG and whether it is adequate,  there’s an adequate legal framework for  processing and for protection. 

 TONY BURKE:                        Importantly Papua New Guinea have now 

 withdrawn their reservations to the 

 convention. That letter has gone from the  Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea through  to the United Nations. They've made the  commitment to enforce the Refugee 

 Convention. And certainly, any assistance and  cooperation with the United Nations High  Commission for Refugees is something that  we're open to and I think they've 

 acknowledged in their statement, the  conversations and meetings they've been  having with my officials. We want to make  sure and Papua New Guinea in withdrawing  their reservations with respect to anyone sent  from Australia is committed to making sure  that people are processed appropriately  according to the convention and that's what  will happen. 

 QUESTION:                            Do you believe that conditions at Manus Island  are adequate? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Yes I do, yes I do. I went to have a look for 

 myself, I saw it for myself and I do believe they  are. 

 QUESTION:                            You said there are changes in the 

 configuration that you've asked for. Are they  going to address some of the concerns around  the rape of men there? Is that going to be  something that these changes are going to  address? 

 TONY BURKE:                        The concept of being able to segregate people  who are involved in any form of intimidation,  whether it's what you've described or any  other form of intimidation is something that in  terms of management of a processing centre is  important, it was a specific suggestion that  was put to me by the person who was the 

 source of that SBS program when I spoke to  him on the phone. It was one of the priorities  that he said we should look at. I sought advice,  I agreed with him and I've made sure that  that's happened. If I can add though with  respect to the allegations that you've referred  to, I had the Secretary of the department  travelling with me to both Nauru and to  Manus. And for each of those sites, one we  have the allegations you've referred to, with  the other, we have what's happened with  respect to the rioting and the damage which  has occurred on Nauru. 

                                                For each of those the same three things need 

 to be resolved. One, determining exactly what  the facts were. Two, making sure those facts  are available to any of the authorities for  any  action that would take place as a result, and  three, to make sure that we get clear 

 recommendations on any systems 

 improvements that can be made to avoid  either what's been alleged or what we've seen  occur, happening in the future. 

                                                The Secretary of the department will be 

 announcing in the course of the coming days a  review process independent of the 

 department to deal with exactly those things.  It's being done by the department, by the  Secretary of the department and I'll leave him  to make the announcement but we've spoken  about it, I'm comfortable with the direction in  which he's heading and I support it. 

 QUESTION:                            It's been acknowledged that following the 

 policy announcement that the boats would  immediately stop. Do you have a ballpark  figure of how long it will take until the  smugglers get the message that they won't be,  or that the people won't be residing in  Australia? 

 TONY BURKE:                        I'm not going to second guess the mindset of  criminal groups that put people at risk on the  high seas. I'm not going to second guess what  it will take for them to stop taking advantage  of people. But be in no doubt they no longer  have a product to sell. Up until now, they've  been taking money from people on the basis  that they were selling residence in Australia,  the right to live and work in Australia. 

                                                No one who gives them money is going to get 

 that. People will not be settled in Australia.  That's what the new arrangement means. Now  I am making sure that that message gets out  through Australia, through people in contact  with those in the pipeline and along the  pipeline itself as loudly as possible. But if it  takes for people to see the planes going across  from Christmas to Manus, if it takes for people  to see that we are true to our word, well, we  are making sure of that. So I'm not going to  give arbitrary timelines, but what I will say is  anybody at all who is paying money to a  people smuggler, if they think they're getting  residence in Australia, they're wrong. And if  they want to test us to prove that they're  wrong, then that's what will happen. 

 QUESTION:                            So when will the plane go from Christmas 

 Island, from the latest boat that arrived on  Thursday? When will it go from Christmas  Island to Manus? 

 TONY BURKE:                        I announced on when I stood with Prime 

 Minister Rudd and Prime Minister Peter  O'Neill, that we would be conducting the  health checks first, that the health checks we  conduct take in the order of two weeks and  that that would be the only delay before we  saw planes going across. I've now been to have  a look at the facilities myself and I'm in no  doubt that they're ready, so the only delay is  with respect to the health checks and despite  being taunted a week ago by the Leader of the  Opposition and encouraged to send people  across without conducting those health  checks, that was a either a childish or just an  irresponsible thought bubble from him. And  we will do things exactly as we said. We said  that the new arrangement would be enforced,  it will be. We said that people would be sent  once the health checks have been complete  and they will be. 

 QUESTION:                            You said before that it wouldn't take long at all  to increase capacity at Manus Island. Can you  give us a better timeframe in terms of how  long you expect it would take to increase  capacities to 3000? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Once you've got your drainage sorted and the  ground levelled, it takes very little time to  erect a tent. And so if I can put it in these  terms, if you look at the rate at which people 

 have been testing our resolve over the first  week, our capacity to increase, our capacity to  increase accommodation is way, way in front  of the rate of boat arrivals. Way in front. And  I've noticed some have wanted to imply that  there's somehow capacity constraints. It's a  really irresponsible people, a really 

 irresponsible thing for people to imply, and a  really dangerous game for people to play  claiming that there are capacity constraints  here. 

                                                The moment it's believed there are capacity 

 constraints, the people smugglers will just try  to fill it thinking they can then go back to  business as usual. There's no more business as  usual for them. It's over. 

 QUESTION:                            So when Bob Carr says that it could be up to 

 50,000 or more people coming by boat every  year, then there is capacity there to cope with  those kinds of numbers? 

 TONY BURKE:                        We'll be able to cope with whatever comes at  us. I've no doubt there's a lot of locations,  there's a lot of spare capacity. I have no doubt  at all that as many as try to test our resolve  will find that we are serious about this. We are  not going to allow a situation to continue  where a product is being sold to people, some  of whom are opportunistic, some of whom are  desperate. But either way, a whole lot of them  drown. We are serious about implementing  this and we will. 

 QUESTION:                            How long until we will see women, 

 unaccompanied children and families at  Christmas Island? 

 TONY BURKE:                        On that I hope to be able to give you more 

 information soon. There's some inquiries I've  made directly about that. I've always said that  there will be a delay but people will still end  up there. But I won't go further than that  today. 

 QUESTION:                            What inquiries have you made? 

 TONY BURKE:                        I won't go further than that today. 

 QUESTION:                            You said that there's up to 100 people per 

 marquee in Nauru at the moment. Is there a  limit to what’s safe, when you're talking about  capacity, are you going to have some kind of  limits around how many people per marquee,  how things are set up? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Oh look, what we've got at the moment is in  the wake of their having been a fire and us  having absolutely no choice. What I've  described in Nauru is in no way representative  of the way places like Manus will be set up, in  no way representative. That's just straight an  emergency, the accommodation was gone. We  had to find a roof over people's heads. As a  permanent or even long-term temporary  solution, it's not acceptable.  

                                                We currently have no choice at all because of 

 the damage that occurred but it won't be long 

 before we're, we have a better form of  accommodation for people there. And in  terms of the numbers we're dealing with  there, a large number of people are currently  not being housed by us but being housed by  the penal system of Nauru. 

 QUESTION:                            Did you get any kind of idea when you were 

 there of how that actually happened? How the  authorities allowed that situation to occur? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Yeah. I was taken through it step by step but I  was taken through it step by step through the  advice of senior officials of my department.  Given what the Secretary will be 

 commissioning in the next few days, I think I -  rather than me go through detail by detail the  latest advice I've received, I'll let that process  take its course. In an incident of that nature  and of that scale, frequently on investigation  some of the initial facts vary, and I've always  tried to be very careful with you that we're at  the final point of verification of any detail  before you're getting it directly from me but  I've also said to the department as best their  information is, they should be providing it to  the media as they go. 

 QUESTION:                            Just on another issue, this is the last weekend  before an election in August can be called. Can  we expect any kind of announcement? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Can I tell you I have absolutely no idea, 

 absolutely no idea. I have a very serious job  with a lot at stake in terms of people's lives in 

 front of me and right now I'm focused on little  other than that. 

 QUESTION:                            So the party hasn't had any kind of discussion  about when an election will actually be held? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Well, if they have, it would've been while I was  in Manus Island, transiting through the  Solomon Islands and visiting Nauru. So I don't  know the answer to your question. 

 QUESTION:                            What's your response to speculation that it 

 will be delayed until much later in the year? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Right now, I'm focused exactly as I've 

 described. It's not a political line, it's true. This  is huge. It's a very big job and that's what I'm  doing. 

 QUESTION:                            Are you confident that those ads are working? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Yeah I am, yeah I am. The process of doing the  direct offshore ads takes a little longer  because you need to work through some  processes country by country before a  government starts to advertise there. It's  important that you do that, and that creates a  level of delay offshore. If we hadn't started  immediately in a very big domestic campaign,  the message wouldn't have started to get  through the pipeline and from anecdotal  information that I've been given, the  information is not universally through, we still  need to push a lot harder. But there is no  doubt that there is a growing level of 

 awareness that there has been a fundamental  change in the way Australia deals with this  issue and that can only result in saving lives.  

                                                I'm surprised that my political opponents have 

 sought to undermine that message, they  would have their own reasons for doing so but  when you think what are the actual 

 implications for people, if they take at face  value the message is that they're hearing from  the Opposition, it would seem to me to be a  deeply irresponsible path. Thank you very  much. 

 

