---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 13 December 2013: Operation Sovereign Borders update."
date: "2013-12-13"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211402583
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2901215%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection and  Commander of Operation Sovereign Borders Joint  Agency Task Force address press conference on  Operation Sovereign Borders 

 13 December 2013  TRANSCRIPTION: E & OE 

 TOPICS: Operation Sovereign Borders update. 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Welcome to the thirteenth briefing on Operation Sovereign Borders. At earlier  briefings I have referred to the underfunding of offshore processing under the previous Government that  has been inherited by this Government. I can confirm today that the funding shortfall for offshore  processing at Nauru and Manus Island from the former Government is $1.2 billion for both capital and  operational expenditure over the forward estimates including $370 million in the current financial year.  

 And this has been confirmed by the Department of Finance and my own department. Service contracts on  Manus Island and Nauru are due to expire at the end of January of next year and there was no provision  for my department beyond the expiry of those contracts.  

 This shortfall has been reduced by the projected savings that will be realised by this Government through  the lower level of arrivals that we are already seeing as a result of the Government's policies that has seen  a more than 80 per cent reduction in illegal arrivals by boat since Operation Sovereign Borders  commenced.  

 The previous government's funding model only provided for just one in six arrivals to be transferred for  offshore processing with the rest to come to Australia and either released into the community on bridging  visas or placed in held detention. During the period between the introduction of the regional resettlement  arrangement with Papua New Guinea on July 19 and the swearing in of the new Government, consistent  with the previous Government's funding model, only 16 per cent of persons who'd arrived illegally by boat  were actually transferred to Manus Island or Nauru by the previous government.  

 This Government has acted to reverse this funding model to ensure that all persons who have arrived  illegally by boat after 19 July will be transferred to Nauru or Manus Island for offshore processing. This has  involved not only providing for the operational funding to receive, accommodate and process these arrivals,  but also to expand the capacity of the centres at both locations which will be more than doubled by the end  of this month. 

 People smugglers are trying to tell would-be passengers presently, that there is no more room at Manus or  Nauru. They couldn't be more wrong. It may have been true under the previous government that that would  have occurred but under this Government that is absolutely and patently false.  

 We have ample capacity to deal with anticipated arrivals at our offshore processing centres and more.  

 If you manage to survive the boat journey to Australia and, given the dangers involved and the  Government's policy is to prevent such arrivals, there is no guarantee that you'll get that far. The only  guarantee you will have if you happen to get that far is that the people smugglers would have lied to you  and you will go to Nauru or Manus Island and you will not be coming to Australia.  

 I also note the Government has been reviewing our contracting arrangements at both locations with a view  to improving the efficiency and operational performance of these arrangements and the structure of those  arrangements and we will be making further announcements on these matters once they have been finally  determined.  

 I note that there has been a report by Amnesty International in relation to Manus Island processing centre.  Now like the Red Cross and the UNHCR before them, the Government provides access to these facilities  with the support of the Government of Papua New Guinea and frankly the other centre at Nauru. And I note  that the Greens Senator Sarah Hanson Young will be visiting Nauru next week.  

 Reports from these visits and whoever provides them will undoubtedly, I imagine, be critical of offshore  processing from time to time and of the Government. This is to be anticipated particularly from groups or  politicians or others who've long opposed the policy of offshore processing. However, I would say this;  where any reports made practical observations that can be verified and that would improve the operations 

 of these centres, the Government will address such observations in partnership with our partners in Nauru  and Papua New Guinea to address any deficiencies in good faith. 

 However, all Australians and more importantly people smugglers and their would-be passengers should be  clear on one thing - offshore processing is here to stay under this Government.  

 Those who advocated for the abolition of offshore processing, which is a regular recommendation or  feature in any of the reports that tend to be critical, together with temporary protection visas and the other  key measures that form part of the former Howard Government's strong border protection regime should  also reflect on this, that the abolition of those measures created an environment where more than 50,000  people turned up on more than 800 boats and more than 1,100 people perished at sea.  

 In addition more than 15,000 people who were seeking Australia's protection from offshore and refugee  camps - and in some cases far worse places - were denied access to Australia's refugee and humanitarian  program.  

 I consider that outcome to be a humanitarian calamity and it will not be repeated by this Government  regardless of what pressure is brought to bear and whoever brings it. We are committed to the policy of  offshore processing, we always have been and we always will be. I'll hand over to Lieutenant-General  Campbell to provide his regular report.  

 ANGUS CAMPBELL: Thanks Minister, welcome to the Operation Sovereign Borders briefing for the week  concluding nine o'clock this morning. On Monday, 9 December, a people smuggling vessel founded in  Indonesian waters off Cibalong Garut on the south coast of West Java. We understand, based on  information provided to us by BASARNAS, the Indonesian search and rescue agency, that there were 30  people on board the vessel. Twenty-seven were recovered; one additional person is in a serious condition  and two people died. Australia wasn't involved in this recovery.  

 This is another reminder, a tragic reminder of the danger of believing and trusting people smugglers.  During the reporting period, three illegal maritime arrivals and two crew from one suspected illegal entry  vessel were transferred to the Department of Immigration and Border Protection authorities on Wednesday,  11 December. 

 From interviews with recent illegal maritime arrivals, I'm aware of the latest round of rumours circulating  among the potential illegal immigrants and offshore processing transferee communities of an impending  change to Australian Government policy. 

 Such rumours arise from time to time and are fed, manipulated and encouraged by people smugglers.  There are no policy reversals. All persons who attempt to travel by boat to Australia without a visa will not  come to Australia. 

 Now, I would like to speak directly to these communities, both those in source and transit countries and  those who are now in offshore processing centres. Minister, is the Government considering now or in the  future a change to Australia's border security policies regarding illegal maritime arrivals?  

 SCOTT MORRISON: Absolutely not. The Government would only be strengthening policies, General. 

 ANGUS CAMPBELL: From the period of this reporting period, 119 people were transferred to offshore  processing centres, 38 to Manus, 81 to Nauru. Again, the Australian Government’s policy is being  implemented by the joint agency task force. At 9 o’clock this morning there were a total of 1,194 people on  Manus, 765 people in Nauru and 2,178 people in the Christmas Island facilities. Also in the reporting period  one illegal maritime arrival transferee was returned to Iran after voluntarily electing to go home. Yesterday,  the Australian Federal Police arrested a 28-year-old Iranian national in Werribee, Melbourne. He was  charged with one count of aggravated people smuggling under section 233c of the Migration Act. Police will  allege the man was involved in organising and facilitating a suspected illegal entry vessel into Australian  waters which capsized en route to Christmas Island on 25 March, 2013.  

 Following the vessel's capsize, 96 people were recovered from the ocean, three required intensive medical  care and two were deceased. The man appeared in Melbourne Magistrates Court yesterday and he is next  scheduled to appear on 10 April, 2014. He was bailed into the custody of the Department of Immigration  and Border Protection who are now in the process of cancelling his bridging visa.  

 In a separate matter, the Australian Federal Police arrested a 25-year-old Indonesian national yesterday at  Villawood, Sydney. He was also charged with people smuggling offences contrary to section 233c of the  Migration Act. Police will allege that the man was involved in crewing and navigating a suspected illegal  entry vessel into Australian waters which capsized on 20 August, 2013, near Christmas Island, carrying  105 passengers and six alleged crew members.  

 Five people on this vessel are believed to have died in the incident, however, their bodies were never  recovered. The man has been remanded in detention at Villawood detention centre and is next due to  appear in Central Local Court on 19 February, 2014. As both these matters are now before the courts, it is  not appropriate for me to comment further on this issue.  

 Finally I would like to publicly acknowledge and thank Rear Admiral David Johnston, Commander Border  Protection Command who today completes his appointment and returns to other duties with the royal  Australian Navy. His leadership and professionalism have been instrumental to the outstanding  performance of border protection command over two and a half very challenging years in which our men  and women at sea have served their nation with distinction. Admiral Johnston will hand over to Rear  Admiral Mike Noonan this afternoon and I'm very much looking forward to working with him. 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Thank you. Could I also, General, pass on my thanks to Rear Admiral Johnston. He  has dealt with some of the most trying periods in his work as heading up Border Protection Command. It  was good to have the opportunity to thank him in front of his colleagues at Customs and Border Protection  a week or so ago. My best wishes go to Rear Admiral Johnston and his family and with the deployment of  his next task we wish him all the best. Questions for General Campbell? 

 JOURNALIST: Have any boats arrived this week?  

 ANGUS CAMPBELL: Yes, as I indicated there was one arrival. 

 SCOTT MORRISON: There were three passengers. 

 ANGUS CAMPBELL: Three passengers and two crew on that boat.  

 JOURNALIST: Can you elaborate on the rumours you were indicating before?  

 ANGUS CAMPBELL: I'm not going to elaborate on them, not because there's any secret to them, but if I  were to do so there would be sound bites and clips taken from the video feed here and manipulated by  people smugglers. That's exactly what they do. They know the rumours I'm talking about. The prospective  travellers and the transferees know the rumours. They are untrue. 

 JOURNALIST: There were reports this week published by Fairfax Media saying people smugglers are  talking about downgrading diplomatic relations between Indonesia and Australia. Are those the rumours  that you're referring to? 

 ANGUS CAMPBELL: I'm not discussing any form of rumour other than that if those who are thinking of  travelling to Australia or those who are now transferees in offshore processing centres are in any doubt, I  would like to think that today that doubt has been relieved. The policies of the Government of the day,  which it is my duty to implement, are continuing as they are now. There are no changes to those policies.  The policies aren't being reversed. The system that we have in place is being implemented by the Joint  Agency Task Force and if persons choose to come by boat without a visa, they will move into offshore  processing centres and will not come to Australia. 

 JOURNALIST: General, has there been any diminution in cooperation from the Indonesian side, either in  terms of military personnel or the rescue agency, in the wake of Jakarta's alarm about the phone tapping  allegations? 

 ANGUS CAMPBELL: As I've indicated previously, those are issues really at the moment for government to  government discussion and leader to leader discussion. In regard to the safety of life at sea and the  cooperative arrangements to ensure mariners are cared for, the arrangements between the Australian  Maritime Safety Authority and BASARNAS are continuing to effectively support mariners as they should  and as they always would. 

 JOURNALIST: So has there been no change in that level of cooperation? 

 ANGUS CAMPBELL: As I'm - as I say, I'm not going to speak further to that. We are working on a safety of  life at sea basis to see mariners - all mariners being supported by those agencies and our nations and  other nations in the region. 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Thank you, General Campbell. Now, I understand that I think the Prime Minister was  doing a media conference just after one or thereabouts so we might move quickly. 

 Questions? 

 JOURNALIST: Minister, the Salvation Army have confirmed that their contract to provide humanitarian  services on Manus and Nauru will not be renewed after January 2014. Can you confirm that? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: I won't be making any comment on those matters at this stage, only to say the  contract arrangements for our offshore operations are in the process of being determined with the view to  improving our operational effectiveness at all of those centres based on everything we've been gleaning  over the last 13 weeks since we've been in office and I don't have anything further to say at this stage but  when I do, then I'll make those announcements. 

 JOURNALIST: The Salvation Army have confirmed this, so I'm just asking whether you know what post-January 2014… 

 SCOTT MORRISON: I have provided the answer the Government is giving today. 

 JOURNALIST: Regarding the Amnesty report and previous reports from UNHCR and Red Cross, asylum  seekers have the right to seek asylum. Is the Government actually trying to break their will and stop them  from doing what they are entitled to do, which is claim asylum? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: If people arrive in Australia illegally by boat, they're transferred to either Nauru or  Manus Island and that's where their claims are assessed. 

 JOURNALIST: But in regards to the conditions in which they are held, is the Government trying to break  their will? Are things like less than half a litre of water a day acceptable? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: There is no restriction on the amount of water that people can receive at Manus  Island and, as I said in relation to all of these reports, they are looked at, they are reviewed, they are  sought to be verified and observations based on one day or another day need to be seen in a broader  context of the more normal operations of these centres and where there are suggestions that could make  useful improvements to centres then they're taken on in good faith. 

 JOURNALIST: You're not dismissing these reports out of hand? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: I never have. All I'm saying the key recommendations of both the UNHCR report and  the amnesty report is that offshore processing should be abolished. We're clearly not going to do that. The  previous Government did that. The previous Government believed so much in offshore processing that they  abolished it, they refused to restore it, they argued it would have no effect, then they finally introduced it  under protest and now want to claim credit for its results despite the fact it was underfunded with a black  hole of $1.2 billion and under capacity. 

 I mean, it's an absurd claim by the Government to say they promptly put these policies in place. They  clearly didn't have their heart in it because they clearly didn't put the dollars into it. 

 QUESTION: But do you accept the conditions that they are being held in amounts to torture? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: No. 

 JOURNALIST: No? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: I don't. 

 JOURNALIST: Minister, the Amnesty report also contained allegations that Immigration and Border  Protection staff on Manus would, as a matter of policy, report to PNG police any homosexual relations  between detainees on the island. Is that something you can confirm and if so, why is that the policy? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well, no, it's not, and my advice is that that is not what takes place and my advice is  that service providers provide clear advice to transferees on the relevant laws in Papua New Guinea and  the department is unaware of any claims or declarations of homosexuality or of any reports of  homosexuality being investigated by the police at the centre. So, no. 

 I mean, people make allegations, people say things, and people report those things in reports, but this is  the answer I'm giving you today and I will give every day in that where issues are raised in these reports,  we provide access for people to visit these centres in partnership with Papua New Guinea and Nauru and  where we're able to verify and substantiate claims that are made often of a general nature, not of a specific  nature, and where we need to run those issues to ground with those who've made those reports, I'm sure  we'll have their cooperation to do just that and where things are presented that can improve, then, of  course, we will do that. 

 JOURNALIST: But this was a very specific instance because it came from an interview with the Chief  Immigration Officer from the Australian Government. 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well, again, I have given my answer to it. 

 JOURNALIST: So the Government office is wrong? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: No, what I'm saying is that, no, that report we don't believe to be correct. 

 JOURNALIST: Minister, have Papua New Guinea and Australia agreed to a permanent special variation on  the 2003 MOU for people arriving in the Torres Strait? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: There are no changes to the MOU to my knowledge but I'm happy to confirm that. 

 JOURNALIST: Minister, did the General just then comment on policy in talking about there being non-reversal of policy, weren't there changes to the way these briefings are being held and did the general just  breach that? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: No, he asked me whether there had been a change in policy and I said no, and that  meant he could report there had been no change in policy. 

 JOURNALIST: Minister, we also heard… 

 JOURNALIST: Minister, are you also able to confirm today what changes will be made to be awarding of  contracts to Manus Island companies after the Ministerial meeting in Canberra this week?  

 SCOTT MORRISON: I have made my comment on the contractual arrangements. We're working through  those processes now. It's important that we get the best possible set of organisational arrangements at  those facilities at both Nauru and Manus Island. There is a fairly complicated network of contractual  arrangements and that is the product of the fairly ad hoc way in which offshore processing is introduced by  the previous Government. It was very much an ad hoc process and the Government is not convinced that  that has been the most effective structure for those contractual arrangements. 

 We are in the process of determining what they will be when the current contract period comes to an end  and when that has been determined and there's been the appropriate communication of all those involved  and stakeholders and others then you can expect the Government to make announcements at that time.  

 JOURNALIST: So there's no indication at the moment what percentage of the Manus contract will go to  locals? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: No, we issued a fact sheet on what was happening with those contracts currently and  the hundreds of people - over 600 local Manusians are employed at those centres, there are some 75  Papua New Guinean firms that have contracts or subcontracts related to operations at the Manus centre.  We are spending $23 million in aid projects specifically over and above the $16 billion or thereabouts in aid  the Australian Government provides directly to Manus as part of the package of aid to Papua New Guinea. 

 The forum this week with ministers was an excellent opportunity to update ministers on just what the  benefits are. Those benefits are considerable and we would expect that to continue and that news was well  received by the ministers. 

 JOURNALIST: Can Papua New Guinea and the Australian Government account for the full $42 million that  was earmarked for the Manus Island centre? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: You mean in terms of the aid project? 

 JOURNALIST: Yeah. Well, all the money you've got for the region. 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well, there are two parts to it, there is the ongoing aid project for Papua New Guinea  and within that approximately $16 or $17 million, or thereabouts, is for ongoing projects that are part of that  normal program. Then there is an additional $23 million which deals with everything from packages into  schools and new facilities in schools, there's roads, there's bridges, there's the market site where the roof  has been in disrepair and that needs to be fixed and so - and there are some local funding grants to various  youth organisations as well to address some training issues and things of that nature. 

 So it is a very comprehensive package and both myself and General Campbell as well as our High  Commissioner have had the opportunity to talk those issues through with not only the Local Member for  Manus, Ronnie Knight, but as well, of course, Governor Benjamin and other local officials. 

 JOURNALIST: You haven't got it yet - I mean, the - you would appreciate the locals say they've got very  little out of the centre and it's quite a bit of trouble for them?  

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well, no they - those funds have already begun to roll. They have begun to roll, and I  was advised just this week the tender process for the repair of the roof of the market in Lorengau was  commenced this week, and it was one of the things I was very keen to get moving when I went up there 

 and I didn't believe these projects were moving fast enough. And one of the things we committed to was  that normally there's an 80-20 rule which applies to these funding arrangements, i.e. 20 per cent is also to  come from local and central government authorities, and I didn't want that to, in any way, impede the  release of the Australian funds to get those projects happening.   And so I made that commitment about six or seven weeks ago when I was in Manus on that occasion, and  that has enabled these funds to start flowing and the projects to get moving. And I think over the next 12  months they'll be appreciative of those benefits and we'll be taking every opportunity to communicate them.  

 JOURNALIST: Minister, you said that detainees held on Manus are warned of the PNG laws on  homosexuality in particular, if... 

 SCOTT MORRISON: I said they were advised of the relevant laws in Papua New Guinea.  

 JOURNALIST: Does that mean specifically they are advised on the laws on homosexuality? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: I'm advised they're advised on the relevant laws, so that's the response I can give. 

 JOURNALIST: So, does that include laws on homosexuality? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: I have given you my response.  

 JOURNALIST: Well, that's not a response to the direct question that [indistinct]. 

 SCOTT MORRISON: In these press conferences you get to ask the questions, you don't get to give the  responses as well.  

 JOURNALIST: How many pregnant women are on Nauru?  

 SCOTT MORRISON: Fourteen.  

 JOURNALIST: Minister, in its report Amnesty also claimed that three teenage boys were wrongly being  held at Manus because of rushed assessments, is that something you're looking into?  

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well, that's no longer true. There were two persons who were unaccompanied  minors, which were the subject of previous press conferences here, and those two had been transferred  under the previous government to Manus. And when that was brought to my attention, they were returned  to Christmas Island. Now the age determination of the third person is a different matter and that is currently  not clear.  

 JOURNALIST: Minister I've heard reports that there was a protest on Manus last night in reaction to the  Amnesty report that involved around 100 detainees. Do you have any further details on that?  

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well, look, only to say that there was a peaceful representation made by about the  number that you referred to. They gathered in the Foxtrot Compound, requesting to speak with  management about the Amnesty report that was released, and the G4S managers and the Salvation Army  senior manager, along with interpreters, attended, received questions with a view to seek answers and  provide responses, and the incident went for about an hour and a half and was resolved peacefully, and  that's how I'd expect something like that to take place.  

 And I think it's important that - we're very happy for official groups to go into these centres, and they can  provide their reports and they can make their suggestions, and we'll make them in good faith and identify  the things we can address, and that's the way it should work. But anyone who goes in these centres, I  think, should be very mindful that any comments they make subsequent to those visits can obviously  impact on the way the facilities operate. And I would expect people to behave in an appropriate manner  and I think people to date have done just that.  

 JOURNALIST: Can you guarantee processing will begin in February? 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well, the initial phases that lead into processing have already begun at both Manus  Island and Nauru. And, as I have explained at previous press conferences, one of the major impediments  to that processing taking place previously was that the previous government was moving people on and off  the island, and so they get started, and then it would have to be interrupted, and then there'd be different  people there.  

 Also, there was a real problem that there was nowhere for people to be accommodated at the potential end  of processing. And, we've addressed that over the last 12, 13 weeks, and that has enabled those  processes to get moving again. So, where that's been criticism, I think, particularly of Papua New Guinea  and Nauru about that, I think that has been very unfair criticism.  

 I mean, they have been dealing with the circumstances of how policy was being operated previously, we've  stabilised that now and we can get on with it. 

 JOURNALIST: Where are those accommodations being built?  

 SCOTT MORRISON: East Lorengau on Manus, and a separate site has been [inaudible]. 

 JOURNALIST: So, will people be free, if they're found to be genuine refugees, are they to live anywhere in  Papua New Guinea?  

 SCOTT MORRISON: Yes, they will be located on Manus. 

 JOURNALIST: Are they free to leave Manus if they wish?  

 SCOTT MORRISON: Look, they're some of the arrangements we're still working through with the Papua  New Guinean Government. It's important to note that the resettlement arrangements, which the previous  government made much of, were a blank page when we came to government. And so they're matters that  we're still working through. But what we can assure people of is they can live freely on Manus, and any  further ability to move around is a matter that will continue to be worked through with the Government of  Papua New Guinea.  

 JOURNALIST: That's not really consistent, though, is it? If you're found to be genuine refugee, to be told  you can only live in a very small part of the country?  

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well, that's not what I said, what I said was the matters were still being worked  through with the Government of Papua New Guinea. And right now, no one has got to that stage, and so  we'll continue to work through those issues. I'm quite well aware of what the Convention says on that  matter.  

 JOURNALIST: And how long do you think it will take before you get an answer to that question?  

 SCOTT MORRISON: It will take as long as it takes to work through the issues with the Government of  Papua New Guinea. 

 JOURNALIST: Just going back to my question that you couldn't get a guarantee that processing will begin  in February, I mean this could still just be dragged on, couldn't it?  

 SCOTT MORRISON: Oh well, no that's - I believe we will be in that position, because we've already  commenced that initial process which gets to us that next phase. When the initial interviews and all of these  things are now taking place, and - as it should and so in many respects, I'd argue that processing has  already commenced. Because the process a fairly long one. It's already under way. A big part what have  we have to do is continue to capability build for those assessors, the local Papua New Guineans, who  undertake any assessments. And there's a lot of training that's going on for that purpose, and our officers  are up there doing exactly that and the assessments have to be conducted properly and we're making sure  that people have the requisite skills to be able to put that in place. So, you know, we look forward to that  happening.  We want the processing to happen and that's why we've put the facilities in place and people will make  their own decisions about what they want to do. Ultimately, if they're found not to be refugees, well, they'll  remain in those centres until they decide to go home or if they're able to be voluntarily returned, then they  will be. 

 Thank you. 

 

