---
title: "Migrant support work credit to Launceston community"
date: "2013-03-27"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392621
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2548237%22
---

 . 

 

 Migrant support work credit to Launceston  community  Wednesday, 27 March 2013 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Brendan O'Connor and Federal Member for  Bass Geoff Lyons today praised the valuable work undertaken at Launceston's  Migrant Resource Centre (MRC). 

 They saw first-hand, during a visit to the busy centre, the contribution staff members  were making to the settlement of migrants and humanitarian entrants in northern  Tasmania. 

 'The Gillard Government is committed to Australia's approach to multiculturalism and  to a national policy that reinforces an appreciation of the benefits our diverse  communities bring,' Mr O'Connor said. 

 'Migrant resource centres provide valuable services to migrants and refugees to help  them settle and become valuable members of local the community. 

 'It is clear the services provided here make a crucial difference to the lives of many  migrants and humanitarian entrants in Launceston and the surrounding region.' 

 Mr Lyons said the MRC services not only help migrants and humanitarian entrants  get on with their lives but enabled the broader society to benefit through the greater  participation of the new arrivals in the social and economic life of the region. 

 Mr Lyons was impressed Launceston MRC's focus on supporting youth. 

 'This early support is so important to helping young people make a positive start, and  to assist them in achieving full participation in their new community as soon as  possible,' Mr Lyons said. 

 'The homework and tutoring groups for primary and high school students had proved  popular as they use the expertise of volunteers to help and mentor children in their  new environments.' 

 Support for migrant and humanitarian entrant students is important as they are often  learning in a new language, developing an understanding of a new culture and  helping their families as they settle into new surroundings. 

 Success in school is often a key factor in helping students from migrant and refugee  backgrounds achieve long-term successful settlement. 

 'It is often through education that young migrants and their families are able to make  links with their new community,' Mr O'Connor said. 

 'This tutoring project is making a real difference not only to the lives of the young  people involved, but importantly also to their families and communities.' 

 Mr Lyons said a welcoming community is a key element in successful settlement  both for the new arrivals, and for the Launceston and northern Tasmanian  community itself. 

 

