---
title: "Budget 2013: Labor's boat blowouts top $10 billion, but still fall short of real cost"
date: "2013-05-15"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211394041
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2445964%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Labor's boat blowouts top $10 billion, but still fall short of real cost 

 Wednesday 15th May 2013 

 Labor’s boat budget blowout has now eclipsed $10 billion since they came to office and  abolished the successful border protection measures of the Howard Government, Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.      

 “Labor's budget boat blowout[1] is a whopping $4.1 billion since February and $5.3 billion  since last year's budget, taking to over $10 billion the total blow out on their failed border  protection policies since they came to office,” Mr Morrison said.      

 “Under Labor the number of illegal arrivals by boat has increased from two people per  month in 2007/08 to more than 2,000 per month this year (2012/13).      

 “At the same time the number of people in immigration detention who had arrived by boat  has increased from just four people when the Coalition left office, to more than 23,000 who  were in the detention network or on bridging visas in the community as of 10 May.      

 “Labor have lost control of our borders and lost control of the budget.       

 “Despite further billion dollar blowouts, Labor’s current budget still falls well short of what  the likely costs will be if Labor’s current failed border polices are permitted to continue.      

 “Labor’s claim that their asylum budget costs will fall by 50% over the forward estimates to  less than $1.5 billion under their failed policies is absurd.      

 “These projections underestimate the real cost of continuing with Labor’s failed border  policies. If Labor simply spends what they budgeted for next year over the forward  estimates there would be an additional blow out of $4 billion. Once again, Labor is just  making it up.      

 “While next year’s planned expenditure of more than $3 billion represents a new record,  these costs are reportedly based on an estimate of just 13,200 arrivals, which represents a  37% drop on arrivals to date this year, with six weeks still to go.      

 “Labor never learn from their mistakes, having serially underestimated the cost of their  border failures for years, they still turn up at every budget and every budget update and do  the same thing.      

 “If Labor was preparing their budget on the basis of a change of Government, then it may  make some sense. But their budget must be based on their policies, and under their failed  border policies, the boats will keep coming and the costs will keep rising,” Mr Morrison said.      

 [1]   Coalition estimate includes capital expenditure and increased recurrent expenditure to fund the  increase in the refugee intake to 20,000 from 13,750   

