---
title: "Coalition demands independent inquiry into Labor's immigration security scandal involving convicted terrorist"
date: "2013-05-31"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395171
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2494814%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration Scott Morrison  

 Coalition demands independent inquiry into Labor's immigration  security scandal involving convicted terrorist 

 Friday 31st May 2013 

 The Coalition today demanded that Immigration Minister Brendan O’Connor immediately establish an 

 independent inquiry into the mishandling of the detention of a convicted jihadist terrorist by his Department, 

 placed in low security family accommodation for asylum seekers at Inverbrackie in South Australia.  

 

 The Government was grossly negligent in keeping a known and convicted jihadist terrorist in low security 

 asylum seeker family accommodation at Inverbrackie for five months, a facility secured by a perimeter pool 

 fence and located adjacent to a defence force facility. This disgraceful incident is a scandal and demands a 

 full independent inquiry.  

 

 Minister O’Connor must immediately announce a full and independent inquiry will be held into this national 

 security scandal [suggested Terms of Reference attached below]. The Inquiry must receive full cooperation 

 and access and take evidence from all relevant agencies, Ministers and their offices, with usual protocols to 

 apply to sensitive information. If the Minister fails to initiate such an Inquiry, the Coalition will be demanding 

 a Parliamentary Inquiry into this incident, which would take evidence in camera, when Parliament returns 

 on Monday.  

 

 The subject of this case is a convicted terrorist whose crimes include premeditated murder, firearm and 

 explosives possession and destruction of property. He was a member of the terrorist organisation Egyptian 

 Islamic Jihad, which merged with Al Qaeda.  

 

 After arriving illegally in Australia by boat he was transferred to the Inverbrackie facility in May 2012. After 

 ASIO initially provided clearance for community release, under Labor’s ‘light touch’ security assessment for 

 illegal boat arrivals, DIAC was advised by ASIO on August 30 that the individual was subject to an Interpol 

 red notice related to his many convictions. This was confirmed to DIAC by the AFP on November 14, from 

 which time DIAC had full knowledge of his terrorist crimes.  

 

 For the next five months, Minister O’Connor’s Department allowed the known convicted terrorist to stay in 

 the low security family accommodation facility for asylum seekers in the Adelaide hills, right next door to an 

 Australian defence facility.  

 

 The Government’s response to date has offered no word of concern or explanation for this scandal.  

 

 With more than 10,000 people who arrived illegally by boat now in the community on bridging visas who at 

 best have received what ASIO itself describes as only a ‘light touch’ security assessment, we need to know 

 just how this was allowed to happen and make the changes needed to ensure it does not happen again.  

 

 We also need to know whether any other serious cases may have slipped through Labor’s light touch 

 immigration security net.  

 

 Yesterday in the Parliament the Prime Minister said she was satisfied with the security process applied to 

 illegal boat arrivals. This is not good enough.  

 

 Any Prime Minister who was aware of this case should have been outraged, not satisfied.  

 

 The fact the Government has already failed to initiate a full independent inquiry as was done in the case of 

 the Christmas Island and Villawood riots is a disgrace and demonstrates that this Government has just 

 given up on their border failures. 

 Download Attachment - 

 TOR_Parliamentary_Inquiry_into_an_Illegal_Maritime_Arrival_National_Security_Failure.495.pdf 

 

