---
title: "Empowering migrants and refugees on Brisbane's northside"
date: "2013-05-10"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435984
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2439017%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 Media release   Senator the Hon Kate Lundy Minister for Multicultural Affairs Minister for Sport Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10 May 2013  EMPOWERING MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES ON BRISBANE’S NORTHSIDE  Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy today thanked Brisbane’s Multicultural Community Centre (MCC) for its continued work helping newly arrived migrants and refugees settle in Australia under the government’s settlement grants program.   The program helps refugees and migrants develop self-reliance and enhance their ability to fully participate in their community as soon as possible after their arrival in Australia.   Through the program, MCC has assisted migrants and refugees in Brisbane’s northern suburbs to navigate and gain access to mainstream services since 2006.   “Improving people's ability to gain access to services, such as healthcare and education, empowers new arrivals to develop greater independence,” Senator Lundy said.    Under the program, MCC also teaches eligible clients practical life skills through information sessions on tenancy rights and responsibilities, banking practices, employment issues and family, relationship and social support issues.  “Whether it is improving people's ability to gain access to mainstream services or providing practical information on life in Australia, these services are all activities that empower new arrivals by building confidence, developing independence and improving life skills,” Senator Lundy said. “I thank MCC staff, particularly director Jeannie Mok, for their continued dedication in assisting newly arrived migrants and refugees to settle in north Brisbane.”   From July 1, a total of 102 new grants delivered through more than 100 organisations will be funded under the settlement grants program nationally.  During 2013-14, the government is providing $41.3 million to support new migrants and refugees through the settlement grants program. This includes $1.39 million in funding to support the implementation of recommendations of the Report of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers. A list of successful 2013-14 applicants is available online at                   www.immi.gov.au/living-in-australia/delivering-assistance/settlement-grants/funded-orgs.htm     

