---
title: "Labor must come clean on $5 billion asylum budget black hole"
date: "2013-05-09"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435889
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2431428%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Labor must come clean on $5 billion asylum budget black hole 

 Thursday 9th May 2013 

 With illegal arrivals by boat continuing to set new records, Treasurer Swan must come clean in next 

 week’s budget and reveal the true cost of Labor’s border protection failure that will hit taxpayers with 

 an extra $5 billion over the next three years, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott 

 Morrison said today.  

 

 “Labor is staring into a $5 billion asylum budget black hole over the next three years as a result of 

 their continued failures on our borders,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “This week Labor welcomed their 40,000th illegal arrival by boat and their 20,000th this financial year 

 alone.  

 

 “Despite Labor’s continuing record level of border failure, their current budget estimates, released in 

 February, project multi billion dollar savings over the next three years, based on their assumption, 

 confirmed by department officials, that they have already stopped the boats.  

 

 “It seems Labor are trying to base their budget on the implementation of the Coalition’s policies, rather 

 than their own.  

 

 “Labor have not stopped the boats and will not stop the boats, so they clearly cannot frame their 

 budget on the basis of already having done so. They must budget on the basis of their own record of 

 border failure.  

 

 “Next week, Treasurer Swan must put an end to Labor’s asylum budget fantasy and reveal the true 

 cost of sticking with Labor’s failed border policies.  

 

 “Simply by projecting expenditure at current year estimates for 2012/13, reveals a black hole in 

 Labor’s asylum budget over the next three years of $ 5 billion.  

 

 

 “Labor cannot expect to expend anything less over the next three years than what they are currently  

 spending.  

 

 “More than 20,000 people are now turning up a year and tens of thousands of people are on shore in 

 the system either in detention or drawing welfare while on bridging visas in the community. Labor’s 

 freeze on assessing asylum applications is only making matters worse, with well over 10,000 claims 

 outstanding.  

 

 “This is not the first time Labor have been out by $5 billion on their asylum budget.  

 

 “At the last election, Treasurer Swan presented his pre-election budget for 2010/11 saying the cost to 

 taxpayers would be $1.1 billion over the next four years. That cost is now estimated by the 

 Government to be $6.4 billion, a staggering $5.2 billion blowout since the last election alone.  

 

 “Australia cannot afford another three years of Labor’s failed border polices and the cost, chaos and 

 tragedy that has resulted.  

 “The Coalition has a proven policy alternative and the demonstrated resolve to stop the boats and if 

 elected in September we will move quickly to clean up the mess Labor has created on our borders,” 

 Mr Morrison said. 

 

 ***charts outlining Labor's $5 billion blow outs on boats attached below*** 

 Download Attachment - $5_billion_blow_out_graphs_[web].494.pdf 

 

