---
title: "Parliament celebrates Refugee Week 2013"
date: "2013-06-20"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396025
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2533873%22
---

 

 

 

 

 Media release   The Hon Brendan O’Connor MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Senator the Hon Kate Lundy Minister for Multicultural Affairs Minister for Sport Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation Senator the Hon Matt Thistlethwaite Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs                                                                                                                    19 June 2013  Parliament celebrates Refugee Week 2013  The Sierra Leone Community Cultural Dance Troupe joined Parliamentarians and refugee workers at Refugee Week celebrations at Parliament House today.  Refugee Week raises awareness about the issues affecting refugees and is a celebration of the contributions refugees make to the richness of multicultural Australia.  Overseen by the Refugee Council of Australia, Refugee Week celebrations are running Australia-wide throughout the week.  Australia is a vibrant multicultural society and since the end of the Second World War Australia has welcomed and successfully settled around 800 000 refugees and others in need of humanitarian assistance.  Mr O’Connor said Refugee Week is a time to acknowledge Australia’s long and proud history as a refugee resettlement nation.  “The contributions of people who have been resettled under Australia’s humanitarian program are enormous in economic, cultural and social spheres, and Refugee Week is an important occasion to pause and reflect on the role refugees have played in forging  Australia’s identity,” Mr O’Connor said  “This year’s Refugee Week theme, Restoring Hope, is an opportunity for Australians to reflect on the inspiring journeys many refugees have endured to build better lives in Australia,” Senator Lundy said.  “Australia’s successful settlement of around 800 000 refugees is a testament to the hard work and dedication of settlement workers and volunteers who have helped the world’s most vulnerable build new lives in our communities,” Senator Lundy said.  

 “Australia’s vibrant and diverse multicultural communities are our greatest asset.  Refugees who have settled in Australia contribute to our nation’s prosperity,” Senator  Thistlethwaite said.   

 Refugee Week incorporates the United Nation’s World Refugee Day on 20 June.   Refugee Week celebrations will run nation-wide until 22 June 2013. 

 

 Media contact:        Minister O’Connor’s Office Kylie Skotnicki 0408 823 604  Minister Lundy’s Office 62 77 7977                                      Parliamentary Secretary Thistlethwaite BJ Jafari 0431 549 220 

 

