---
title: "Greens celebrate election of new Victorian Senator, re-election of Senator Hanson-Young"
date: "2013-10-01"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211444927
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2761326%22
---

 Greens celebrate election of new Victorian Senator, re-election of Senator Hanson-Young   

 The Australian Greens are today celebrating the election of a new Senator in Victoria, Janet Rice.   

 “I am delighted that Janet Rice will be joining our strong Greens team in Canberra, reinforced today  with the re-election of Senator Sarah Hanson-Young in South Australia,” Australian Greens Leader  Senator Christine Milne said.   

 “We have a huge job ahead of us standing up to the excesses of Tony Abbott and we need Janet  Rice’s and Sarah Hanson-Young’s experience and passion.”   

 Senator-elect Janet Rice said: “I feel very privileged to have been elected as a Senator for Victoria  and to be joining our Greens team in Canberra.   

 “Almost 300 000 people who voted for The Greens in Victoria. I really want to thank them, and  pledge that I intend to truly be a politician who represents them and is their voice in Parliament.   

 “I aim to actively engage with the community, and campaign side by side with them on the issues  that matter to us all.   

 “These issues include urgent action on climate change, support for public transport, walking and  cycling and campaigning against the East West tollway, care and compassion for refugees, protecting  our forests, protecting our farmland and water supplies from coal seam gas mining,  a better deal for  the unemployed and single parents, and equal marriage.”   

 Ms Rice’s diverse career has included being a Councillor and Mayor, transport campaigner and local  government transport planner, community engagement specialist and environment campaigner. She  was one of the founding members of The Greens in Victoria. Ms Rice will attend the declaration of  the poll tomorrow at 10am.   

 At her press conference earlier today Senator Hanson-Young reaffirmed her commitments to  reconnecting with voters to stand up to Tony Abbott’s dangerous policies.   

 Media contacts:  Senator Milne - Peter Stahel 0437 587 562  Janet Rice - 03 9602 1141   

