---
title: "Another boat as smugglers clear monsoon backlog"
date: "2013-02-10"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390319
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2723293%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ANOTHER BOAT AS SMUGGLERS CLEAR  MONSOON BACKLOG February 03, 2013

 The arrival of another illegal boat, with 135 people on board, signals a break in the weather as people smugglers attempt to  clear  their  monsoon  backlog  in  Indonesia,  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 "A break in the weather has seen people smugglers move quickly to get their backlog of clients arriving into Indonesia  during the monsoon onto the boats, with just under 200 people turning up in the past few days," Mr Morrison said.

 "The only deterrent to illegal boats arriving in Australia over the summer has been the weather. Yet even during this  monsoon season there was a record number of illegal arrivals in January.

 "Australia doesn't need yet another Labor Minister to babysit their border policy failures, we need a change of Government  with the resolve and full suite of proven Coalition measures to stop the boats," Mr Morrison said.

 Mr  Keenan  said:  “2  boats,  carrying  nearly  200  passengers,  have  arrived  in  the  last  24  hours  as  the  people  smugglers closing down sale picks up momentum.

 "Under  a  Labor  Government  Australia’s  borders  are  weakened  making  it  easier  for  them  to  be  penetrated  by  criminal syndicates, including people smugglers.

 “The Australian people will hold this Government to account for their disastrous mismanagement of our borders.

 “The  Coalition  has  stopped  the  boats  before  and  will  stop  them  again  because  we  have  the  tough  border  protection policies needed to put an end to this insidious trade,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 ANOTHER BOAT AS SMUGGLERS CLEAR MONSOON BACKLOG > Michael ...

 13/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

