---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Macquarie University, Macquarie Park: 12 August 2013: Manufacturing Skills Plus; GST; Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal Outlook; Asylum seekers; Polls."
date: "2013-08-12"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Manufacturing Skills Plus"
  - "GST"
  - "Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal Outlook"
  - "Asylum seekers"
  - "Polls."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398673
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2660231%22
---

 

 

  Campaign Transcript    

 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, MINISTER KIM CARR AND LABOR  CANDIDATE FOR BENNELONG JASON YAT-SEN LI  DOORSTOP  MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY, MACQUARIE PARK 

 12 AUGUST 2013    

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________ 

 

 Subjects: Manufacturing Skills Plus; GST; Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal  Outlook; Asylum seekers; Polls.  _____________________________________________________________  

 

 PM: It’s great to be here at Macquarie University at the Australian Hearing Hub with  the Minister for Innovation, Science and Research, my good friend Kim Carr, as well  as my good friend Jason Yat-Sen Li, who is our candidate for Bennelong. Vice-Chancellor, thank you for taking us through this centre this morning. We are very  proud of it. We've invested in this place. And you see such extraordinary research  and good work under way here today and for full disclosure I'm using notes also  today, if you just take your attention to that, consistent with my normal practice of  using notes. I prefer to be across the detail wherever I can.     

 This is a great centre, a really good centre. I remember with Kim way back when we  decided to invest $40 million into the construction of the Australian engineering hub.  What I have seen this morning is an extraordinary reflection of the high quality work  which is under way here. This is, I’m advised, one of the best centres in the world.  And when it comes to hearing sciences it is helping to make Australia a genuine  world leader in this area of critical research. This is research which affects so many  hearing impaired folk right around the world, right around Australia, including little  kids. So it's been an honour, actually, to mix with some of the professionals that work  here this morning and see terrific things that they are doing.     

 There are five core reasons why we are seeking support from the Australian people  for this upcoming election in building Australia's future. Number one, we believe in  building the new industries of the future to adjust for the end of the mining boom and  through those new industries to create the new jobs of the future. Number two, we  believe in building the best education system in the world and that means  implementing our Better Schools Plan right across the country so that we have the  one-on-one attention which young Australians need in the classroom, so that they  can end up here in places like the hearing hub with the sorts of professional skills  which are needed.     

 Number three, we believe in maintaining a first-class health and hospital system that  caters for our ageing population, but on top of that building Australia's first  DisabilityCare system. Number four is we believe in building for the future through a  National Broadband Network. I look at all the young researchers here today, if  they're not linked in with high speed, high reliability, lowest cost possible broadband  then frankly they can never be cooking with gas. It's part and parcel of how research  is done these days. We are passionate about that as a building block for Australia's  economic future.     

 Number five is building, of course, a clean energy future for Australia. I looked at  some figures recently which said, for example, on solar panels on roofs - I think  when we were elected to office, Kim, we had about 7 to 10,000 houses with solar  panels, I stand to be corrected. Now there's more than a million. This is all helping to  build a clean energy future as well as deal with the challenge of global warming. To  do all these things and to build our future, we need a new way of approaching these  challenges as well.     

 What I'm here to do today is to announce another investment in how we create the  new industries and new jobs of the future. Now that we see the end of the China  mining boom in sight. As I noted before, this is a world-class facility for collaborative  research into hearing and related speech and language disorders. An example of the  potential for jobs to be created through our high tech industries. I've always said  before I never want to be the Prime Minister of a country that doesn't make things  any more. You know something, we've got about just under a million Australians who  are working in manufacturing. Manufacturing is the end point of innovation and  research and technical application and venture capital to make it all work. We are in  this country making extraordinary devices to assist with people's hearing disorders  and so much of the research is done here.     

 Manufacturing is not just about yesterday, manufacturing is also about tomorrow and  it's built on these pillars of innovation, research and commercial application.  Therefore, we believe what we need for the future of our manufacturing is to  continue to move up the value added chain into high tech, high skill sectors and for  all of our workers to be able to lift their skills on the way through. So today, I  announce that if our Government is returned to office, we'll invest $35.6 million  working with business and institutions like this to begin to retain our manufacturing  workforce for the future. Our Manufacturing Skills Plus program will help nearly 7,000  new and existing manufacturing workers to develop the skills they need for the new  industries of the future. We want to help our companies move from low skilled, low  technology manufacturing to high skilled, high tech sectors, where we will find the  jobs of the future.     

 This initiative builds on the $35 million Step into Skills initiative I announced  yesterday. The bottom line is this: you can't create the jobs of the future unless  you're investing in the skills of the future. That's what this Government is about -  building our country's future, brick by brick, wall by wall, in order to make sure that  we have a strong house for the nation into the future.     

 There is a further announcement I would like to make today as well. That is, the  announcement of the establishment of a medical technology innovation partnership 

 here at Macquarie University bringing together researchers and industry. Medical  technology is a key industry for the future. One of the new industries, employers for  the future. Worldwide, it's a $300 billion business. The success stories, we know are  right across Australia. This is one of the 12 innovation partnerships around the  nation. Our Government will boost funding for these partnerships by $12 million. We  have a plan to deal with the end, therefore, of the China resources boom and  building the skills which the manufacturing workforce needs for the future is part of  that. And building the skills we also need through innovative partnerships like the  one here at the Australian hearing hub and those like it around the country are just  as important.    

 I conclude just by saying this, we believe in building and investing in the future. It  seems, however, that Mr Abbott is more interested in cutting and cutting for the  future. There’s a big difference there. I believe we need to focus on this squarely as  we move into the final month of this election campaign. We believe that you've got to  invest in the future, but what I see however is Mr Abbott still not being upfront about  where his $70 billion worth of cuts will come in terms of education, health and of  course jobs.    

 I fear that the reason for this is that Mr Abbott wants to keep all this under wraps and  not come clear about where his $70 billion worth of cuts will happen because he is  frightened about what the people of Australia might do if they found out. Mr Abbott  has today however gone one step further. Mr Abbott today says that he wants to  emulate Jeff Kennett's golden age in Victoria, nation-wide. That’s what he said. He  regards Jeff Kennett as representing a golden age and he therefore embraces that,  we presume, as his model for the future. Let me say a thing about that in terms of  the model he would embrace. In the period Mr Kennett was Premier of Victoria, 300  public schools were closed, 9,000 teachers and school staff were sacked, 3,500  nurses were sacked, 17 hospitals were closed, 800 police officers were sacked,  45,000 public servants were sacked and unemployment peaked at 12.3 per cent,  and state taxes ended up being the second highest in Australia. So if that is the  golden age that Mr Abbott embraces for Australia's future, I think the people of  Australia will legitimately ask, where are your $70 billion worth of cuts going to fall?     

 On top of this we also have a call to arms from the Liberal National Party Premier of  Queensland saying, and I see it reported in the press today, that a Queensland style  of austerity measures program is working in Queensland and calling upon Mr Abbott  to do the same. What has happened in all of these places, whether it’s Queensland,  Victoria under Premier Kennett, and what Mr Abbott is proposing is a Commission of  Audit, no details attached, if they are elected. Then, the cuts and the cuts and the  cuts roll in. I worry about that the level of the general economy, because if you cut  that much, the real risk is that you will plunge the economy into recession and that  will have an effect on all jobs. But particularly when you embrace Mr Kennett's  golden age, that's Mr Abbott's words, golden age in Victoria as I presume a model  for the future, I think we need to know precisely where that goes. So what’s our  vision for building Australia’s future - it’s about building the nurture by investing in the  future industries and jobs we'll need with the end of the China mining boom.  Whereas Mr Abbott's vision is one of cut, cut and more cuts, without giving us the  details.     

 I will turn briefly to Minister Carr on this program here, briefly to Jason, then we'll  take your questions.    

 KIM CARR: Thank you Prime Minister. We have a new way, a new way to assist this  country move to a brighter and more prosperous future. What this Centre shows is  that this Government has a commitment to ensuring that our scientists and  researchers have the very best kit this country can afford. And in return, we ask of  our scientists and our researchers to work with us to help us rebuild this country, to  prepare for the future, to prepare the jobs for the future. And that's exactly what's  going on. And today we're announcing new measures to see that that happens. This  is what we say is about blue-collar meeting white coat.     

 This is an opportunity here for us to be able to build on the strengths of this country,  its intellectual firepower, to have the very best researchers in the world come and  study here, ensure we use the best equipment this country can afford and then build  the jobs for the future. Medical instruments is one of those areas. 19,000 people  currently employed in these industries. We think this is an area in which we can grow  substantially, $300 billion worth of business out there in the world and we want a cut  of it. We want to ensure that the very best is able to be produced here in Australia so  that people buy Australian at home and abroad.     

 This facility highlights what can be done. We bring the very best of all our different  agencies, the CSIRO, the ARC, Australian Hearing, we bring them together with the  universities to be able to get the very best talent this country has and mobilise it to  produce the jobs for the future. Prime Minister, you mentioned that the Opposition is  still continuing to hide its cuts. I can tell you where $1 billion of those cuts will come  from, because they've indicated that they would wish to remove the underpinnings of  programs such as this, remove the precincts program. $1 billion jobs plan would go  out the window under Mr Abbott. Furthermore, Enterprise Connect which is a very,  very important instrument, $150 million program which helps sustain up to 25,000  businesses in this country at this time, would also go. There is just one example of  what cuts would mean if we adopted the Kennett-style approach to government in  Australia.    

 PM: Thank you very much Kim. Jason for just a minute or two on your ideas locally.    

 JASON YAT-SEN LI: Thank you Prime Minister. I'm delighted and I think it's entirely  fitting that these announcements should happen in the electorate of Bennelong. We  have a vision for Bennelong as the Silicon Valley of Australia, as a hub of innovation,  economic growth and local jobs. We're holding an event here at Macquarie Uni on  the 28th of August, where we're bringing the best minds together to come up with a  strategy to deliver that vision.    

 PM: Thanks very much Jason and having been around Macquarie University a bit in  the past, in this precinct. There is, per cubic meter of space, there is a whole bunch  of really bright people out here. So when it comes to building a Silicon Valley in  Australia, I believe you are starting with the absolute right ingredients. Over to you  folks.   

 JOURNALIST: On the GST, you ruled that out of the Henry Tax Review. Negative  gearing wasn't ruled out. Do you have a secret agenda to scrap negative gearing?     

 PM: No.    

 JOURNALIST: PEFO is coming out tomorrow. Do you expect that the numbers in  PEFO will be very different to the numbers released in the economic statement a  released in statement a few weeks ago. And also, you've obviously got policy  costings as well. When are we going to see your policy costings and - that will do for  starters?    

 PM: Well, I like a level playing field, Sid. That's good. You saw with the economic  statement a week or so ago, a clear statement involving lots of hard decisions on  how we return the budget to surplus over time. Very clear both on the revenue side  and on the expenditure side and some of these have been quite politically  controversial and some of them unpopular, but we believe in taking those hard  decisions. I think for the future Sid, as we release further policies, you should  assume that there will be a full reconciliation of the costings on the way through, but  we start with a very transparent position about how we intend to return the budget to  surplus over time without engaging in a massive $70 billion set of cuts.     

 The challenge for our opponents, 24 hours out from PEFO - Pre-Election Economic  and Fiscal Outlook - is to level with the Australian people about where the $70 billion  worth of cuts will come. It’s a pretty simple request. Then if there are subsequent  initiatives in the campaign, fine, put them out and indicate how they will be funded. I  think that's the right and fair way.     

 JOURNALIST: The tertiary staff union is using money to help fund Independent and  Greens’ candidates in this election, rather than Labor, because they're angry about  tertiary education funding cuts. What will you do to address those concerns?   

 PM: One thing I just say, before I turn to Kim to help answer this question, is when I  look across Australia, I mentioned this in the debate last night, one of the things I'm  very proud of is we now have 190,000 more kids in university across Australia than  we did when we first came to office. That's a huge investment and when we've  uncapped university places we've accompanied that with a parallel strong investment  with universities. Kim on the specific question.    

 KIM CARR: Can I just say to you, we have record levels of science and research  investment in this country by the Australian Government. Record levels of  investment in higher education for undergraduate programs. A university such as  this, on average, would increase its funding, in terms of direct funding to the  university by 50 per cent. We've got 190,000 extra places in the system. So in terms  of our record of achievement, I think it stands second to none in the history of the  Commonwealth of Australia. If the national tertiary Education Union wants to vote for  the Greens, that's their position but they'll never be able to form a government. All  they’ll be able to do is form a protest movement. We're in the business of forming a  government and reshaping the higher education agenda in this country, the research  agenda in this country, the science agenda in this country.    

 JOURNALIST:  Two Somali asylum seekers have been found making their way from  PNG through the Torres Straight on their way to Australia. Are Campbell Newman's  fears being realised and is this part of our border secure?   

 PM: I will allow the Immigration Minister to answer those questions a bit later in the  day in detail on the ones that you raise. But broadly, what I said when we launched  the regional resettlement arrangement was that what's fundamental here is a clear-cut message to people smugglers and those who draw upon their services, which is  if you seek to bring people to Australia by boat, they will not be allowed to be settled  in Australia.    

 That's why we have entered into an agreement with Papua New Guinea for people to  be not just assessed there but also to be settled there if they're proven to be  migrants. If they're proven to be bona fide refugees. I always said there's always  going to be bumps in the road in the implementation. I said that upfront. But I also  note based on the most recent data that in the month or so since we've had this  policy being implemented, I'm advised that the number of boat arrivals is down by  about 30 per cent. So I think we take this one step at a time. Understanding that this  is a challenge which will face any government of Australia. I believe we put the right  policy forward.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd you made a joke of bringing your notes along to the press  conference today, but do you acknowledge at all that you did make a mistake last  night by taking notes to the lectern? And that that is seen by some people as a  breach of trust?   

 PM: I think what's fair to say is that if someone had said to me that it was not proper  to take notes along to a debate, then sure, that's fine. I was in receipt of no such  advice. It would be rather odd if you went to a platform watched by several millions of  people thinking you could do something on the sly. You can't. So I acted in good  faith. I think everyone would accept that.     

 Second thing is, I seem to remember when I debated Mr Howard in 2007, I had  notes with me then. I think most times I stand before you folks I carry notes with me.  There's a reason for that. I prefer to be as accurate as I can and so when people  present data like they did last night about how terrible labour productivity is under the  Fair Work Act then what I can say, well actually if you look at the data about  productivity under the Fair Work Act versus WorkChoices it's better rather than  worse. The other thing is there is a limit to how much you can scribble down on the  palm of your hand, there is a limit of how many of Mr Abbott's three word slogans  you can actually get there to actually remember them all. So you do need notes.   

 JOURNALIST: Talking about future measures in science. Your candidate for Perth  today, Alannah MacTiernan, has said that Australia should look at nuclear power as  a future option. Is that something that you would consider? And a second question,  is the Victorian right of the ALP at war and are you confident that your candidate or  most likely candidate Claire O'Neill, that no dirt will emerge against her?   

 PM: I think the first thing to say is that everybody in the Labor Party is free to put  their views on the question of Australia's energy mix. I could tell what you the 

 Australian Government's policy is and it does not involve nuclear power. These  matters are regularly debated and discussed at our national conferences and that’s  as it should be in a democratically run party.     

 On the question of Victorian pre-selections, this is a matter which will be dealt with  by the National Executive of the Australian Labor Party and I'm sure, as is usual,  these will be the subject of robust discussions and debate about who's the most  appropriate person. What I would say is that when it comes to the good folk of  Victoria and the good folk who reside in the seat of Hotham, we want to be able to  put the best candidate forward. I have never known anyone nominated for political  office who has not had some things thrown at them, which then subsequently prove  to be completely false. That's why you have to be very cautious about these things  on the way through.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd today's Newspoll, it's probably the fourth or fifth survey  which shows that Labor is behind and your personal approval is slipping. Is the  honeymoon over?   

 PM: What I’d just say is I said on day one as we called the election, we entered this  election for September the 7th, as the underdog. Nothing has changed. If you look at  these polls, 48, 49, 50, depending on the day, depending on the poll, I think the key  thing is this: the Australian people will be the good judges of who should be the  Prime Minister of the country. When we get to September 7, there's about a month to  go in this election campaign.     

 I'm a positive sort of guy, with a positive set of plans for the country's future and I'm  not fazed by any of this. I've been around for a bit, mate. I've been around for a few  things somewhat more challenging than this as well so we will continue to put our  best foot forward. But I think the key thing is just contrasting on the way through,  we've put forward how we intend to build a better Australia for the future. It's very  plain. We believe in diversifying the economy.    

 Mr Abbott seemed to be saying last night that the mining sector is where he thinks  we should still have our principal focus, if I read him correctly. I don’t think that’s  sustainable, we need to diversify, I’ve explained how we’d seek to diversify because  I don’t think we can have all our eggs in one basket because we need to create  these new jobs in the future. How we intend to build a world class education system  through the Better Schools Plan which he’s described as a con, how we intend to  build the health and hospitals system for the future which remains world class given  that his record is cutting a billion dollars out of public spending, how we’re building a  National Broadband Network for the future which he would plan to disconnect. And  how we are building a clean energy future given that Mr Abbott has said he’d  basically tear the emissions trading scheme into little pieces given I think in his heart  of hearts he remains, at best, a climate change sceptic if not worse.    

 KIM CARR: Can I just add something, we don’t normally comment on polls but I do  think it’s worth a mention. What we’ve seen is quite ugly negative polls, negative  advertisement, financed by the tobacco industry and those of us who have some  experience in these matters know that negative politics does have an impact and  they have clearly have had some impact. I think we can overcome them, but I don’t 

 think that for a moment you should be deluded by thinking that the negative  campaign that’s been run has not had some impact. We will overcome it. We are in  the business of arguing the case for the future of Australia and I think that’s where  the electorate will put its money in the end.    

 JOURNALIST: My point before was do you accept that things can be included in  your review that doesn’t mean you’re necessarily going to change them?    

 PM: What I’d say about that is pretty basic, is that on something as fundamental as  the Goods and Services Tax, which affects every single Australian, every single  Australian because it’s 10 per cent on top of everything you buy really outside of  food with a few other exceptions as well. We have taken the view, had a long debate  about this internally with the Government that that’s not on the table because it goes  to cost of living pressures faced by families who themselves are finding it tough to  make their budgets meet. So where I don’t get Mr Abbott’s logic last night is this, if  on the one hand you’re not going to touch the Goods and Services Tax then why are  you making the Goods and Services Tax part of our tax review.     

 JOURNALIST: (interrupts)     

 PM: this is just so basic for everybody, everyone is affected by the Goods and  Services Tax, everyone. Let me give you another example, Mr Abbott said last night  that he couldn’t change the Goods and Services Tax unless you’ve got the  agreement of all the state Premiers. Well that’s just not true, that arrangement  exists..    

 JOURNALIST: (interrupts)     

 PM: The Goods and Services Tax exists through an intergovernmental agreement  which is entrenched in Commonwealth Government legislation and therefore if the  future Australian Government wants to change that legislation it can by putting a Bill  through the House of Representatives, passing it and putting it through the Senate.  It’s a simple as that. So what I’m saying is that his core argument that there is not a  problem because everyone would have to agree is actually a false argument so I’m  just saying that it’s a big impact on cost of living pressures for families across the  country.     

 I think the question that needs to be answered is if Mr Abbott is and he said last night  he doesn’t want to change the Goods and Services Tax then why is it part of the  review. One final thing on the Goods and Services Tax, in Perth he has said he  wants to make sure that WA gets a bigger slice of the Goods and Services Tax.  That’s what he says in certain discussions in Perth and that’s one of the reasons why  we have sought to invest more in WA in infrastructure in order to assist our West  Australian friends with some of the big infrastructure challenges they face. At the  same time in Tasmania he’s saying that of course that distribution of the Goods and  Services Tax wouldn’t be affected, wouldn’t be affected at all. Now you can’t do one  without the other so all I’m saying is, it's time to be upfront about what his plans on  the Goods and Services Tax.     

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 

 

 PM: Yeah well today is the last day for enrolling to vote for the election on  September the 7th. If you haven't enrolled today it closes at 8pm. So whether you're  going to vote for Mr Abbott or vote for me at the next election, it's really important  that every Australian has their say, every Australian citizen should enrol and young  people who are on the roll for the first time or if they've been changing their address,  go online, find the Australian Electoral Commission website and you can enrol on-line. You don't have to toddle off to the post office again.    

 JOURNALIST: Nathan Bracken is running as an independent in the seat of Dobell.  Will you be talking to him about preference deals?    

 PM: anything concerning preferences in this election is dealt with by National  Secretary or the relevant state secretaries so I’ll leave all that there. Anyone here  who hasn’t had a question? Yes mate.    

 JOURNALIST: You've been accused by the Coalition of playing politics on gay  marriage.    

 PM: Do you say I’ve been accused of playing politics by the Coalition? That’s terrific.  You know something I was very upfront way before I returned to the Prime  Ministership about why I changed my position on marriage equality. I’ve told people  why I’ve adopted that position and the reasons for it, got attacked left right and  centre at the time and supported by others. Secondly we get asked a question at the  end of the debate last night, that is, what's your position and what are you going to  do about it? I just answered the question directly. I support marriage equality. I  believe that if are going to bring about that change, then we're going to need to have  a free vote in the Parliament, which our party will provide but regrettably, Mr Abbott  is not providing to his own members.    

 I also said that in the first 100 days of our Government being returned, if we are  returned, is that legislation will come forward with the objective of legalising same-sex marriage because, frankly, in the year 2013 I think the time has come to put this  acrimonious debate behind us. When I meet same sex couples across Australia, as I  had in recent years and that had a profound effect on my thinking, as I have  discussed the matter with them. I believe that under the ceremonies provided by a  secular state, there should be no impediment for their relationships to be reflected as  that of marriage. The churches are still free to conduct religious ceremonies which  distinguish themselves from those of the state and which marriage is still regarded  as between a men and a woman. I think I had a question here.    

 JOURNALIST: I thought I’d ask you about Sydney airport. Last night you said it  wasn’t the only airport in the country. Do you understand the importance of it as a  gateway to this city and would you personally take it up and would you consider that  Anthony Albanese may have a conflict of interest because his electorate is affected  by aircraft noise?    

 PM: Sydney Airport is a critical piece of the nation's infrastructure, like all our major  airports are whether it's Tullamarine or Brisbane Airport, but because Sydney is the  nation's gateway, of course, it is the most critical of all. The point I was making last 

 night was about the productivity for the nation is that it's a bigger equation than  Sydney Airport. The point I was making last night about productivity for the nation is  that it is a bigger equation than Sydney airport.     

 Secondly the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister for Infrastructure has made absolutely  plain that he believes that construction on a second airport site would need to  commence in the next term of the Parliament and I understand from his earlier  comments that there is still the completion of a specific survey of the Wilton site as  one of those to be considered. For the future, it's big for Sydney. I understand that.  On the conflict question I have known Minister Albanese for a long, long time. He is a  Member of Parliament who in my experience will put the national interest first and he  wants to make sure that this decision is got right. I’ll take one before I go.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you acknowledge that if your figures from the budget update don't  match up PEFO figures that will be an issue of trust for the Australian voters?     

 PM: We work with the data we’re given and I don’t know what your alternative  expectation would be. The Treasury provides its best analysis of revenue  projections. We act within that. That's the proper way in which government is done.  You can't sort of have some plan in the back of your pocket, what if this projection is  wrong or that projection is wrong so we operate honestly on the basis of the data we  are given. Can I just suggest to the country at large that we have adhered to the  disciplines based on the numbers we are given. I would just request, I would just  request that Mr Abbott be subjected to the same discipline.     

 Remember it was Peter Costello, the former Liberal Treasurer of Australia who  brought in this discipline. I think it's the correct discipline, it tries to put us all on to a  level playing field about your disciplines on revenue and expenditure. It’s the right  way to go and I fully support it, he brought that back in I think after the 1996 election.   It's something we've all adhered to since and what I am stunned about is Mr  Abbott's continued determination to keep his $70 billion worth of cuts to jobs,  education and health under wraps for political reasons, not for good financial  economic reasons. Having said all that folks, I think I better zip.    

 ENDS    

 

 Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111   www.alp.org.au     

 Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor, 5/9 Sydney Avenue, Barton, ACT, 2600   

