---
title: "Coalition cuts would decimate legal services and plunge courts into chaos"
date: "2013-09-06"
creators:
  - "Dreyfus, Mark"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211438581
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2715653%22
---

 

 

 Campaign Media Release 

 Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus    

 COALITION CUTS WOULD DECIMATE LEGAL SERVICES AND PLUNGE  COURTS INTO CHAOS    

 The Coalition’s plan to rip $30 million from the Family Court over the next four years  would lead to chaos for families in crisis and provide access to justice only for those  who could afford it. 

 Tony Abbott and his legal spokesman, George Brandis, need to explain the real  meaning of the Coalition’s plan to “streamline Family Court processes”.  

 These huge funding cuts would mean fewer judges, decimated services and a  reduction of court circuits in regional areas. At the same time, the Coalition would  swamp the High Court with refugee appeals by cutting other avenues of review. 

 One thing is certain - cutting court resources will not address Mr Brandis’ previously  claimed desire to improve access to justice. 

 By slashing $30 million from the Family Court, the Coalition would reverse the  benefits of Federal Labor’s injection of $38 million into the federal courts over four  years.  

 Federal Labor’s increase has strengthened the federal court system and improved  court services, especially for families. Federal Labor has also provided a funding  increase to rebuild legal assistance services to meet growing demand in the  community. These services were cut savagely under the previous Howard  Government and the Coalition is clearly planning to cut them again. 

 In June, in the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee report into court  fees, Coalition senators criticised the Government for not passing on the entire  amount of revenue raised by court fee increases to the courts.  

 Now it is revealed the Coalition would pocket all of the fee increase while cutting  services to the community. 

 These cuts expose the emptiness of Mr Brandis’ rhetoric on justice as a human right  and his ‘concern’ about underfunding. The Coalition must be held to account.  

 

 MELBOURNE   6 SEPTEMBER 2013 

 

