---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Perth: 4 April 2013: Sri Lankan returns; Manus Island transfers; 457 visas"
date: "2013-04-04"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Sri Lankan returns"
  - "Manus Island transfers"
  - "457 visas"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392801
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2349585%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP    

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  PERTH  THURSDAY, 4 APRIL 2013   

 SUBJECT: SRI LANKAN RETURNS, MANUS ISLAND TRANSFERS, 457 VISAS   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:    Thanks very much for coming. Today I can report that last night a plane of  20 people who arrived in an irregular fashion recently were returned to Colombo. Twenty people  who did not engage the international obligations of Australia as a signatory to the convention. This  takes the total returns to 963 since 13 August last year to Sri Lanka, and of course the large bulk of  those returned were returned involuntarily.   

 This sends the most powerful message one can send to those people who are looking to come in a  dangerous fashion to Australia. This sends a most powerful message to those people who will get on  unseaworthy vessels that they should not be giving money to people smugglers. They should not be  endangering their lives at sea because indeed if they will not engage our international obligations  under the convention, they will be returned home as quickly as possible.   

 We will continue to be ensuring that we return people in this manner so that people do not risk their  lives at sea. We've seen too many fatalities already. We've seen too many people seek to come here  but are not in fact ones who would exercise or engage our international obligations, and for that  reason they will be returned home.   

 Of course we'd like to see other ways in which we can do this. Sri Lanka is primarily a country of  origin and we appreciate the work and partnership with Sri Lanka in helping us deal with this  particular matter. But of course we would also like to see the Malaysian arrangement implemented.  This would allow us to send people who do not…who should not be coming in that fashion to  Malaysia, which I believe will deter people getting on dangerous vessels, will undermine the people  smugglers business model, which of course is to say that if you get into Australian waters, you get to  stay in Australia. So that's very important news.    

 The other thing I should also report this morning is that there were 20 people transferred to the  processing centre on Manus Province in PNG over the last…just recently. That of course is another  reason why people have to understand that if they seek to take the irregular path by getting on  unseaworthy vessels they may well end up in processing centres on Nauru or in PNG.   

 And finally I'd like to just report, of course, the recent data on 457s. The 457 increase continues. The  fact is, there's been a 21 per cent increase in 457s this year compared with February last year.  There's an almost 10 per cent increase since last month, which completely and utterly underlines the  need to bring about the reforms so that the 457 visa is used for the purposes it was constructed,  which of course is to fill temporary shortages.    

 We are of the view that 457s are used properly by most employers. We are of the view that you  need a temporary skill stream to respond to shortages in sectors across this country. But what we do  not accept is people should be using 457s in a manner that is contrary to the intentions of that  scheme. What we do not accept is that the 457s should be brought in to reduce employment  conditions and reduce the nominal and real rates of pay of local workers.   

 What we do not accept is that 457s should be used instead of local workers who are actually able to  fulfil or discharge the functions of that particular job. What we do not accept is that 457s should be  the replacement for training our young people to fill the jobs, whether they be apprentices or  whether they be graduates, so that they can become trades people and so that they can become  professionals in their profession.   

 So, again, I say to those…those naysayers and critics of the reforms that there is clear evidence that  the increase in 457s is running much faster than the employment rate and I think the other thing  that we have to totally and utterly demolish is the myth that this is about the mining states. In fact  the fastest increase around Australia in 457 growth is happening in order of increase in Tasmania,  South Australia and New South Wales.    

 It is not happening in the mining sector specifically. It's not happening in Western Australia faster  than those areas. In fact it's not happening in Queensland. It's happening in the areas where there is  the highest unemployment rate. It's happening in the three states where their unemployment rate is  actually higher than the national average. That means there is something amiss with the current  application of the 457 scheme, and for that reason the Government calls upon those critics to  reassess their position and support the reforms.    

 Finally, I might want to say…I want to say this. It's becoming apparent that commentators in the  media and the Liberal Party and others are - that oppose the 457 reforms, are exactly the same  people who spent years supporting, and still support Work Choices. And the reason is clear; if you  misuse and abuse 457s you will undermine employment conditions; if you misuse and abuse 457s  you are able to undermine employment security of local workers.   

 The Gillard Government believes that local workers, Australian citizens and permanent residents  deserve our support first and once that has been discharged, of course we should be looking at  overseas workers to fill the needs.   

 Finally I'd like to say that this is a debate about the temporary skill shortage scheme. This in no way  changes our position that we need to continue to have significant levels of immigration, two-thirds  of which will be skilled migrants that help build this country, help enhance our economy and help us  to be the diverse and wonderful country that we are.    

 I'm happy to take questions.   

 QUESTION:                        On refugees, how quickly are you able to process claims and determine  whether people are allowed to stay or need to be sent back?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:    Well, that varies on, of course, each circumstance, but each person that has  sought a refugee status of course is processed. I can confirm that none of the explanations provided  to our officials from the 20 that were returned to Colombo engaged our international obligations  under the convention.   

 QUESTION:                        Are you happy with the time it's taken?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:    I'm happy that we have discharged our responsibilities as a country that's a  signatory to the convention. I'm very happy that we have done what we need to do, and I'm also  happy that we do not allow people to seek to use the convention in a manner that it wasn't  intended. And that is that if of course you seek protection under that convention, then of course  that is something that the Australian Government will consider pursuant to our obligations under  the convention.   

 But if you do not, if you are seeking to come here for another purpose, then of course you will not  be part of the people that we place into the humanitarian program for refugee settlement.   

 QUESTION:                        But how can you really say that you're sending a powerful message, I mean  you've sent back over 900 since August last year. We had more arrivals than that last month.   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:    We've sent more people back in this manner than the entire period of the  Howard Government. This is the most effective means we can do that, of course what we'd seek to  do - we could return more and we would deter people getting on these vessels, if Tony Abbott put  the national interest ahead of his own interest, and supported the Government in implementing the  Malaysian arrangement.   

 In fact, my real concern is that Tony Abbott doesn't support the Malaysian arrangement, not  because it won't work, but because he fears that it will.   

 QUESTION:                        Just on 457s; do you feel vindicated by this new data, particularly that - in  Tasmania showing the rise in 457s there?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:    Well I think we've been clear all along. The department has spent over a  year looking at these matters, and what we've found is that there are 457s, the majority of which are  being used entirely properly. What we've found is that employers, in the main, will do the right  thing.   

 There are three people - there are three types of people that can be exploited by the misuse of 457s.  Firstly, the applicant, where they are exploited improperly by a minority of employers. Secondly, of  course, we have local workers who have the skills, but are not offered the job. That is unreasonable.  And I say, in combination with that, we're also talking about young people who are hoping to get a  trade, but of course if employers seek only - or seek as a first option the 457, that's unfair. And the  third category, which I think sometimes is forgotten in all of this, are those employers, which are the  majority of employers, who do the right thing in the way in which they use 457s, up against a  competitor who is misusing the 457s, and gets a competitive advantage.   

 We do not want to see a race to the bottom. Work Choices was a race to the bottom, the misuse is a  race to the bottom. And let's be very clear, this is not just about our reforms, Mr Abbott has  signalled that he wants to make the 457 visa the mainstay of immigration. That is a signal that he  wants to bring about fundamental change, a radical departure from the current scheme, and a way  in which he can undermine employment conditions without mentioning work choices.   

 He has rolled up in a tiny ball on industrial relations, this is his way to illustrate that he wants to  undermine employment security, and employment conditions in this country.   

 QUESTION:                        So do you think that there are young, keen workers who could have fulfilled  the sorts of roles which the union movement is choosing to fill with 457 visas?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:    I don't know, but I found it very fascinating that some in the media have  discovered that unions are employers. I just say this; the unions and media proprietors who use 457s  will be treated exactly the same. I know Fairfax uses 457s, I know that News Limited - I know the ABC  have used 457s. We know unions have used 457s.   

 They're all employers, and they've got every right to use them, but they must use them properly. If  they misuse them or abuse them, then with these reforms of course there will be consequences.   

 Now I don't have the facts of each and every case, but I make it very clear; everyone will be treated  in the same way under the law, and if they use the 457 appropriately, that's fine. If they misuse it or  abuse it, that's not fine and that's what we will stamp out.   

 QUESTION:                        But do you think the union movement's use of 457 visas somewhat blunts  their rhetoric on this?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:    I think there's been, of course, hysteria amongst some media  commentators, who by the way are also users of 457s. That somehow if you use it properly, or if you  use it pursuant to the obligations you have under law, that somehow that undermines an argument  for reform. I think that's entirely a very sort of obtuse way of looking at things.   

 The Government has said, and I've said since the day I announced these reforms on the 23rd of  February, we have no problems with 457 as a scheme. Insofar as the way it should be used. In fact,  we've said it's absolutely vital that we have an uncapped scheme that used - that is used in a way  that deals with the peaks and troughs of demands of temporary skill shortages.   

 What we've said is it should not be the vehicle to undermine employment conditions of local  workers. And I don't care what employer misuses or abuses it, if they misuse and abuse there will be  consequences, and it doesn't matter who they are. And I think everyone would understand that.   

 But to suggest because someone who is a supporter of reforms, who also has used a 457, somehow  is contradictory, I think is a long bow. But I don't expect any different from some media  commentators.   

 QUESTION:                        Just on refugees, can you just explain, the ones that were sent back, when  you say that they didn't raise any issues, that Australia was obliged - that, you know, enacted  Australia's international obligations. What - was there, I guess, examples within their claims that  didn't fit - can you give us kind of an example?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:    All I can say is that what was put to the officials did not in any way provide  them the requirement of protection under the convention. I mean you look at the way in which we  do these things; I think we are a very fair society. I think we are a remarkably generous country, and  we should be, we're a wealthy country, and we should do our fair share.   

 We've increased the humanitarian program to 20,000. We have the highest humanitarian program  outside of the United States, and we have the highest in the world per capita. We are a generous  nation, but we're not going to be seen as a soft touch.   

 Those places are for refugees, those places are for people that are fleeing persecution, and they will  not be used, they will not be used by this Government for people who do not fit that criteria. And I  think every Australian would agree with us on that.   

 QUESTION:                        Can you explain why, when the Federal Government announces another  boat arrival, that rather than say oh we had three boats arrive in one day, you stagger the  announcements?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:    Oh come on. Look, you know what? The comparison between what we do  and the transparency we show, and the Howard Government, is stark.   

 I'll give you one example. The former Home Affairs Minister Amanda Vanstone announced in a press  release between Christmas and New Year, seven boats with 1,700 people on the 27th of December.  And this was boats that came in over six weeks. 

 

 So if you're trying to suggest that we are nothing but transparent, go have a look at your history,  because So I'll have none of that nonsense that somehow this Government is not transparent.  All good? Thanks very much for coming   

