---
title: "Labor fulfils people smugglers' promise by abolishing TPVs"
date: "2013-12-02"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211401316
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2876812%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott  Morrison 

 Labor fulfils people smugglers' promise by abolishing TPVs  2 December 2013  

 Labor has repeated history by once again joining with the Greens to vote down  Temporary Protection Visas, ignoring the clear mandate obtained by the government  at the last election and working to fulfil the people smugglers' promise of permanent  residency to those who arrived illegally by boat on their watch, Minister for  Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison said today. 

 'Just over five years ago Labor abolished TPVs in government and set in train the  chaos, cost and tragedy that came with over 50 000 illegal arrivals by boat, including  a record of more than 8300 children, and over 1100 deaths at sea,' Mr Morrison said. 

 'Tonight Labor has repeated one of their worst mistakes in government, showing  they have learned absolutely nothing from their border failures in government, which  they are now maintaining in Opposition. 

 'The vote to abolish TPVs is a vote to deliver on the promise of people smugglers to  more than 33 000 people who turned up illegally on boats, and were still waiting for  their permanent visa from Labor, after more than 15 000 had already been handed  out to those who came before them. 

 'This won't be happening under the Coalition. We will be keeping our promise to  deny permanent residence to those who arrived illegally by boat, whether they  turned up three months ago or three years ago. 

 'The Coalition believes those who come the wrong way to Australia should not be  rewarded with permanent residency. Labor disagree and have demonstrated once  again that when it comes to strong border protection they simply cannot be trusted. 

 'Labor's reckless act betrays the deep divisions and double mindedness on border  protection that plagued them in government, contributing to their spectacular border  failures, and now drives them once again in Opposition into the arms of the Greens. 

 'On his departure from the Parliament Bob Carr pleaded with his Labor colleagues to  allow 'not a bit of daylight between Tony Abbott and Labor on irregular migration'.  Tonight's events have shown that the only two parties between whom no daylight  exists on border protection are Labor and the Greens. 

 'Tonight Labor has failed to respect the mandate Australians gave to the Coalition at  the last election to implement our full suite of policies to stop the boats and restore  integrity to our immigration programme. 

 'The Australian people can be assured the government will be working to ensure that  the smugglers' promise will not be kept. Those who arrived illegally by boat will not  be getting permanent protection visas from the Coalition. 

 'The government will be making further announcements on this matter to confirm the  denial of permanent residency to those who have arrived illegally by boat,' Mr  Morrison said. 

