---
title: "Over 10,000 illegal arrivals by boat this year"
date: "2013-05-26"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211394841
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719392%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling OVER 10,000 ILLEGAL ARRIVALS BY BOAT  THIS YEAR May 26, 2013

 Another two illegal boats have been intercepted north of Christmas Island yesterday, carrying a total of 105 people, Acting  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and Shadow Minister for Justice Customs and Border Protection Michael  Keenan said.

 “This year there have already been over 10,000 people arrive in Australia courtesy of a people smuggler,” Mr Keenan  said.

 “In just 48 hours five boats carrying over 300 people were intercepted off Christmas Island - despite this huge volume of  people on boats this has become the daily norm under this Labor Government.

 “Despite the record breaking numbers of arrivals, the Gillard Government continues to cling to policies that do nothing but  fuel the people smugglers business model.

 “This inaction by Labor is creating record profits for people smugglers and record debt for the Australian tax payer.

 “Labor’s failure to stop the people smuggling trade has come at a cost of $10 billion to the Australian tax payer.

 “The Australian people cannot afford another three years of Labor’s border protection failures.

 “To put an end to this evil trade, it requires a strong stable government that has the will and the resolve to implement the  tough border protection policies needed - something that Labor has failed at time and time again,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 OVER 10,000 ILLEGAL ARRIVALS BY BOAT THIS YEAR > Michael Keenan MP

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

