---
title: "Almost 600 illegal arrivals in June as Labor fails national security test on convicted terrorist"
date: "2013-06-07"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395544
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719375%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ALMOST 600 ILLEGAL ARRIVALS IN JUNE  AS LABOR FAILS NATIONAL SECURITY  TEST ON CONVICTED TERRORIST June 07, 2013

 The latest illegal boat, with 93 people on board, is the seventh to arrive over the last week, a week when Labor's failures on our borders and national security were laid bare in the Parliament, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Almost  600  people  have  arrived  illegally  by  boat  as  the  Prime  Minister  was  dragged  kicking  and  screaming  in  the Parliament  this  week  to  call  an  inquiry  into  her  government's  national  security  scandal  that  saw  a  convicted  jihadist terrorist who arrived by boat a pool fence away from freedom in the Adelaide Hills,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Record boat arrivals and the scandal over the convicted jihadist terrorist remind Australians once again that Labor simply can't be trusted when it comes to protecting our borders or on issues of national security.

 “People smugglers continue to exploit every day they can under this failed government with consecutive months of over 3,000 illegal arrivals and an average of more than 100 people turning up every day.

 “The  chaos  engulfing  this  Labor  Government  will  just  lead  to  a  bigger  mess  and  more  cost,  chaos  and  tragedy  on  our borders. They long ago abandoned all pretence on stopping the boats and they are now showing a dangerous disregard for  the  consequences  which  include  a  convicted  jihadist  arriving  and  being  placed  in  the  Adelaide  Hills  despite confirmation of his identity.

 “Australians have 99 days to weigh up the clear contrast between the Coalition which will stop the boats and a Labor Party with a record of over 43,000 illegal arrivals and a 'don't ask don't tell' attitude on national security,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “7 boats, carrying nearly 600 people have arrived in the first 5 days of June, as the Gillard Government’s  bungled handling of a grave national security breach has been further exposed this week.

 “We  saw  the  Minister  for  Immigration’s  embarrassing  back  down  when  he  had  to  admit  that  in  fact  the  previous Immigration  Minister,  Chris  Bowen’s  office  had  been  made  aware  of  the  convicted  Egyptian  terrorist’s  presence  in  low   security detention, but had failed to act.

 “On top of this the NSW Police confirmed that they were not even aware that a convicted terrorist was being housed in Villawood,  which  raises  the  question  as  to  whether  the  South  Australian  Police  Force  knew  there  was  a  terrorist  being housed in Inverbrackie family detention facility for the best part of a year.

 “In  the  background  of  this  national  security  breach,  the  boats  continued  to  arrive,  with  more  than  100  people  arriving everyday this month.

 “Labor cannot be trusted on national security and they cannot be trusted to stop the boats,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 ALMOST 600 ILLEGAL ARRIVALS IN JUNE AS LABOR FAILS NATIONAL SE...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

