---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: St Anthony's School, Sydney: 7 August 2013: Better Schools Plan; GST; interest rates; asylum seekers; Dobell preselection; company tax"
date: "2013-08-07"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Better Schools Plan"
  - "GST"
  - "interest rates"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Dobell preselection"
  - "company tax"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398412
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2650056%22
---

 

 

 

 Campaign Transcript 

 Prime Minister Kevin Rudd    

 

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER   DOORSTOP AT ST ANTHONY’S SCHOOL  7 AUGUST 2013     

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________ 

 

 Subjects: Better Schools Plan; GST; Interest Rates; Asylum Seekers; Dobell  Preselection; Company Tax.  ____________________________________________________________  

 

 

 

 PM: Well it's great to be out here in Greater Western Sydney at St Anthony's  Catholic Primary School here at Girrawheen, and I'm here with the local Member  Michelle Rowland. I'm here with David Bradbury, the Member for Lindsay, and  where’s Susan? Susan Templeman, who is our Candidate in Macquarie, not far from  here at all.     

 I think when I travel around the country, what I find is people tired of wall-to-wall  negativity. What they really want is a positive approach to the future. They want the  country to be united and positive rather than just negative and divided, which is a bit  how it's shaping up in certain political quarters in Australia at the moment. I think  what Australian’s also want is a clear cut approach on the big questions of the  economy, economic management, jobs and cost of living pressures. This is so much  central to the lives of Australians right across Greater Western Sydney and right  across the nation. And that's what we're here to talk about today.     

 I've said before that Australia faces new economic challenges because after a  decade-long China mining boom, it's coming to a close. As a result of that we have a  big new challenge, which is how do we diversify the economy, how do we make sure  all of our eggs are not just in one basket in the future, and how do we do that through  a new national competitiveness agenda. And we're building that on 7 separate pillars  and one of those pillars is making sure that we have the best skill, the best trained,  the best educated work force anywhere in the world. And that's why we're investing  in the Better Schools Plan, and St Anthony's here out in Girrawheen is going to  benefit from the work done by this Australian Government to make sure that our kids  have the best possible one-on-one attention in the future.  

 

 The whole purpose of keeping the economy strong and also to make sure people are  in jobs is also to ensure that cost of living pressures for Australian families are kept  under control. The interest rates decision yesterday is important and we will do  everything we possibly can to ensure that interest rates are kept as low as possible.  On cost of living pressures, the biggest pressure which most families face is paying  off the mortgage, and if you are on average $300,000 mortgage, you are now paying  $6,000 a year less than you were back in 2006 towards the end of Mr Howard's  period in government. That is a huge difference.  

 

 It's one of the other reasons why we've been so determined to keep supporting  families with the SchoolKids Bonus. That extra bit of money which helps buy the  uniforms, buy the books, help the kids with their out-of-school activities, $410 a year  for primary school kids, I think $820 for secondary school kids, that all helps. And on  child care, the fact that we've been able to increase the Child Care Rebate from 30  per cent, which is what it was when we first took office to 50 per cent, these are big  cost of living measures on child care, on SchoolKids Bonus, but in particular, on  what people are paying on their mortgages and on their small business loans as  well.  

 

 Which brings us to out-of-school-hours care. It is really important. I've not been to St  Anthony's before but I've been talking to these kids this morning and their out of  school hours care supervisors. More than 40 children each morning come here from  I think 7 or 7:30 in the morning and they are brought here by their mums and dads  hoping that they're going to get the best possible care, and from what I've seen they  are. It's terrific. And, after school here at St Anthony's I'm told by the supervisors,  there are 140 kids here in after school hours care. And I've been talking with David  and talking to Susan, talking also with Michelle, this is a fairly standard picture  across Greater Western Sydney.  

 

 Out of school hours care is really central for how families juggle their really complex  lives and their cost of living pressures. So the policy that we announced earlier in the  week, which is $450 million to support another 500 schools, up to 500 schools  around the country, to find either more places, more flexible hours, or just as  importantly, more activities - supervised homework clubs, supervised sporting  activity, music lessons - to make sure that these hours are used as effectively as  possible to make it good for our kids, good for their parents, and frankly, good for the  bottom line as well in the family budget.     

 What I want to indicate today is that we need to make sure that these new services  are made clear to parents around Australia. I understand in NSW based on current  usage, around 98,000 kids could benefit from this investment. This is really  important. But it's important at that all those parents of those kids have an idea  where to find the information.  

 

 So our Better Schools Before and After is going to be made clear and clearer  through the changes that we'll make to the My Child website. One of the early  initiatives of the Australian was mychild.gov.au website. It's to provide parents with a  very practical guide in terms of what's available at schools in given locations around  the country. It's been a very good practical initiative for families.  

 

 So what we will be doing is a revamp of this website to make sure that we've got  more information in there about the activities of child care services, including out of  school hours care services and the particular offerings of each location, more up to  date information on vacancies and waiting lists to save parents times in searching for  a place, and a new service which will be called My Child Care which will allow them  to register for notifications when a place becomes available in a preferred provider.  This is practical stuff.  

 

 This is about mums and dads, they may have just moved into Girrawheen last week  and they're saying "where is the kid going to go to school?, where do I get the best  OHSC, where can I find out what services are being provided?" This upgrade will  cost us $2 million which will be absorbed by the Department.    

 This is important practical stuff and it's all about making sure that we are doing the  best possible by our kids. Let me just turn to one or two other points before I take  your questions this morning. I've spoken already about cost of living pressures and  where all that stands for the future. And I've said rates what's happened on interest  rates and what's happened in these other areas as well. We've seen in the last 48  hours Mr Abbott and his Treasury on spokesman fundamentally at odds on monetary  policy, that is whether there should be lower interest rates or not. 

 

 We've seen Mr Abbott and his Treasury spokesman fundamentally at odds on  whether the alternative government will produce a Budget bottom line or not. We  now seem to see the alternative Prime Minister and the alternative Deputy Prime  Minister of the National Party fundamentally at odds as to whether there is going to  be a paid parental leave policy of the type Mr Abbott's described in the past put out  there. Again because this is a big need in the community and our scheme has been  up and running for quite some time, the first in Australia's history. And I think what  we see is increasing evidence of a bit of a shambles on their side on basic questions  of economic and budget management.  

 

 If it was myself and Chris Bowen having a disagreement in the last 24 hours, the  Prime Minister and Treasurer, over one, interest rates policy, two, fiscal policy, that is  whether we should produce a budget bottom line like we've done with the Economic  Statement last week, or three, whether or not we're going to have a paid parental  leave policy or not and how it's to be funded, you would rightly attack us.     

 The other mob are in a complete shambles on this and I would draw that to  everyone’s attention if the core question in the minds of Australians is, who is going  to manage this $1.5 trillion economy through the difficult shifts and challenges which  come ahead of us because of the end of the China mining boom.     

 One final thing which I believe is so critical for the future, and that is, the statement  that we have reported in the newspapers today that a rise in the Goods and Services  Tax and possible expansion of its base, that is, I presume to cover food, is now on  the Liberal Party agenda. Today’s Financial Review puts it pretty starkly and that’s  based on an interview with Mr Abbott's Treasury spokesman. This is significant stuff.  If you're going to jack up the Goods and Services Tax, you've got to be upfront with  the Australian people about how much and what's it going to cost them. If you're 

 going to extend the Goods and Services Tax on to food, which is what expanding the  base means, then you've got to be up front with people. If we are going to have a  debate about cost of living pressures, a Goods and Services Tax on practically  everything that Australian families buy is the most fundamental thing at all.     

 So what we are seeing through multiple statements now by Mr Hockey and by  Liberal premiers around the country, and others, is that this Goods and Services Tax  increase is now increasingly on the agenda. In fact, I think Mr Hockey, Mr Abbott's  Treasury spokesman says, this review of the Goods and Services Tax has to be part  of the equation. You've had one Liberal premier after the other saying the Goods and  Services Tax has to be increased and now we have in today's Australian Financial  Review Mr Hockey in an interview indicating clearly that raising the Goods and  Services Tax is on the Coalition's agenda. And he says again, it's part of the  equation. So I think this is a big, big development in this election campaign. If it's  about economic management, if it's about Budget management and it's about cost of  living pressures for families, if you're going to go about increasing the Goods and  Services Tax and expanding its coverage to include food, this is a massive issue for  Australian families across the country.     

 Final point is about $70 billion worth of cuts to jobs and to education and to health.  Here we are in the first week of this election campaign and I want to know when Mr  Abbott is going to put out there for everyone to see what he will cut in jobs and  health and education to fund the figure which his Treasury spokesman has himself  used, a $70 billion shortfall. The Goods and Services Tax increase seems to be the  hidden part of the agenda about how they actually bring these things together.     

 So over to you, folks.    

 JOURNALIST:  How will you ensure there will be no housing price bubble created  by the latest rate cut we had yesterday as ANZ and UBS are warning today and  secondly, will you rule out ever changing the GST, the rate, broadening its scope?  

 

 PM: On the Goods and Services Tax, what I would say loud and clear, that the  Australian Government, that I lead, will not increase the Goods and Services Tax,  nor will it extend its scope. That is clear cut language. On the other point concerning  the comments you made about the interest rates cut, we the Australian Government  back in 2007 reintroduced the housing portfolio, why? Because no-one was looking  at it properly before and Mr Howard did not have a Minister responsible for housing.  

 

 That's why we have been engaged in a whole series of measures, including the  national Rental Affordability Scheme, including our massive investments in social  housing, including our co-investments with developers around the country to bring  the cost of certain developments, mixed developments, to make them more  affordable for various families around the country by co-investing in local  infrastructure costs.     

 We have a massive program out there, not a theory, not a bubble, this has been  affecting tens of thousands of homes and units being built right across the country,  quite apart from the expanded capacity for those who are homeless and who have  been street sleepers through the work we've done Common Ground. On the other 

 broader impact of interest rates, Australian families in Greater Western Sydney want  less pressure on their budgets and I would have thought anyone concerned about  the cost of living pressures on families would welcome an interest rates cut as we in  the Government do. 

 

 JOURNALIST: The Opposition Leader has said on radio this morning that the  Coalition has no plans to raise the GST but acknowledges that it might come up in  consultations as part of the review that they've promised. Why isn't there a case to  change the GST in response to getting rid of some of those other inefficient State  taxes which have long been a problem and a burden on the economy?    

 PM: In the past Mr Abbott once before gave a rock solid, iron clad guarantee and  then 3 months after election - 6 months after an election - completely back flipped.  On something as fundamental as the Goods and Services Tax, when Mr Abbott's  Treasury spokesman says in today's Australian Financial Review that this is on the  agenda, on the agenda, frankly I don't believe Mr Abbott on this, I believe his  Treasury spokesman for some time now has been sounding the gong, this is the  direction in which they're going. Let's just step back a bit. One, they're going to have  a tax review. Two, they've said that review of the GST is on the table. Three, we now  have this interview today pointing to possible changes in rates and elsewhere we  see evidence of changing it also.    

 (audio break)    

 So put this debate about the GST into its broader context. Number one, they have  said that there's going to be a tax review. Number two, they've said that the Goods  and Services Tax is on the table. Number three, Liberal premiers have called for an  increase in the Goods and Services Tax. Number four, they have a $70 billion gap  that they've got to fill. So either you cut into jobs, health and education, which is we  believe what they will do, or you mix that up with additionally increasing in the Goods  and Services Tax.     

 So this is not creating a figment of someone's imagination, this is actually putting  together statements, positions put by Liberal leaders around the country over some  period of time. Our position on the Goods and Services Tax is clear, there will be no  increase, and it will not be applied to food. What Mr Abbott’s Treasury spokesman  has said today is, watch out it’s on the way. That's the bottom line here.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott has written questioning the PNG asylum deal. Apparently  it was signed after - I think he was alleging it was signed after caretaker had  commenced. Are you satisfied that the deal has actually been executed properly and  is safe from a challenge about how it was put together?    

 PM: The first point I'd make is that I have absolute confidence in the proper  execution of it because the Australian Government signed this Memorandum of  Understanding prior to entering into caretaker. The Cabinet of Papua New Guinea  met after the caretaker conventions entered into force and then they signed. So let's  just make those facts clear. We are meticulous on these questions. And on the  question of the broader possibilities of legal challenges, what I've said from day one,  Sid, as you know, is that based on past history it's always possible that people here 

 or elsewhere are going to mount a legal challenge. I've been very upfront about that  from day one.     

 I've also been upfront about the fact that this is the only credible response to  destroying the asylum seekers - sorry, people smugglers using asylum seekers,  people smugglers' business model so that if they come to an asylum seeker and say  we're going to stick you on a boat and send you to Australia, we're saying you're not  going to be settled in Australia. At the same time we're saying we're prepared to  have a more generous approach when it comes to the overall number of refugees  coming to Australia through the official humanitarian program. It's the right balance,  it's getting the practical questions right, it's getting our ethical responsibilities right,  our legal responsibilities right, and I've yet to hear a credible argument against it in  terms of how you stop hundreds and then thousands of people from drowning each  year.    

 JOURNALIST:  I believe you've agreed to a debate on Facebook and Channel 7, do  you encourage from Abbott to join you?    

 PM: Mate, I'm completely relaxed about debating Mr Abbott. As long as it's a proper  debate which means Mr Abbott, who wants to be Prime Minister, myself, I'm  currently Prime Minister, and a panel of you folks, you sort out who it is across the  National Press Gallery, grilling us for all we're worth in terms of whether we're up for  being future occupants of the high office of Prime Minister of Australia. So that's how  the Channel 7 Facebook debate is proposed.  

 

 I will be in like Flynn, mate. So is it Sunday the proposal, someone said to me  walking out here this morning? Fine, Sunday's available. I will it say again, yesterday  I debated the Liberal candidate for Griffith and it was an hour and a half hours, you  were there, most of you, of lively exchange, then another half an hour on ABC radio,  again. I was there for two hours with the local candidates. That’s as it should be in a  democracy. Now, I've just been talking to both David and Michelle. Their Liberal  candidates, Mr whatever his name is, the guy who was running away from the TV  the other night here in this seat, at a local level we want to see Liberal candidates  stump up for a debate. They're running away in David's seat, they're running away in  Michelle's seat, and I just don't get it in terms of what they're hiding.  

 

 I think in Mr Abbott's case it's pretty simple. The core question he does not want to  answer is where his $70 billion in cuts to jobs, health and education will come from  and go to, and secondly, what are now the real plans of the Liberal Party on a Goods  and Services Tax since good old Hockey Joe let the cat out of the bag. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Why don’t you have a candidate in Dobell? and on that subject is it a  good look for your Deputy to be drinking with Craig Thomson  given he has been suspended from the Labor Party? 

 

 PM: Well I do many things in life, but supervising the drinking activities of my  ministerial colleagues is not one of them and who choose to sit down with. On the  question of Dobell, we will have a good candidate and the candidate will be known  well before nominations close for the elections and there are a number of  possibilities for that seat.  

 

 JOURNALIST: Is Andrew Charlton one of them?    

 PM: There are a number of possibilities for that seat and I don’t want to name one of  them in particular, but we’ll have a very strong candidate and the good people of the  Central Coast deserve the best possible representation and I believe they will  respond well to who we put forward.    

 JOURNALIST:  Labor did pledge to cut the company tax rate as part of the mining  tax and that was blocked by the Coalition - given you spoken about a n economy in  transition should you have put that money aside, so if you do get majority  government you can also have that tax cut ready to go?    

 PM: Let me ask you guys all this question, what was the tax to GDP ratio under Mr  Howard’s Government, Mr Costello?.. about 24 per cent, now assistant treasurer, the  tax to GDP ratio under this Government 22 to 23 per cent. The factual underpinnings  of the proposition need to be put under scrutiny, the tax to GDP ratio under the  Australian Government is lower than under Mr Howard and Mr Costello.  

 

 The whole proposition being drummed up by the Liberal Party war drums, high  taxing government, it’s just factually untrue. How about a few facts upon which to  base this entire national discourse about the future of the country. Facts about where  you are going to cut your $70 billion. We’ve got our Economic Statement out there -  we’ve copped it from a whole bunch of people about where we are going to cut,  where we are going to spend. That’s fine, but it’s transparent and it goes back to the  question about why Mr Abbott won’t debate. So the whole proposition about  overtaxing, just submit it to some basic analysis of tax to GDP under us versus under  Mr Howard and this is a low taxing government relative to what Mr Howard had.    

 JOURNALIST: Does that mean you have no further plan to cut company tax rates?    

 PM: You know something, I believe that to the extent that the economy can afford it  and the budget can afford it, we are always in the market of making sure that we  have the most competitive tax rates in the world. For the first three or four years of  this Government, we bought in one serious of personal income tax cuts after another  and if you look at the average tax take for individual consumers for individual  taxpayers now, relative to what it was at the end of the Howard, Costello period, they  are paying less income tax.     

 Less income tax under us because of three to four years of big changes. Number  two, the tax to GDP ratio overall is less under us than under Mr Howard and this mob  run around the place saying ‘Oh, by the way we need another tax cut’, when they are  not saying where the money will come from. I notice by the way on the credibility of  the tax they say that if they cut the company tax rate by 1.5 that this will be a cost of  $2.5 billion continuing into the future.  

 

 The last time I looked at anyone projecting a static impact of a tax cut as an  economy changes and grows into the future, I just go back to my point that this has  not been done thoroughly and go back to the core question, when is Mr Abbott going  to put it on the table - where’s the $70 billion cuts going to go? And what’s going to 

 happen with the Goods and Services Tax - will it go on to food and what will the new  rate be?     

 JOURNALIST: Will you be matching Tony Abbott’s reported efforts to reduce the  company tax?    

 PM: I think Mr Abbott has been speaking about 1.5 per cent for a long, long time. I  mean, correct me if I’m wrong, this has been around for quite a while, so I know  various people have taken the drum beat that this is something new. I mean, any of  you heard of this before, we certainly have, so on the what’s going to be announced  today, our view is, we have a big challenged to manage a strong economy.     

 We’ve put forward already an Economic Statement that is very clear about where we  are going as far as tax and expenditure is concerned and when we’ll bring the  Budget back to surplus and I’d challenge Mr Abbott to do the same. I’ve got to say,  the big piece of shambles that I see on their front this morning apart from the Goods  and Services Tax is the alternative Prime Minister and the alternative Deputy Prime  Minister not being able to agree on whether there is going to be a Paid Parental  Leave Scheme which would be funded by 1.5 per cent tax hike on bigger businesses  around the country.  

 

 I presume this is designed to be some offset for that, but if you read the Nats versus  the Libs on that it seems to be split right up the middle. I’ve take a couple there. Who  haven’t I taken a question from this morning. I’m going to take the last question. Ok,  yes.     

 JOURNALIST:  Joan Kirner is battling cancer - your thoughts on Joan?    

 PM: Joan is a wonderful Australian. I first got to know Joan when she was Premier of  Victoria way back when, when I was a junior wood chuck working for the then  Queensland Labor government and she was an exceptionally strong Premier of  Victoria, she was handed a very difficult task to do, following the departure of John  Cane. I think all Australians and Victorians in particular have a deep affection for  Joan and all I would say on behalf of Therese and myself is we wish her well in what  will be a tough fight against cancer.     

 

 ENDS    

 

