---
title: "A Regional Deterrence Framework to combat people smuggling"
date: "2013-08-23"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399441
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2802561%22
---

 A Regional Deterrence Framework to combat people  smuggling August 23, 2013

 If elected, the Coalition will establish a comprehensive Regional Deterrence Framework with our neighbours to stop asylum 

 seekers transiting through our region in an attempt to gain illegal entry to Australia.

 Unlike Labor, the Coalition believes that an effective regional solution must have a single minded focus on deterrence, preventing 

 secondary movement of asylum seekers into our region.

 Labor’s focus has been on processing and resettlement of those coming into the region and seeking to illegally enter Australia,  not on deterring their arrival in the first place.

 Labor has also hamstrung the ability of our agencies to combat people smuggling in Indonesia by cutting the Australian Federal 

 Police's presence there by 40 per cent.

 The Regional Deterrence Framework will provide strong leadership and increased funding support so that Australia is spending  our time and resources on practical regional priorities to stop people smuggling.

 If elected, the Coalition will: 

  Ã‘ Provide $67 million to support joint operations with Indonesia, Sri Lanka and Malaysia to disrupt people smuggling through 

  international deployment of specialist Australian Federal Police officers;  Ã‘ Implement a $20 million program with the International Organisation for Migration to engage and enlist Indonesian villages to 

  support people smuggling disruption, including a capped boat buy-back scheme that provides an incentive for owners of  dangerous vessels to sell them to government officials, not people smugglers; 

  Ã‘ Appoint a special envoy for Operation Sovereign Borders to focus on facilitating international cooperation on the Regional 

  Deterrence Framework; 

  Ã‘ Seek to establish transit zones within the region to facilitate the transfer of asylum seekers to offshore processing facilities, 

  preventing entry to Australia. This means that illegal arrivals that are subject to offshore processing will be moved to a 

  regional transit port and not be brought to Christmas Island or the Australian mainland;   Ã‘ Invest $27 million to prevent drowning at sea through increased aerial surveillance and offer up to $71 million to boost 

  search and rescue response capability of Indonesian authorities within their search and rescue zone;  Ã‘ Supplement our border protection fleet with commercially leased vessels to support patrol operations including offshore 

  processing transfers. 

  In addition, offshore processing capacity at Manus and Nauru will be expanded including an additional 2,000 places on Nauru and  illegal boat arrivals found not to be refugees will be returned quickly to their source countries or detained until possible.

  A Coalition government will restore effective policies including our Regional Deterrence Framework. This is our country and we 

  will decide who comes here.

  23 August 2013 

  Download the Coalition's policy for a Regional Deterrence Framework to combat people smuggling here.

  © Tony Abbott MHR 2010 | Authorised by Tony Abbott MHR, Level 2, 17 Sydney Rd, Manly NSW 2095

  www.tonyabbott.com.au

  Tony Abbott Federal Member for Warringah | Leader of the Opposition

  Page 1 of 1 A Regional Deterrence Framework to combat people smuggling > Tony...

  25/10/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

