---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Punchbowl, Sydney: 7 July 2013: split in the Opposition's asylum seeker policy; asylum seeker policy"
date: "2013-07-07"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "split in the Opposition's asylum seeker policy"
  - "asylum seeker policy"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396807
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3063861%22
---

 Tony Burke MP  Minister for Immigration, Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship  Minister for the Arts 

 

 Split in the Opposition's asylum seeker policy,  asylum seeker policy  Monday, 07 July 2013 

 Press conference, Sydney 

 Tony Burke: Thanks very much everybody once again for coming back to  Punchbowl. There's been reports in the paper today which I'm happy to confirm  about the way in which we are now processing people who are seeking asylum  within Australia. The processing had been paused for quite some time and  recommenced it last Monday. As you'd be aware many people have been in the  practice of destroying their papers and also if they've run - if they've arrived here  without their papers, there's been a very common practice of people refusing to  assist the Australian Government in accessing new papers. I want to make it  absolute clear that no-one will be advantaged by playing that sort of game. 

 We want to make sure that the decisions made by the Australian Government and by  Australian officials are as accurate and timely as possible. That means we want any  documentation that can help us make those decisions to be provided. If people have  decided that they think there is some advantage in destroying their papers, they will  now discover that nothing could be further from the truth. People who have  destroyed their papers, people who refuse to cooperate in getting access to papers  will find themselves at the back of the processing queue. People often Question  whether or not there's a queue but obviously within Australia for our own processing  rules, there absolutely is a queue. 

 And within Australia we have a large number of applications that we need to deal  with. We are prioritising those applications from people who are cooperative. We're  prioritising the applications from people who either have papers with them or are  cooperating in helping the Australian Government get access to their paperwork.  There are some people from parts of the world where papers are simply not  available. And so they're not being disadvantaged by this. But for people who come  from parts of the world where papers are available and they think it's smart in some  way or to their advantage to destroy them, they will now find out that that is 100 per  cent incorrect. And we'll be prioritising and have started as of last Monday,  prioritising the cases of those people who have been cooperative. 

 Secondly, there's been a lot of interest, understandably over the significant  announcements that came out of Jakarta between Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and  President Yudhoyono. One of the points that was made in that communique loud  and clear was that unilateral action is something that is not supported. Now when 

 those comments were made, in the first instance Scott Morrison from the Liberal  Party had a go at wanting to claim that unilateral action was a reference to the Labor  Party. That was his - where he was at on radio before breakfast yesterday. After  breakfast he went out and did a doorstop interview and at that point Scott Morrison's  comment was you have to take unilateral action. Julie Bishop on the Insiders  program this morning said we won't take unilateral action. So in the course of a day  the Liberal Party have gone from arguing that you have to take unilateral action to  now arguing that they won't take unilateral action. 

 This is what happens to a party that has nothing but slogans to offer. This is what  happens to a party when they actually had no principle beyond a slogan about  turning boats around that they know won't work. That a year ago they were saying  they were going to tow them to Indonesia. Now they're saying they'll tow them to just  outside Indonesia and on the fundamental issue with our relationship with Indonesia  as to whether or not unilateral action will be taken, they can't even hold a view for 24  hours. You go from Scott Morrison yesterday saying you have to take unilateral  action to Julie Bishop today saying they won't take unilateral action. 

 What we have from the Liberal Party with this is a policy lightweight leading a policy  shambles. And we're dealing with a serious policy issue. We're dealing with a  serious issue in our region and around our world that requires people to behave like  adults and not simply play games with slogans but come to terms with what is a  deeply significant issue around the world in our region and deserves a mature, level-headed policy response. 

 Question: Is this new principle in terms of asylum seekers who destroy their  documents - is that about getting tough? Is it a lurch to the right? 

 Tony Burke: It's about making sure that we prioritise the people who are being  cooperative. I don't want to get into this one's a lurch to the right or this one's a lurch  to the left sort of argument. I've taken on a serious job. We're dealing with a serious  challenge which makes massive difference to whether - what happens with peoples'  lives and indeed whether or not people have lives. There are deeply significant,  serious policy issues at stake here, and I know my political opponents have wanted  to view all of this through a prism of the politics. I'm dealing with a massive  administrative task, a serious issue with a lot at stake for Australia and the  individuals involved in it. 

 I think it is an orderly way to deal with the applications - that we prioritise the people  who're being cooperative. 

 Question: How can you prove that they've destroyed documents and not just lost  them? 

 Tony Burke: Well, this is where for people who don't have documents it is their call  whether or not they cooperate on getting documents reissued, and there are many  cases where people can cooperate with Australian authorities on getting fresh  access to documents. And this is why I focus not on whether or not documents exist,  but on whether or not people are being cooperative. The flipside of course is some  people come from parts of the world where for the best endeavours there are no 

 ways of getting documents. Some countries of the world are like that. They don't get  disadvantaged by this. But for people who're trying to game the system and who  think there is an advantage in not cooperating, I'm making sure that no such  advantage will exist. 

 Question: So what do you say to refugee advocates who are concerned about it? 

 Tony Burke: I'm making sure that we are dealing with an orderly process on the  high number of applications we have in front of us. I'm making sure that decisions  are made according to law, and I'm making sure that people don't game the process. 

 Question: Why don't you just do what the Coalition plans to do and deny these  people who allegedly destroy their documents the benefit of the doubt and refuse  visas? 

 Tony Burke: That's yet another example of the Coalition contradicting themselves. I  mentioned a moment ago from one day to the next the Coalition have gone from  saying you have to have unilateral action to they won't take unilateral action. In the  same way, they've made the comments that you've just referred to about the  processing of visas and then said that they continue to uphold the Refugee  Convention which, of course, to deny visas on that ground would be a breach of the  Convention to apply a test other than a serious test of refugee status. 

 It goes again to the fact that the only thing that is consistent from the Liberal Party is  their slogan. The moment you get to any level of policy detail or serious rigour  behind it, they collapse into a shambles. 

 Question: So you say it's a breach of the Convention to do that? 

 Tony Burke: To determine whether or not someone's a refugee based on reasons  other than whether or not they're a refugee - if that's what they want to argue, then  there are some Questions to be put to them but, you know, let's face the fact we all  know they have no consistency other than their slogans. That's how they operate,  and from our perspective I'm running a system that is a serious policy issue, and I  intend to take it seriously. If they want to behave like adults at the table they should  do so, but at the moment they're not. 

 Question: Are you considering [indistinct] the no advantage test for asylum  seekers? 

 Tony Burke: I want to tighten the explanation of the no advantage test. I think there  have been valid criticisms where people have wanted - and so I should refer to it as  no advantage principle is the more accurate way of describing it. I want to tighten the  explanation that we give of that principle. I've put some words forward to the  department and I've asked them to work through it and come back to me with advice.  This is not an area where I think you go off with a thought bubble and broadcast it in  public and then see where it flies. 

 I want to make sure that a principle like this, which will have a very significant effect  on any applications, goes through some serious rigour with the department. I've put 

 some personal views to them. Before very long I expect they'll come back to me with  some views on the workability of what I've proposed and after that, once we get to  that stage I'd be happy to discuss it publicly. But it's not a shift in the principle, it's an  improved explanation of it. 

 Question: Can't you say what you've put forward, though? 

 Tony Burke: Well, no, because when - as Minister when you're the decision maker,  the moment you do that it can have an impact on people's behaviour, it can have an  impact on a whole range of things, and I don't think it's prudent or sensible to just  start flying kites in public. 

 Question: There are reports that you're seeking some new deals with Indonesia and  other countries similar to that which exist with Sri Lanka to send failed asylum  seekers home. Is that correct? 

 Tony Burke: It's always been the view of the Australian Government that people  who do not have a valid claim should return to their country of origin. That's always  been our view. Now, we've had a challenge with some nations where some nations  have been very resistant to receiving returns even of their own nationals. My view is  quite simple on this: if you are not here under Australian law, then you should be on  a plane as quickly as we can get you on a plane. We've been doing that in the last  week with returns to Sri Lanka. I would like to see us be able to have agreements of  that nature with as many countries as possible. 

 Question: Which countries are you referring to? 

 Tony Burke: I'd like to see us be able to do that wherever we have nationals of a  country who are not legally in Australia and who therefore should be returned to their  country of origin. It doesn't matter what country someone's from if they're in  Australia, if they've gone through the process, it's determined that they don't have a  legal right to be here, then they should go back. It's not a getting tougher lurch to the  right principle, it's plain common sense. If you're in a country and you're not there  lawfully then you should return to the country where you would be lawful. 

 Question: So you don't need a deal specifying that? That will be the policy and that  will be what will happen? Is that the case? 

 Tony Burke: Well, to return someone to their country of origin, you can't just start  putting people on planes without the agreement of the country that they're going to  land in so, you know, we need to make sure that we've got sensible discussions  going on with those different countries. But unlike the way the Opposition have dealt  with Indonesia by announcing their turn back policy claiming, as Julie Bishop once  did, that the Indonesians say different things in private to what they say in public and  making a complete level of shambles to the way they deal with important countries in  terms of Australia's relationship. I don't operate that way, and we will continue to  have sensible conversations with the different countries around the world whenever  we have their national returned to them. 

 Question: And your review of refugee processing? When will you announce the  results of that? 

 Tony Burke: As soon as it's concluded. As soon as it's concluded I'll do that. The  principle behind this review is really simple: we want to make sure that the law is  helping people who have a lawful right to be helped and not helping people who  don't have a lawful right to be helped. And the nature of this area of policy - and it's  not the only policy that's like this. There's a few areas of policy where wherever you  set the rules people try to find loopholes around them. That's not uncommon. We  make many changes to the tax law each year to make sure that people aren't  exploiting loopholes. Similarly, this review is making sure that the people we help,  and the only people we help, are people who have a lawful right to be helped. 

 Question: Thanks very much. 

 

