---
title: "Government excises its conscience amid dismal refugee debate"
date: "2013-05-16"
creators:
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211394140
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2448302%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Thursday, 16 May 2013   

 Government excises its conscience amid dismal  refugee debate   

 The government has voted to excise the mainland of Australia from its own migration zone and  failed to support any of the three Greens’ amendments that were moved with the Bill.   

 The three Greens amendments would have given the media and the Australian Human Rights  Commissioner access to the offshore processing centres and brought the children and the  families on Manus Island back to Australia.   

 “Today the Labor Government has passed a deeply shameful piece of legislation that even John  Howard couldn’t get through the Parliament years ago,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson,  Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said today.   

 “Excising the entire mainland of Australia from its own migration zone is a cruel and hysterical  response to a serious humanitarian issue in our region.   

 “While the Greens’ amendments would have restored a modicum of dignity to our refugee laws,  Labor and the Liberal Party ganged up to vote them down.   

 “Giving the media and the Australian Human Rights Commissioner access to the offshore  detention centres is an essential step towards openness and transparency.   

 “If the government doesn’t have anything to hide, it would have supported my amendments.   

 “My third amendment to bring back children from Manus Island and ban the future transfer of  families was also voted down by both parties, even though there have been calls from their own  members to bring the kids back.   

 “MPs from both of the old parties are on the record saying they are against locking children up  on Manus Island but today they voted against my amendment that would have brought them  back to Australia.   

 “This terrible decision will create a damaged generation, for which Australia will be deeply sorry  in years to come.   

 “The Greens are standing up for the rights of the most vulnerable people in our region  throughout this race to the bottom that Labor and Tony Abbott have dragged this Parliament  into.   

 “With a multi-billion dollar blowout in the cost of the government’s no advantage rule and  offshore processing regime and now the passing of this shameful legislation, it has been a sad  week for Australia.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

