---
title: "Five illegal boat arrivals in 48 hours as Labor admits another offshore processing stuff up"
date: "2013-06-21"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396135
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719354%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling FIVE ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS IN 48  HOURS AS LABOR ADMITS ANOTHER  OFFSHORE PROCESSING STUFF UP June 21, 2013

 Five illegal boats have arrived, with a total of more than 220 people on board, in just the last 48 hours as Labor admits  another stuff up on their half-hearted embrace of offshore processing by removing women and children from Manus  Island, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and  Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “As more than 100 people continue to arrive every single day under this failed Labor Government, families are being  pulled off Manus Island - families that should have been sent to Nauru in the first place,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Instead of listening to the Coalition and sending families to Nauru, Labor’s stuff up has created a dangerous incentive  whereby people smugglers could potentially encourage more women and children on to boats given they won’t be subject  to offshore processing.

 “The government has left Australia with a stranded offshore processing policy and they are now flagging a ‘fly, in fly out’  arrangement for single adult males on Manus Island under a ‘Getaway solution’ where people will be released into the  community, sent for a period to Manus Island before being released back in Australia on bridging visas.

 “This is an absurd proposition that proves again that Labor have never believed in genuine offshore processing and will  never stop the boats,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “As the Parliamentary Sitting Week comes to a close these three latest illegal boat arrivals carrying 154  people is a reminder this this Government have failed the Australian people on border protection.

 “With the constant Prime Ministerial leadership challenge on the cards, both candidates have failed to protect our borders:  former Prime Minister Rudd who introduced the measures that led to this very sorry state of affairs, or Prime Minister  Gillard who said she was going to do something about it and has only made matters worse.

 “There are still 9 days until the end of June and there have already been 32 boats carrying 2,269 people seeking to take  advantage of a Government embroiled in an ongoing leadership spat.

 “For the sake of the Australian people the Coalition hopes that next week the Government can put their internal woes  aside and actually do their job, which is to protect our borders and stop the boats,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 FIVE ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS IN 48 HOURS AS LABOR ADMITS ANOTH...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

