---
title: "O'Connor must front media to explain latest Manus breakout and TB case confirmation"
date: "2013-02-15"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390616
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2231060%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 O'Connor must front media to explain latest Manus breakout and TB case  confirmation 

 Friday 15th February 2013 

 Minister for Immigration Brendan O’Connor must front up to the Australian people today to fully explain the 

 circumstances surrounding a breakout by asylum seekers from the Manus Island processing centre last 

 night and confirmation that a Sydney-based immigration detention centre employee, who had worked at 

 Christmas Island and Villawood detention centres, has contracted Tuberculosis, Shadow Minister for 

 Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.  

 

 “Both the break out on Manus Island and the confirmation of the TB case for the detention centre employee 

 now in isolation in a Sydney hospital, warrant a direct explanation from Minister O’Connor to the Australian 

 people,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “Minister O’Connor cannot send out department officials as a human shield for his own accountability. 

 Labor must be accountable for their failures and not seek to push the blame off to public servants and put 

 them in the firing line.  

 

 “Mr O‘Connor is the accountable Minister for what happened on Manus Island yesterday and for the health 

 and welfare of our detention service employees.  

 

 “Many unanswered questions remain in both circumstances. These are serious issues that demand 

 explanation not obfuscation from the Minister. Having to explain Labor’s failures is part and parcel of being 

 Minister for Immigration in the Gillard Government.  

 

 “Labor’s abysmal track record on border protection is only matched by their total lack of accountability for 

 that failure - whether it’s on riots and chaos in immigration detention, billions of dollars worth of budget 

 blow outs, or these latest revelations.  

 

 “Mr O’Connor should treat the Australian people with respect and do his job by fronting up to the media and 

 fully explaining the circumstances surrounding today’s revelations,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 

