---
title: "Latest boat marks Labor's $10 billion blow outs on illegal arrivals"
date: "2013-05-15"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211394096
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719428%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LATEST BOAT MARKS LABOR’S $10  BILLION BLOW OUTS ON ILLEGAL  ARRIVALS May 15, 2013

 Another  illegal  boat,  with  42  people  on  board,  arrived  as  Labor’s  blow  outs  on  illegal  boats  reached  the  appalling   milestone  of  $10  billion  under  their  failed  border  protection  policies,  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Year in year out this failed Labor Government has underestimated the cost of their failure on our borders. That blowout has now reached over $10 billion including more than $5 billion alone since last year’s budget,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Today  in  the  Parliament  Wayne  Swan  couldn’t  justify  his  government’s  forecast  that  spending  on  their  failed  border  protection policies would fall by 50 per cent over the forward estimates.

 “The truth is Labor is presiding over record illegal arrivals including over 20,000 people this financial year. They don’t have  policies to stop the boats so can’t credibly budget to stop them.

 “After so many failures to get their forecasts right, no one can seriously believe what Labor put in their budget on illegal boats.

 “Only the Coalition has the proven policies and necessary resolve to stop the boats and end the wasteful spending on our borders,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr  Keenan  said:  “The  boats  continue  to  come  as  Labor  unveiled  their  budget  cuts  to  our  frontline  border  protection agencies.

 “Once  again  the  Australian  Customs  and  Border  Protection  Service  was  on  the  receiving  end  of  Labor’s  economic   mismanagement with another $61 million in funding cut from their budget, including $14 million from border protection and enforcement.

 “Since coming to office Labor have now cut 870 staff from Customs, yet they still expect the agency to be able to deal with the record breaking numbers of boat arrivals that continue to flood our borders.

 “Not only has Labor stripped  funding  and  personnel from Customs, they have also reduced aerial and sea surveillance despite the escalating crisis at our borders.

 “This Government’s budget offers no relief or support for our already overstretched and under resourced Border Protection Command,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 LATEST BOAT MARKS LABOR’S $10 BILLION BLOW OUTS ON ILLEGAL A...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

