---
title: "Arrivals surge above 3000 since Rudd's PNG election fix"
date: "2013-08-26"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211436221
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2686916%22
---

 

 

 

 Media Release    

 Scott Morrison MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Coalition Campaign Spokesman 

 

 Michael Keenan MP 

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection 

 

 Monday 26 August 2013    

 Arrivals surge above 3000 since Rudd’s PNG election  fix    

 More than 3000 people have arrived illegally by boat since Kevin Rudd announced his  PNG election fix, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and  Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.    

 “Two boats have arrived in 24 hours, with the latest carrying 65 people on board. The  number of illegal arrivals since the PNG election fix was announced has now exceeded  the 3,000-person capacity of Manus Island,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “Not only have more people arrived illegally by boat than can be accommodated at  Manus Island since Labor’s announcement of its PNG election fix, but if Labor is re-elected accommodation on Manus Island won't be ready until next year.     

 “Meanwhile there are still no detailed guidelines on the resettlement of refugees in PNG  and no agreement on how people will be resettled in PNG, with both the PNG and  Australian governments confirming they are only talking about it.     

 “This is the centrepiece of Kevin Rudd's big, bold announcement. Yet the details are  nowhere to be found and Labor has no backup plan except more talk.    

 “Unlike Labor and their endless border debacles, the Coalition has a real plan on border  protection - a full suite of proven policies which will be implemented in full with the  necessary resolve to stop the boats,” Mr Morrison said.    

 Mr Keenan said the latest illegal boat arrival is the 70th boat to be smuggled to Australia  this financial year.     

 “As Mr Rudd and Mr Burke continue their talkfest on border protection, the boats  continue to arrive and the people smugglers continue to reap huge profits,” Mr Keenan  said.    

 “Labor’s border protection failures are highlighted by every new boat arrival.     

 “We cannot afford three more years of Labor - Australia needs a strong government that  will close down the people smuggling trade,” Mr Keenan said.    

 Media Contacts:        Julian Leembruggen 0419 494 667 (Mr Morrison)                                      Hannah Weir 0458 167 600 (Mr Keenan) 

 

 

 

