---
title: "Labor's refugee ads rort: Greens' bill needed"
date: "2013-08-09"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398482
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2651986%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Friday, 9 August 2013   

 Labor’s refugee ads rort: Greens’ bill  needed   

 The government’s blatant rorting of tax payer money to fund their advertising campaign  in caretaker mode shows why a Greens’ bill that would overhaul advertising rules is so  important.   

 “It’s appalling that the government is using Australian tax payer’s money to fund its  tough-on-refugees election campaign,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator  Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “Bold-faced rorting of the advertising approval system has seen millions of dollars spent  by this government in recent months and now they’re at it again.   

 “A Greens’ bill, which was introduced back in 2010, would see the Auditor-General  scrutinise government advertising spends of over $250,000 to prevent flagrant breaches  of this nature.   

 “The government’s ‘national security’ excuse for this extraordinary caretaker-mode  advertising campaign is deeply cynical.   

 “This isn’t the case of a national emergency, it’s a Labor emergency.   

 “These ads are clearly designed to help the Labor Party’s chances on polling day and  they should be paying for them.   

 “The fact that public money is being spent on government ads rather than processing  refugee claims in Indonesia and bringing them here safely shows exactly where this  government’s priorities lie.   

 “This isn’t about saving lives in the Indian Ocean, it’s about saving votes in western  Sydney.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760    

