---
title: "Speech to sports Without Borders conference, Melbourne"
date: "2013-05-03"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR SPORT"
subjects:
  - "Sport"
  - "Social inclusion"
  - "Innovation"
  - "Conferences"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435520
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2422885%22
---

 

 

 

 

 Media release   

 

 Senator the Hon Kate Lundy  Minister for Sport, Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Minister  Assisting for Industry and Innovation 

 

 Sports Without Borders Conference 

 Friday 3 May 2013 

 Melbourne 

 

 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

 

 Acknowledgements omitted  

 

 Firstly, I would like to acknowledge the traditional custodians of the land, the 

 Woiworung People. Thank you for the opportunity to speak here this morning.  

 

 With my broad range of ministerial responsibilities, a common assumption is that 

 three areas are distinct portfolios and do not have much overlap.  

 

 But, conferences like this show the exact opposite is true and by thinking outside of 

 the box in the areas of multiculturalism, sport and innovation local communities can 

 achieve some really amazing results.  

 

 So I congratulate Sports Without Borders for having the foresight to host this 

 conference with this theme today.  

 

 In particular, I am really excited about how sports are opening up to new ideas and 

 how innovation can help to create new sporting opportunities for Australians, while 

 also delivering real social inclusion outcomes. And it is on this topic that I will speak 

 to you today.  

 

 SOCIAL INCLUSION 

 I’m sure I’m preaching to the converted here today when I say that sport is arguable 

 the best platform for social inclusion, it is also a powerful driver for social cohesion.  

 

 We have seen it bring down cultural barriers where other mechanisms have failed.  It 

 is the sense of belonging, a shared experience, a common passion - these deeply 

 human experiences are prevalent across sport so it is no wonder that, as a society, 

 we elevate it, celebrate it and invest in it our family, community and professional 

 lives.  For most, the sport experience is a local one.  It’s here, at the grassroots, that 

 programs experience the most success. 

 

 One timely and moving example is the experience of the Western Sydney 

 Wanderers in their first season. This team - so hurriedly pulled together by the FFA 

 last year - has proven all the detractors wrong.  

 

 Some commentators said you couldn’t unite Western Sydney under one team - that 

 the area was too culturally diverse to come together to rally around one local team.   

 

 Well - we’ve seen a year of unmitigated success - of people being drawn together 

 from all walks of life from Sydney’s west by sport. This is the power of sport to deliver 

 improved community cohesion.  The A-League Grand Final was electrifying. 

 

 It’s with this motivation that the Gillard Government supports sporting initiatives that 

 can contribute to building community cohesion. 

 

 We do this in a number of ways.  The Multicultural Youth Sports Partnership 

 Program that offers grants to organisations to create opportunities for youth from 

 new and emerging communities, and those from culturally and linguistically diverse 

 backgrounds to participate in sport. 

 

 Often local sporting clubs and local Migrant Resource Centres are already doing 

 fantastic work on the ground.  Rather than re-invent the wheel or duplicate existing 

 programs to reach common goals we want to support groups by fostering and 

 building relationships within communities. These partnerships are important, not just 

 because the programs gets good results, but because it also increases cultural 

 awareness and improves cultural competence within our clubs - and I will expand on 

 this point further in a moment.   

 

 Just recently I was here in Melbourne to see how the program is making a difference 

 through the Sunshine Heights Cricket Club that is delivering the 'We Don't Like 

 Cricket - We Love it!' program. 

 

 In this case, local children from refugee families are getting to try out cricket for the 

 very first time in a safe and supporting environment. This is a great example of sport 

 helping new humanitarian entrants and migrants alike settle in their new home. 

 

 And Netball is another great example of a sport that has really taken advantage of 

 this program. It has been through this program that Netball has realised the 

 opportunities for their sport to grow by reaching out to newly emerging communities. 

 And, not only is Netball expanding their game, they are helping girls who may not 

 otherwise have opportunities get involved in this great traditional Australian sport.  

 

 It’s also been exciting to see sports take advantage of opportunities like Harmony 

 Day to reach out to new communities. The Football Federation of Australia have this 

 year launched their Harmony through Football initiative, which will see some 150 

 events for more than17,000 participants get involved. 

 

 The beauty of this program is that will help foster a sense of belonging, acceptance 

 and understanding of other cultures by bringing children from all kinds of 

 backgrounds together to play football.  

 

 I am also very pleased that more than 25 sporting organisations have already 

 endorsed and pledged their support for the racism.itstopswithme campaign, and in 

 the spirit of the campaign the Government has funded Rugby League, Basketball, 

 Netball and the AFL to deliver projects that will build social cohesion and combat 

 racism. 

 

 So for those of you who have not signed up to the campaign already, I encourage 

 you to do so.  

 

 INNOVATION 

 While Government can support programs like these, Government cannot provide all 

 the answers and the message for sports, and many have already acted, is that 

 sports must innovate to keep their sport strong and sustainable over the long term.   

 

 Right now, sports are considering the best way to innovate and to take advantage of 

 the changing cultural landscape and demography of Australia.  The Australian Sports 

 Commission can help national sporting organisations through this time of change.  

 

 I acknowledge not every NSO has the capacity or resources and this is why the 

 Sports Commission has already started this work by commissioning research papers 

 to help sports understand their markets. 

 

 I recently released the Commission’s Market Segmentation for Sport Participation 

 report, which provides important tools for clubs to identify segments to tailor 

 programs to.  The research categorized groups of people according to their attitude 

 to clubs. 

 

 In particular, this research identified the ‘Club Wary’ category of consumers - 

 individuals who are physically active, but wary of joining clubs. Importantly, in this 

 segment there are more multicultural members than in the other nine segments 

 identified through this research. 

 

 Where this research is useful, is that it can help clubs to understand the market 

 segments and to innovate their products to meet consumer wants and needs.  

 

 For example, for the Club Wary, clubs need to be proactive in seeking them out and 

 communicating with them. Club Wary consumers want to get more involved in sports 

 clubs but often don’t know where to find information. Direct mail, inviting them to a 

 demonstration and local and ethnic newspapers are ideal sources coupled with 

 easily accessible online information. 

 

 To attract this segment, clubs perhaps will need to deliver sporting opportunities 

 beyond the traditional club structure, and will need to think about avoiding a sense of 

 over-commitment or competition (both in time and cost) and obligation when 

 messaging and in the products offered. 

 

 CONCLUSION 

 Sport has given so much to Australians over the generations. We all have those 

 favourite sporting moments that we will remember forever.  

 

 But we need to make sure the next generation of Australians also have the chance 

 to love sport as much as we do and have the opportunity to enjoy all of sport’s 

 benefits - be those health, social and economic.  

 

 Australian sport gives us far more than the sum of its parts.  Effective, ethical 

 leadership and strong sound governance is essential.  Sport in this country is not a 

 play thing.  It is serious public policy and serious business.  In this way, it is my role 

 to protect and enhance its integrity. 

 

 By emphasising the benefits of multicultural Australia and our capacity to innovate, 

 we will achieve new heights. 

 

 And that’s where we know that multiculturalism and innovation have so much to offer 

 sport. For those sports that have led the way, I congratulate you - and for those 

 sports considering their next steps, I encourage you to talk to the Australian Sports 

 Commission and talk to your fellow sporting administrators to see what innovation 

 and multiculturalism can offer you.  

 

 Thank you. 

 

 ENDS 

 

