---
title: "Kicking goals for young people in Western Sydney"
date: "2013-08-13"
creators:
  - "Husic, Ed"
source: "Office of HUSIC, ED, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398737
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2662192%22
---

 

 Campaign Media Release 

 Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus 

 Member for Chifley Ed Husic 

 

 KICKING GOALS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE IN WESTERN SYDNEY 

 The Rudd Labor Government will provide almost $120,000 in new funding for the  University of New South Wales’ Football United program to support young people  at risk of radicalisation. 

 Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus QC and Member for Chifley Ed Husic today  visited Blacktown to announce the grant which is being made through the  Building Community Resilience grants program.  

 The program has supported 50 diverse community projects worth more than $4.1  million across Australia.  

 “Supporting projects such as Football United is an integral part of Federal Labor’s  strategy to counter violent extremism and promote a safe, tolerant Australia,”  said Mr Dreyfus. 

 “Football United will use the funds for its Youth Connections United program, to  continue its work with children and youth in communities at risk of radicalisation.  

 “Free, weekly football training in local schools helps ensure that cultural, ethnic  and religious communities are effectively engaged and mixed, breaking down  barriers and enhancing cross-cultural understanding.  

 “As well, it offers these young people a 10 month course in life skills, leadership,  resilience and communication training to spread these messages through digital  media to their own communities. 

 “The life skills training is combined with football coaching accreditation for youth  leaders who are then able to engage with their communities and schools as role  models and youth mentors.”  

 The Football United program will run in Blacktown, Fairfield, Liverpool, Granville  South, Chester Hill and Holroyd. 

 Mr Husic said the funding would bring benefits to communities right across  Western Sydney. 

 “Through football and mentorship, the program aims to promote health, well-being and school and community engagement for refugee, migrant, non-English  speaking, Indigenous and low socio-economic status children and young people. 

 “I have been engaged with Football United since its early days and commend the  work Football United does in promoting an accessible and engaging program that  provides opportunities for young people in Western Sydney.” 

 The funding announced today is already included in the Budget. 

 More information on the Building Community Resilience grants program and the  projects being funded can be found on the Attorney-General’s Department  website http://www.ag.gov.au. 

 

 BLACKTOWN  13 AUGUST 2013    

 Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111   www.alp.org.au  

 

 Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor, 5/9 Sydney Avenue, Barton, ACT, 2600 

 

