---
title: "Labor’s dangerous lurch to the right on refugees must be avoided"
date: "2013-07-02"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396594
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2562980%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Tuesday, 2 July 2013   

 Labor’s dangerous lurch to the right on refugees must be avoided   

 The Australian Greens are deeply concerned by the Labor Party’s continued, baseless claims  regarding refugees and its looming lurch to the right on immigration policy.    

 “The people who were disappointed by Julia Gillard’s lurch to the right will be heartbroken if Kevin  Rudd goes even further,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “We need to see a new, humane approach from the government, not a repeat of the Howard-era  cruelty.    

 “Over 90% of boat arrivals are genuine refugees and no amount of political rhetoric will change that.    

 “It is disgraceful for Bob Carr to try to tamper with the essential process of refugee determination,  which saves peoples’ lives, for cheap political gain.   

 “You can’t change the goal posts when you’re making life and death decisions.    

 “By committing to an emergency intake of up to 10,000 refugees out of Indonesia when he visits  there this week, the Prime Minister could show refugees that there are safer pathways than boats.    

 “The Houston Panel also recommended an extra $70 million be spent in the region, which could  boost refugee assessment capacity and provide welfare support for families waiting to be resettled.   

 “The Greens are standing up for a caring and rational response to the humanitarian crisis in our  region and I urge Kevin Rudd to do the same.”    

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

 NOAH SCHULTZ-BYARD  MEDIA ADVISER   

 OFFICE OF SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA 

 

 Level 7 / 147 Pirie St, Adelaide, SA 5000  TEL  +61 8 8227 0425   |   MOB  +61 427 604 760   |   FAX  +61 8 8227 0426     

 

 

 

