---
title: "Transcript of press conference: 30 July 2013: Coalition's "Tent City" Nauru policy; Australian funding of PNG infrastructure; first arrival of asylum seekers to Manus Island; the slowing of boat arrivals; risks posed to asylum seekers on Manus Island; making Manus Island safe for women and children, and the costing of the Government's PNG plan."
date: "2013-07-30"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397858
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2630345%22
---

 The Hon. Tony Burke MP  Minister for Immigration for Citizenship 

 

 Transcript   

 PRESS CONFERENCE    

 TUESDAY, 30 JULY 2013 

 

 

 

 TONY BURKE:                        Thanks very much for coming in today. 

 Today is the day that Tony Abbott 

 effectively admitted that turning back the  boats won't work. Up until now they have  been talking about how quickly they  thought that the current flow of boats  could stop. Today, for the first time, with  their new announcement, they have  started to acknowledge how the problems  of today are different to the challenges of a  decade ago.  

                                                 In the announcement today, and I don't 

 want to get into their game of trying to  find a political angle on everything, what  I'd rather do is look at what they've  announced today and work through how  what they've announced would have to be  changed if it was going to be effective.  There's some fairly dire errors that the  Coalition have made in today's 

 announcement and my approach very 

 much is to try to turn their announcement  into something that can be part of a more  mature and professional discussion.  

                                                They've had similar conversations on Nauru 

 to what I had last week. Last week I had  conversations with both the Justice  Minister, who I know Mr Morrison has met  with, and I presume he's also met, as I did,  with the President. In those discussions we  talked about the possible expansion of  capacity on Nauru. The difference, though,  isn't in the conversations we had in Nauru,  it's the response and how it's been handled  subsequently. Their concept has been no  matter what conversations they have or  whether they know what they're doing or  not, to quickly rush out for the 

 announcement, quickly rush out for the  sound bite, quickly rush out for the front  page.  

                                                 We saw it after the Prime Minister and I 

 first returned from Papua New Guinea and  they were out there in the media saying  see, they haven't agreed on anything, only  to find a few days later there was an  agreement. They then, after the 

 arrangement had been signed, were  rushing out misrepresenting private  conversations they'd had with the Prime  Minister of Papua New Guinea only to have 

 the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea  subsequently correct the record last night.  

                                                 And similarly with this, they've rushed out 

 with the idea of expanding 

 accommodation on Nauru, which of itself  does make sense, and as I say, I've had  similar conversations, but they made some  fairly fatal errors in the way they've done  it. And I think if they'd been thoughtful,  and worked through the issues sensibly,  and had a policy strategy rather than only a  media strategy, they probably wouldn't  have made these errors. The first, and it's a  dire error, is to put a figure on what the  capacity will be. Be in no doubt, people  smugglers want to know what the figure is  that they could then overwhelm. They  want to know that. To put the figure of  2,000 on it, at a time where people  smugglers in the current surge have been  getting more than 1,000 people in a week,  means that effectively the Coalition are  putting up in lights if you want to 

 overwhelm the policy here's how. Grossly  irresponsible, and I don't think they would  have had to have thought about it for long  to realise what a grave error that was.  

                                                 Similarly, they have shifted the language, 

 and I presume they've done this 

 accidentally, because I'd hate to think  they've done it deliberately. But shifted the 

 language from saying if you arrive by boat  without a visa you won't be settled in  Australia, to saying there's no guarantee  you will be settled in Australia. Now that  effectively leaves a window open to  settlement which I think is very unwise. If  we've learnt anything in the way people  smugglers have changed their operations  in recent years, and the way in which they  have been willing to put at risk the lives of  people on the high seas, it's that ultimately  the difference is whether or not people  smugglers have a product to sell. That  product is the chance to live and work in  Australia, and as long as the window is left  open that that product might be available  then people smugglers are able to get out  in the market and people will pay money  for them and people will end up drowning  in the Indian Ocean. That's the 

 consequence of not going to the source of  this challenge, and the challenge is do  people smugglers have a product to sell or  not?  

                                                 Now if you take away those two errors, if 

 instead of saying well we'd only go to  2,000 and you say we will go to whatever  capacity is required, and secondly, if you  work on the principle that people who now  come by boat will not be settled in 

 Australia, then you have a situation where  the people smugglers do not have a 

 product to sell. Now some people have  wanted to frame this as being a thump the  table, hardline let's-be-as tough-as-we-can  policy. Let's be in no doubt about the good  and decent motivations for a policy of this  sort. We want to stop people from  drowning. We want to make sure that the  most vulnerable people to fill our 

 humanitarian quota are chosen in  consultation with the United Nations, not  self-selected by people smugglers. And we  want to make sure that the people who are  waiting in refugee camps around the world  for up to a decade are actually able to get  access to our humanitarian quota in  Australia and that that humanitarian quota  is getting bigger rather than smaller.  

                                                 These are good reasons to pursue the 

 policies that we've pursued and that we  are continuing to implement. But it also  goes to the heart of the dangers of rushing  to the announcement without thinking  things through. I don't doubt in terms of a  media strategy what Tony Abbott and  Scott Morrison have done today is first  class. But in terms of doing something  about people drowning on the high seas  it's childish. You don't set a limit on  capacity. The moment you do, that you  give people smugglers a target to fill, and  instead of it being a policy for five years by  putting that limit on capacity it's effectively 

 a policy for a fortnight. Similarly, you  cannot leave the window open to 

 settlement in Australia. That gives people  smugglers a product to sell. And if they  have a product to sell, we all know the  tragic consequences that will follow.  

                                                 Australia is still working with both Papua 

 New Guinea and with Nauru and we will  continue to work with Indonesia as we get  closer to the summit that is being hosted  by President Yudhoyono. We have  significant problems in our region. They are  not identical to the problems of a decade  ago and we need to make sure that we,  that in our policy responses we are flexible,  mature, professional and dealing with the  policies at their source.  

 QUESTION:                            The Papua New Guinea Prime Minister says  that there's even more aid on the way, in  terms of hospitals and schools and  whatnot for the country. What discussions  have you had with him about extra funding  on top of their [indistinct]?  

 TONY BURKE:                       The principles that are agreed to by 

 Australia and Papua New Guinea were  found in the first document, when the two  Prime Ministers had their signing, was that  the, Friday before last - the first document  they signed dealt with some specific aid  issues, the second was the arrangement 

 with respect to processing and settlement  of asylum seekers. In that first one, and the  carriage of this is with Bob Carr and  Melissa Parke rather than with myself, but  on that first document there were issues  such as the Lae Hospital, a number of  specific development issues that Papua  New Guinea was seeking and that  Australia's agreed to work through in  terms of the policy detail of the 

 implementation of that, that resides in  someone other than me.  

 QUESTION:                            Do you think this is a genuine policy 

 announcement from the Coalition, or are  they just boasting about talks they've had  with Nauru, some loose talks?  

 TONY BURKE:                        Look, I can say one thing in all of this, there  is no doubt Tony Abbott and Scott 

 Morrison really enjoy the politics of this. I  don't. I think we've got a really serious  problem and a really serious challenge.  And I also believe we are now putting the  policies in place to be able to fix it. So I'm  not going to rush to the opportunity to try  to tear down or pull apart anything that  they suggest. Scott Morrison has clearly  had similar conversations on Nauru to  some of what I had but he's rushed to  announcement without thinking through  some of the detail and some of what he's  put forward would have the exact opposite 

 consequences to what I honestly believe  that he would want in terms of the policy.  

                                                So what they've done in today's 

 announcement - aspects of it, and some of  the ideas there are reasonable and similar  to some of the conversations the 

 Government's already commenced. The  difference is they haven't cared about the  detail, and in doing so some of the details  that have appeared in today's papers, if  implemented, would be exactly what the  people smugglers want and the 

 consequences of that would be disastrous.  

 QUESTION:                            What aspects have you discussed with the  Government there?  

 TONY BURKE:                        Look, unlike the Coalition, I don't meet 

 with the heads of foreign countries and run  off to media conferences before we finalise  arrangements. And that meant a couple of  weeks ago we put up with three or four  days of Scott Morrison and Tony Abbott  getting a good run in the media saying  we'd completely failed to reach an  agreement with Papua New Guinea on our  return… 

 QUESTION:                            But surely… 

 TONY BURKE:                        Now, I'm still going to answer your 

 question, but I'm explaining the difference  in approach because I think the difference  in approach does go to whether or not  people are actually ready for government.  You know, if you're ready for government -  if you're not ready to deal with our nearest  neighbours in a mature way, then it would  be a very strange thing to be running  Australia.  

                                                 Now, in terms of the discussions that I've 

 had with the Government of Nauru, there  are a number of issues still under 

 discussion and still having details finalised.  The concept of expansion, yes, discussed.  The concept of restoring the facilities that  had been damaged, yes, discussions about  that. Similarly, we also had very direct  discussions about the people who were on  charges under the law of Nauru, and I  made clear that the view of Australia is  that we are not asking the Government of  Nauru to do anything other than 

 implement the law of Nauru for people  who broke their law. They have some  additional issues with prison capacity as a  result of that, where there are now a large  number of people being housed in prisons  that are not designed to take that number  of people.  

                                                But most importantly, the Government of 

 Nauru wanted an assurance from me that  in the wake of the riots that had taken  place Australia was not about to walk away  from the arrangements with Nauru, and  that's an assurance I gave them.  

 QUESTION:                            Surely the Government of Nauru has some  say as to how much of the capacity is  increased. Can you assure if you increase, if  you expand the capacity, that there will be  no limit?  

 TONY BURKE:                        We don't only have the capacity to expand  on Nauru, we also have the capacity to  expand in Papua New Guinea, specifically  within Manus Island and there's a number  of announcements of particular sites that,  when they're ready, I will make. But I'm  not going to start announcing things just as  thought bubbles. I'm waiting for everything  to be properly agreed before we get there.  

                                                 But it's essential that no matter how many 

 people test our resolve, no matter how  many there are, the capacity is found. You  have to do that and the reason you have to  be willing to make that commitment is you  need to think through what the alternative  is if you don't make that commitment,  because the moment you do what the  Coalition have done today as a government  and put a limit on capacity, people 

 smugglers can game it and they know  exactly how many people they have to  push across and at which point they can go  back to business as usual because offshore  is full, and that's why you will never find  me, either in public or private language,  limiting the capacity at these different  sites. Be in no doubt they will test our  resolve. Also be in no doubt the number of  spaces for accommodation will always be  more than the number of people requiring  it and we'll make sure of that. 

 QUESTION:                            Do you foresee setting up an arrangement  like that of PNG and Nauru [indistinct] by  that I mean resettlement and processing  there as a permanent alternative? 

 TONY BURKE:                        There's been very broad - there is a 

 discussion of the Papua New Guinea  arrangement and I was being asked how  that operates. We've made clear though  we're not going to go around the Pacific  shopping the idea around and trying to  leverage countries into agreeing to  resettlement arrangements. Papua New  Guinea raised the concept with us  originally and the Prime Minister's  previously said that. Prime Minister Peter  O'Neill came to Prime Minister Rudd  wanting to find ways of helping, and so our  approach with the rest of our approach  with the rest of our regions is the same, 

 which is people are aware of the problem,  we are working cooperatively within the  region but we are not going around trying  to sell the arrangement to Nauru or to  anyone else.  

                                                 But the nations in the region are well 

 aware that this is something that is helpful  to Australia and they're also aware that the  arrangement with Papua New Guinea has  been drafted in such a way to leave open  the possibility of it being an even broader  regional approach. 

 QUESTION:                            Can PNG rely on it being a broader 

 approach [indistinct]…? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Yes. 

 QUESTION:                            Under your policy when will the first group  of asylum seekers go to Manus Island and  how many will there be in that group? 

 TONY BURKE:                        My approach has always been that, and I  said this the day that we announced the  new arrangement, which is that that you  can't send people until their health checks  are complete. Tony Abbott has dared me  to send people on time frames that would  not allow health checks or inoculations to  take place and, as I said previously, that  was grossly irresponsible of him and 

 another example of them not thinking  through things before they say them. At  least in radio there's what, a five or seven-second delay before it going to the  microphone and reaching the public. I  don't think member of the Coalition have  that five or seven-second delay in their  own heads between the thought bubble  and when they talk.  

                                                So my approach has always been we will 

 not send people until their health checks  are complete. Health checks in the  ordinary course take in the order of about  two weeks. That the time frame for me is  not a deadline that I believe under all  circumstances it just must be met. The  time frame that matters to me is when  health checks are being complete, then  people can start going across for different  cohorts of people, different groups of  people, different groups of people. My  view is for each group we need to make  sure that they are safe, that 

 accommodation is appropriate and that  services are appropriate. And I'm keeping it  within a policy frame rather than a  deadline frame. 

 QUESTION:                            After the initial spike in arrivals there has 

 been a slowdown in the last few weeks.  Does that suggest the policy is working to  you? 

 TONY BURKE:                        I don't read too much into the recent 

 slowdown. My view is people smugglers  will actively try to overwhelm us and they  will then discover that couldn't and,  unfortunately, that will have some awful  consequences for some desperate people  in the high seas. I don't want that to be the  case, but it's my view that the people  smugglers will probably continue to try to  test our resolve.  

 QUESTION:                            There are reports in today's paper that the  first group of 40 single men will be sent to  Manus Island possibly sometime today or  tonight. I know you've set the time frame  [indistinct] tell us? 

 TONY BURKE:                        I'm not defining timeframes other than 

 how I've said it. I've said it exactly that way  for, you know, about a week and a half. I'm  not about to change. 

 QUESTION:                            So will you tell us then when they've 

 arrived on Manus Island, [indistinct] when  will you announce the first…? 

 TONY BURKE:                        We've always, and we've done this when  we've done returns to Sri Lanka, when  we've sent people for processing, when  people arrive at various sites, that's always  made public. There will be nothing secret  when people arrive or anything like that.  But, you know, with health checks there 

 are a number of different issues that come  together for different individuals, and I'm  just not going to get into a game of any  deadlines other than the policy ones.  

 QUESTION:                            What's your response to the report today 

 about pregnant women and young  children, and anti-malarial medications,  and the risk that that poses on Manus  Island?  

 TONY BURKE:                        If you go back to the principles that I've 

 applied, and they are that people need to  be safe, that there needs to be appropriate  accommodation and appropriate services,  there is a reason why I won't define it  further than that. People will often come  up with an example of someone and say  well, if it's someone of this description will  you rule out sending them in a way as to  try to get you to have a compassionate  response to that individual. But you can't  limit your compassion to the people who  are in the line of sight. If, for example, I  carved out children of a particular age, it  would take about a fortnight before we  saw boat loads of children of that age  being pushed across the Indian Ocean. And  that is not a compassionate way to behave.  So my policy principle is that people will be  - everyone will end up being sent offshore.  But they will be sent at a time that I am  confident they are safe, that their 

 accommodation is appropriate and that  services are appropriate.  

 QUESTION:                            And that suggests months, but surely it's 

 no more or less compassionate to send  young women and children into a country  where there's a known health risk?  

 TONY BURKE:                        And you can draw whatever inference you  want on these issues, I'm not getting into  arbitrary time frames. I'm making sure that  the policy principles that I've been  consistent on the whole way through are  what applies and I will certainly never - and  might I say I don't think it's in the interests  of any Australians or of the media to ask  me to do something where the 

 consequence, if you think it through,  would be an increased likelihood that that  would become the exact type of person  who people smugglers will be pushing on  to the high seas. 

 QUESTION:                            Perhaps if you detail what measures you 

 will take to ensure that Manus Island is an  appropriate safe place for pregnant  women and young children?  

 TONY BURKE:                        The challenges are different depending on  different individuals. For example, there  could be a series of different health  ailments that people arrive with, and  different level of services are needed to be 

 provided depending on the state of health  of particular individuals, depending on  disability of particular individuals. Similarly,  there can be very different experiences  that have led to different mental health  outcomes that require a different standard  of mental health service for people. If you  have somebody who is making a refugee  claim but under any definition, even their  own version of events, has no history of  torture and trauma, then the level of  services that you would provide for them is  quite different, quite different, to what you  provide from somebody who on their own  version of events has in fact experienced  severe torture and trauma.  

                                                 And this is where when you get into 

 generalisations beyond the actual  individuals, you end up setting some  artificial benchmarks. The principles need  to be the people are safe, that 

 accommodation is appropriate, and that  services are appropriate. Health services  are part of that and the safe - the issue -  primary issue of people being safe goes to  health advice as well.  

 QUESTION:                            Minister, you've said earlier that this is 

 Tony Abbott admitting that turning back  the boats won't work, something to that  effect, hasn't he always said though that 

 it's turning back the boats when it's safe to  do so, so there's still a bit of scope there?  

 TONY BURKE:                        Well, he's now talking about thousands 

 where he's already decided it's not safe to  do so. I think we know where the boat turn  back policy is left.  

 QUESTION:                            The Fijian Foreign Minister was pretty 

 critical of the PNG policy yesterday, are  you concerned about our relationship with  countries in the region?  

 TONY BURKE:                        The comments that I've seen in the papers  out of Fiji basically presume that Australia  is out there selling the policy and trying to  pressure countries to be involved. As I  remarked earlier in this media conference,  the opposite is true.  

 QUESTION:                           What conversations have you had with the  PNG Government about social discord,  rubbish dumped  [indistinct] around  Manus Island, and what is the Australian  Government doing or committing to doing  to kind of help resolve those issues around  that?  

 TONY BURKE:                        The first thing - there are specific 

 accommodation issues that we're working  through on different locations within  Manus at the moment. And a lot of the 

 social issues go to the extent to which  there are local employment opportunities  out of Manus, and there has been a  frustration from some within Papua New  Guinea that - with Papua New Guinea  generally wanting to make sure that there  are enough local jobs coming from it. But  then on Manus Island there is a specific  issue as to whether the jobs are coming  from people who are Papua New Guinean,  but not from Manus itself. And that's  effectively the tension. So I haven't just  been meeting with government officials,  I've also met with the governor of Manus,  Governor Benjamin, and I've also met with  the other member of Parliament for there,  Ronnie Knight and had discussions with  each of them about these issues.  

                                                 Some of these issues, though, go to where 

 we end up with settlement arrangements.  Now we're at a point right now where  people affected have not been sent there.  Once they're sent there their claims need  to be processed. If their claims are valid  and they do have a well-founded fear of  persecution under the Refugee 

 Convention, it's at that point that we're  looking at settlement arrangements, and  they aren't necessarily on Manus. 

 QUESTION:                            Do we have a budget yet for any of these 

 announcements, do we know how much all  of this is going to cost, in the ballpark?  

 TONY BURKE:                        Yeah look, the actual cost depends on how  many people decide to test our resolve.  What happens in the ordinary course with  budgets is estimates on all of that are done  and appear in the budget update which the  Treasurer has said that he will be releasing.  

 QUESTION:                            By wanting to expand Nauru, aren't you 

 and the Opposition conceding that the  boats can't be stopped or at least 

 significantly reduced because why else  would you expand capacity?  

 TONY BURKE:                        Really simple, because I'm confident, and I  was from the day of the announcement,  that people smugglers will test our resolve  and that's exactly what they've been doing.  So when you know they're going to test  your resolve, you need to make sure that  you have a capacity - you're able to expand  your capacity and make sure that there is  no upper limit that they feel if they reach  then they've won. And that's my concern  and why I think in all honesty, if the  Opposition had spent more than a few  seconds thinking about this before they  went to announcement, they never would  have put an upper limit on the 

 accommodation figure.  

 QUESTION:                            So when do they stop testing your resolve?    

 TONY BURKE:                        Well I think the truth is that the key people  who we need to reach here are not the  smugglers, it's the customers. I think that's  the truth of it. Smugglers are running a  business that they know is illegal, that they  know causes people's deaths. I don't think  they're going to be highly engaged in  rational policy discussion. But for the  customers themselves there are campaigns  being run up and down the pipeline from  source countries through transit countries,  but most importantly the issue that it  keeps coming back to for the strongest  point of contact, and strongest source of  advice for people who are considering  paying a people smuggler, it's friends,  relatives and contacts back in Australia,  and that's why the domestic campaign is so  important.  

 QUESTION:                            The PNG policy has also been criticised by 

 female Afghan MPs who say that Afghan  women facing danger in Afghanistan will  face more danger in PNG, isn't that a  reason to revisit the policy?  

 TONY BURKE:                        I heard that interview today and it goes 

 once again to why I'm making sure that we  keep the three commitments and decisions  are made based on the three 

 commitments, which is to say that people  need to be safe, they need to have 

 appropriate accommodation and  appropriate services. I might say though  some of the arguments that have been  running with respect to Papua New Guinea  would imply that we should evacuate  everyone from Papua New Guinea from  that country. I struggle with the argument  that says conditions for our nearest  neighbour are such that somebody who  has travelled across the world could not  possibly live there but it's quite OK for our  friends on the other side of the Torres  Strait to live there. I find that a 

 disappointing argument when it's run in  those terms.  

 QUESTION:                            Do you know if Indonesia has stopped 

 giving Iranians visas yet, on arrival? And if  so is it having the desired effect?  

 TONY BURKE:                        My understanding is the date for that is 

 later next month. So I would not expect  that we would have seen an impact on that  yet. But certainly I would expect that  people who are in Iran are starting to  realise that the rules have changed.  

 QUESTION:                            Just to confirm, Mr O'Neill also said last 

 night that the costs of all asylum seekers  coming from or going to Australia would be  borne by Australia [indistinct]. Is that your 

 understanding, and how far will those  costs be borne?  

 TONY BURKE:                        Well, some people have raised this 

 concept of, you know, how long Australia  will keep paying a bill. Let's not forget, at  the moment where people prior to the  announcement have been settled within  Australia, the settlement costs get borne  by the Australian taxpayer forever.  Settlement costs in Papua New Guinea, for  most areas, probably come out less as a  cost to the taxpayer than they do within  Australia. So I don't think we should view  this purely through a fiscal lens but the  truth is, whatever the cost ends up being  to make sure that people are properly  settled, it is hard to imagine that that cost  for that part of it is higher because they're  in Papua New Guinea.  

 QUESTION:                            When you say forever and less, do you 

 mean it will still be forever but it will cost  less, or there will be a point, say five years,  it will no longer cost? 

 TONY BURKE:                        What I'm saying is if people are settled in 

 Australia then any costs that subsequently  incur are borne by the Australian taxpayer.  That is already the case. We're making sure  that as a result of assisting Australia in this  way, that Papua New Guinea will not end  up having a cost borne by itself when 

 they're helping with a regional approach  and directly helping Australia. But the  precise nature of those settlement  arrangements, how funding is front ended,  how funding is dealt with in different ways,  is still being worked through but let's not  forget in terms of timing - at the moment,  as we speak, we haven't transferred  anyone under the new arrangement to  Papua New Guinea yet, because we've  been waiting for the health checks to be  complete.  

                                                 Once they're there they then have to have 

 their claims processed, that takes some  time. It's only after their claims are  processed, if they're found to have a claim  under - a successful claim under the  convention, at that point we're looking at  settlement. And some of the settlement  options will be different for different  individuals. Very simple example: there will  no doubt be some single adult males who  have particular skills that are wanted by  Papua New Guinea for jobs at various sites  where they have particular industrial  projects going on. There will be - but you  will find for family groups, that there may  well be quite different locations that are  more appropriate for settlement. These  issues will be worked through but the  policy will be implemented.  

 QUESTION:                            So it's fair to say then that the costs are 

 fairly open ended at this stage?  

 TONY BURKE:                        Well, if you say that something that would  cost less than what it's already costing  because it is already being borne by the  Australian taxpayer within Australia…  

 QUESTION:                            How can you say that if you don't know 

 what it costs?  

 TONY BURKE:                        Well, for example, if you compare the 

 costs of education, if you compare the  costs of health service, if you compare the  costs of welfare support, if you compare a  whole series of costs between the two  countries, I don't know how you can end  up with a conclusion other than the one  I've just put.  

 QUESTION:                            But those in Australia eventually 

 [indistinct] eventually might become  refugees, and they could become  taxpayers themselves?   

 TONY BURKE:                        That's right, as you presume would happen  within Papua New Guinea. It's no different  in the way that follows through.  

 QUESTION:                            Just to clarify, the Opposition has 

 announced this Nauru policy, how  advanced were your discussions, or the 

 Government's discussions, with Nauru?  How - to what extent is this something  you've already considered?  

 TONY BURKE:                        We - the concept of expansions, using 

 tents and marquees, all of those 

 conversations have happened. But, you  know, I'm not going to get into a silly thing  of, you know, how dare they rush out and  announce it. If, you know - to the extent  that they've announced some parts of it  that are good, if they feel that they got a  good day in the media out of it good on  them, but to the extent that they got  details that actually provide a gift to  people smugglers, I think it's important  that I clarify that those parts of it should  have been thought through before they  were announced.  

 QUESTION:                            I understand that Mr Kennett said this 

 morning in reference to both sides of  politics' policies, that you're treating  asylum seekers like sacks of potatoes, do  you have a response to that?  

 TONY BURKE:                        You bet I do. You bet I do. I won't accept 

 for a minute that we should limit our  compassion to people who are in the line  of sight. I do believe we need to make sure  that we are appropriate and decent and  compassionate to the people who are in  front of us. But I don't believe that gives us 

 an excuse to ignore people who drown in  the Indian Ocean. I don't believe that gives  us an excuse to ignore the people who wait  for more than a decade in camps in Africa.  I don't believe that gives us an excuse to  pretend that there aren't criminal  networks that are behind this, that are  exploiting people.  

                                                 So if it were the case that the only person 

 in front of us was the person who has  reached Australia and is seeking asylum,  then there would at least be a 

 conversation to have with those arguments  that you've reported from Mr Kennett. But  for heaven's sake, he might feel he has the  luxury to ignore those other consequences,  I certainly don't.  

 QUESTION:                            Is it the most compassionate response to 

 provide some of the money that would be  spent on expansion in Nauru to helping the  UNHCR fly people to Australia so they skip  that dangerous boat trip and lose their  lives at sea?  

 TONY BURKE:                        Well, that's what our humanitarian 

 program does. Our humanitarian program  that used to cover 13,000 people now  covers 20,000 people, and if the policies  we've set ahead work then we want to  start looking at whether we can go to  27,000 people. All of those people fly here 

 when you've got the humanitarian  program working in its complete way.  None of them drown. That is the most  compassionate way to do things.  

                                                 And that's why we need to make sure that 

 there's not a benefit for people to be able  to pay a smuggler instead. Our 

 humanitarian program doesn't let people  drown. But smugglers do, and that's why  we need to take away the product that  they're selling.  

 QUESTION:                            Couldn't money going into expansion go 

 into helping the humanitarian process  become a faster process so people aren't  waiting five, seven, ten years?  

 TONY BURKE:                        Well, let's not forget, if what we're doing  works the way I hope it will, and we get to  the figures that I've said I hope we get to,  we are still dealing with millions of people  around the world. We're still dealing with a  situation where Australia on its own will  never be able to take so many people that  no one ever thinks to pay a people 

 smuggler, that no one ever thinks to put  their life at risk on the high seas. So the  only way to make sure that we get the  humanitarian outcome of our own  program, and that we're able to do  something about the drownings and loss of 

 life, is to make sure that the people  smugglers don't have a product to sell.  

 QUESTION:                            The baby boy on the front page of the 

 papers yesterday, his name was Abul and  the authorities didn’t name him until  reporters spoke to the family - why don't  we name people who die on the way to  Australia, isn't that denying them some  semblance of humanity?  

 TONY BURKE:                        My view on naming of anyone is - decisions  on whether someone is named should be  in consultation with the family, that's view  my view. And there can be circumstances,  for example, where by virtue of having  named someone who has fled and died, if  they were in fact a genuine refugee that  can put their relatives back in the source  country in a great deal of danger. We need  to understand, and this is once again -  there are a lot of ideas that come to mind  at different points, and we think oh yeah  that's the good and decent thing to do. We  need to logically think through what are  the repercussions.  

                                                 Now my view on this is that with anyone 

 who has fled a country we need to be very  careful that we don't make media  decisions that put their families in danger  back in their original country. We also need  to be - need to make sure that we are 

 being respectful to people who are  grieving, and I think we need to make sure  that we deal with the entirety of that  framework. I don't disagree with the  concept of the humanity of what you  describe. When that boy - that boy was the  first person to die on my watch, when he  did I asked my Department for his name  and they were straight away, well you can't  release it and I said no, no, no, I just want  to know his name.  

                                                And so I understand why people want to 

 know this. The humanity of it is important,  and none of us should have a moment  where we stop realising that this is a real  issue for people's lives, it is - no matter  how much political interest there is in it, it  is not a political game. But I think that's a  framework to determine whether or not a  name is released.  

                                                Thank you. 

 

 

