---
title: "Labor commits to language skills for jobs"
date: "2013-08-12"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398692
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2757834%22
---

 

 

 

 LABOR COMMITS TO LANGUAGE SKILLS FOR JOBS 

 Minister for Multicultural Affairs Kate Lundy 

 MIRRABOOKA 

 12 AUGUST 2013  

 Recent refugees and migrants will gain valuable workplace skills and experience through  innovative English language programs that will link learning directly to employment pathways. 

 Visiting a career fair in Perth today, Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Kate Lundy, announced  Federal Labor would commit $5 million to help Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP) providers  build innovative partnerships with employers and industry. 

 This program will help prepare more migrants for job opportunities by helping them develop  greater confidence and experience in an Australian workplace setting while they are developing  better English language skills.  

 Federal Labor knows that finding a job is an important part of the settlement process and  employment provides a sense of stability and belonging for many of our refugees and migrants.  

 The program will help providers be more flexible and innovative with the delivery of their English  language programs which will ensure better outcomes for participants. 

 In developing projects, providers will need to work in partnership with employers and industry to  deliver relevant English language training that reflects the needs and skill sets of specific  workplaces. 

 The AMEP program, which was established in 1948, has provided the opportunity for more than  1.5 million new migrants to learn English. 

 This new focus for English language programs will complement the Rudd Labor Government’s  $6.6 million Migrant Communities Employment Fund and further ensure that all Australians who  can work, benefit from the dignity, security and independence that a job can bring. Funding for  this commitment is already included in the budget. 

 

