---
title: "End of monsoon and Labor's broken policies lead to fresh boat surge"
date: "2013-03-20"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392256
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2316586%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison 

 End of monsoon and Labor's broken policies lead to fresh boat surge 

 20/03/13 

 Five boats with over 300 people on board have arrived in just two days, as the monsoon weather  breaks, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “The breaking of the monsoon weather, together with Labor’s broken border protection policies is  seeing a fresh surge in illegal boats. It is the perfect environment for people smugglers to profit,” Mr  Morrison said. 

 “Ten boats carrying over 600 people have arrived in just the last seven days and 1,000 people have  arrived so far this month. This is the biggest March ever for illegal boat arrivals as well as the biggest  first quarter of any calendar year. 

 “Labor will not change any of its failed policies. They just don’t see continued illegal boat arrivals as  anything but a political problem, one they hope they can sweep under the carpet with endless  distractions. 

 “The Coalition has stopped the boats before and will do it again with our proven suite of border  protection measures, combined with the resolve necessary to take on the people smugglers,” Mr  Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “Five boats have now arrived in just two days under Labor’s watch, with the latest  arrivals transferred directly to the Australian mainland. 

 “Not only did this latest illegal vessel almost reach the mainland undetected but its passengers were  then transferred directly to Darwin, despite the Government claiming to have implemented tough  offshore processing laws. 

 “It is not good enough for vessels to be arriving on Australia’s doorstep undetected. 

 “Labor doesn’t adequately fund or staff the Australia Customs and Border Protection Service yet still  expects it to handle the crisis that is occurring at our borders,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

