---
title: "Abbott undermines Australia's Defence capability"
date: "2013-03-25"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392480
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2326622%22
---

 

 

   Christine Milne 

 Australian Senate  Australian Greens Leader 

 media release

  Monday 25 March 2013  Abbott undermines Australia's Defence capability: Greens  “The Special Report on Climate Change and Defence released by the Australian Strategic Policy Institute today underlines just how dangerous Tony Abbott's climate denialism is for the future security of Australia.” Christine Milne, Australian Greens leader said today  “Any nation that deliberately ignores looming security threats and fails to prepare its Defence Forces leaving them untrained and ill equipped is selling out the country and the well-being of its citizens and that is exactly what a Coalition government would do.”    “Increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, diminishing water resources, desertification, changing disease patterns and the flooding of low lying areas gravely threaten people’s lives and livelihoods, and exacerbate the likelihood of conflict and forced migration.”    “The Greens were highly critical of the fact that the 2009 Defence White Paper dismissed climate change as an issue for future generations. It was clear then, as it has become apparent now, that climate change is a risk too great to be ignored and needs a whole of government response.  “A major failing of both the Rudd and Gillard Governments has been that the Department of Defence has ignored climate change and the Department of Energy and Resources has exacerbated it. Tony Abbott would only make matters worse.  “It is ironic the Coalition, which argues that it will secure Australia's borders, are the ones who will undermine them.  “Australia is out of step with contemporary security experts. There is a risk that Australia will be unprepared for climate security impacts that include mass displacement of as many as 150-200 million ‘climate refugees', the intensification of intrastate conflicts and growing regional instability as the struggle for resources becomes a major driver of war and conflict,” Greens assistant defence spokesperson Senator Scott Ludlam said.   “Australia is now four years behind other nations, including the US, when it comes to Defence climate change planning.”   “The cabinet reshuffle creates opportunity for new response. The Climate Change Ministry needs to be elevated to a position of strategic oversight of a whole of government approach, not downsized and downgraded.” Christine Milne said.    Media contact Alexandra Lamb on 0437 587 562 

