---
title: "Galaxy poll shows surge to Greens in Melbourne Majority opposes Labor's refugee policy"
date: "2013-08-04"
creators:
  - "Bandt, Adam"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398185
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2643229%22
---

 Media Release   

 Adam Bandt MP  Deputy Leader, Australian Greens  Federal Member for Melbourne   

 Galaxy poll shows surge to Greens in Melbourne Majority opposes Labor's refugee policy   

 4 August 2013   

 Greens Deputy Leader and Federal Member for Melbourne, Adam Bandt, says a Galaxy poll showing  a surge in support for the Greens in Melbourne reflects concern over Labor's refugee policy and cuts  to clean energy and universities.   

 Mr Bandt says the poll shows that even if the Liberals preference Labor he will be able to hold the  seat.   

 The Galaxy poll conducted in the Federal electorate has support for the Greens at 48%, Labor on  29% and Liberals on 21%. The results would produce a 2PP outcome of 66% for Mr Bandt or 56% if  the Liberals direct preferences to Labor.   

 68% say they are satisfied with Mr Bandt and 62% say they oppose Labor's new stance on refugees,  with only 29% supporting the policy.   

 The poll shows 56% of Labor voters oppose Mr Rudd's new policy.   

 "These results support what we've been saying for some time. Even if Labor and Tony Abbott  conspire on preferences we can still hold the seat," Mr Bandt said.   

 "The results of this survey reflect the values of people in Melbourne, who are strongly behind our  action on clean energy, refugees and uni cuts. It also reflects the work we have done over three  years to involve people in our movement for change through community organising."   

 "While others around us in politics have been losing their heads, we've kept ours. I have kept my  eyes on the bigger picture, providing stability and offering a thoughtful alternative. I think people  appreciate that."   

 "These results match what I am hearing from people right across the electorate. People are  disappointed and angry about Labor's hardline policy on refugees."   

 "It's one poll and things can change a lot between now and the election. I won't be taking the  support of people in Melbourne for granted. I will be working hard every day until 6 PM on election  day to communicate the Greens' plan for the future."   

 At the last election, Mr Bandt secured 36% of the vote, Labor 38% and the Liberals 21%.   

 Contact: Damien Lawson 0487 900 005   

 Link to full poll - http://www.adambandt.com/galaxy_poll_shows_surge_to_greens_in_melbourne   

 Damien Lawson 

 

 Strategy and Communications Adviser  Office of Adam Bandt MP  T: 03 9642 0922 M: 0487 900 005  www.adambandt.com   

