---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Fairfield: 23 September 2013"
date: "2013-09-23"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211442781
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3281668%22
---

 Chris Bowen   

 SHADOW TREASURER 

 DOORSTOP, FAIRFIELD  Posted September 23, 2013  

 CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks for coming everybody. Well today we have seen the first  briefing from the new Minister for Immigration in relation to border protection. The  Government has confirmed that they will not be releasing media releases when a boat  arrives in Australia, tearing up transparency and hiding the facts from the Australian  people. Let’s be very clear about this, if the previous Government had attempted  something like this, Mr Morrison would have jumped up and down and claimed all sorts  of conspiracies. Having reached government he finds it very convenient…(recording  interrupted)…there is no operational reason, no operational reason not to issue press  releases on each boat arrival. 

 At no point did the previous Government receive any advice from the military or from  any national security expert that the releases of boat arrivals were jeopardising  operational integrity. At no point did I receive that advice as a former Minister; at no  point was that advice tendered. And yet, the new Government has implemented this  policy in its first week. 

 Secondly, we just saw Mr Morrison in quite an extraordinary revelation say that he would  not be revealing if any boats are being turned back. Turning back the boats has been a  centrepiece of Coalition policy now for a long time. They’ve told us at every opportunity  that they would turn back boats where it was safe to do so. Now we’re seeing Mr  Morrison saying we may or may not tell you if we’ve every turned a boat back. This lack  of transparency is completely unacceptable. 

 It would be completely unacceptable to the Australian people. If the new Government  want to be taken seriously they need to be honest with the Australian people. There is  no excuse not to tell the Australian media and the Australian people when a boat has  arrived and not to tell the Australian people when a boat has been turned around. 

 Now I think this policy is actually quite naive. If the new Government thinks that it is not  going to become public when a new boat has been turned back or arrives in Australia I  think they will be sadly mistaken. But they’re the ones that should be telling the  Australian people. 

 Mr Morrison just complained that the previous Government was too transparent and too  accountable and provided too much information. Quite an extraordinary criticism for him  to make and quite a misplaced criticism. 

 So, it’s up to the new Government. They can review this policy, they can be up front  with the Australian people, they can tell the Australian people when a boat has arrived,  and they can tell the Australian people when a boat’s been turned back. 

 If they don’t do that the Australian people are entitled to conclude that they are not  being up front, that they are more interested with controlling the media cycle, they’re 

 more interested in the spin than the reality, they’re more interested in stopping the  press releases than stopping the boats 

 

