---
title: "TPVs & turning back boats will cost lives"
date: "2013-09-18"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211440384
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2733047%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Wednesday, 18 September 2013   

 TPVs & turning back boats will cost lives: Greens   

  The Australian Greens have slammed Tony Abbott’s decision to re-introduce cruel,  Howard-era temporary protection visas to fast-track refugees back to potential danger  and will move to stop it when parliament resumes.   

 "On day one, Tony Abbott has breached international law and upset our closest  neighbour with his dangerous and cruel refugee policy," Greens immigration  spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 "Resurrecting Howard’s Temporary Protection Visas is simply toying with human  lives and will, once again, increase the number of women and children risking dangerous  boat journeys.    

 "The Greens will move to stop the re-introduction of TPVs in the parliament. They are a  cruel breach of law and undermine genuine protection for refugees who have fled war,  torture and brutality.    

  "The new Prime Minister is already an embarrassment on the world stage and  Indonesia has already rejected his government's arrogant immigration policy. Many  Australians are shuddering at the thought of Tony Abbott strutting around at APEC later  this month.    

 “Forcing our navy officers and customs personnel to turn back boats is dangerous and  will cost lives. Former Admiral Barry is right to denounce Mr. Abbott's perilous  policy. Turn backs and TPVs will cost lives."    

 

 Media Contact: Amy Moran 0427 604 760   

 

 

 

 

