---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 13 July 2013: search and rescue for missing asylum seekers."
date: "2013-07-13"
creators:
  - "Clare, Jason"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397088
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2593136%22
---

 THE HON. JASON CLARE MP   MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE   

 TRANSCRIPT       

 

 13 July 2013  Sydney 

 

 

 JASON CLARE: This morning I have been briefed by the head of Border Protection  Command Rear Admiral David Johnson. I can now give you the latest information  that we have. Can I stress that this information is the initial advice provided to me,  and that information is subject to change.   

 Last night our officers have rescued 88 people, and they've recovered the body of a  little baby boy. The advice to me is that 97 people, the initial advice to me is that  there were 97 people on board, and a search and rescue effort is happening right  now. That search and rescue is happening 87 nautical miles north of Christmas  Island.    

 It involves two of our Navy patrol boats, HMAS Bathurst and HMAS Albany, as well  as a merchant vessel named Garden City River, as well as the Royal Australian Air  Force's P-3 Orion aircraft and two chartered AMSA aircraft. The Customs Vessel  Triton that rescued the 88 people last night has now transferred those people to  Christmas Island. Let me take you through the chronology of events that have been  provided to me.   

 At approximately 11:15am Australian Eastern Standard Time yesterday, the  Australian Federal Police advised the Australian Maritime Safety Authority that they  had received a call from a man in Melbourne, who said that he'd received a call on  his mobile phone from a person on a vessel, saying that the vessel was in trouble,  and at that time provided a partial GPS position for the vessel. At approximately  12:30pm Australian Eastern Standard Time, the Rescue Coordination Centre  requested the assistance of Border Protection Command to locate the vessel.    

 At approximately 2:30pm Australian Eastern Standard Time, Border Protection  Command advised that they believe the vessel was approximately 108 nautical miles  north of Christmas Island. At approximately 3pm Australian Eastern Standard Time,  the Rescue Coordination Centre released a broadcast to shipping in the area,  seeking assistance. At approximately 4:30pm Australian Eastern Standard Time, the  Australian Customs vessel Triton was directed to proceed north to be ready to assist  if necessary.    

 At approximately 4:45pm Australian Eastern Standard Time, the Rescue  Coordination Centre advised Border Protection Command that the Federal Police  had received further calls from a person on the vessel, and information from the  caller suggested that the vessel was disabled, that it was taking on water, and that  there were over 90 people on board the vessel. At that time, the Rescue  Coordination Centre requested the release of the Triton. At approximately 4:50pm  Australian Eastern Standard Time, Triton was directed to proceed to the location of  the vessel seeking assistance.   

 At approximately 6pm Australian Eastern Standard Time, the merchant vessel  Garden City River also headed towards the boat seeking assistance. At  approximately 7pm Australian Eastern Standard Time yesterday, the Rescue  Coordination Centre advised Border Protection Command that they had again been  in contact with the vessel. An updated position placed the vessel at approximately 87  nautical miles north of Christmas Island.    

 At approximately 10pm Australian Eastern Standard Time last night the Triton  arrived on the scene, and sent a boarding party to the vessel. When they arrived, the  vessel was stationary. At approximately 10:30pm last night Australian Eastern  Standard Time, the Triton reported that a wave had broken over the vessel, and that  it had taken on more water and began to sink. The merchant vessel had also, I'm  advised, arrived on the scene at this time.    

 At approximately 10:45pm last night Australian Eastern Standard Time the Triton  reported that they had two tenders and a life raft in the water, and were working to  recover people from the water. At approximately 10:50pm last night Australian  Eastern Standard Time the Rescue Coordination Centre requested further  assistance, and HMAS Albany and HMAS Bathurst were tasked to respond. Bathurst  arrived on the scene at about 1:20am Australian Eastern Standard Time this morning  Australian Eastern Standard Time, and Albany arrived on the scene at 4am this  morning Australian Eastern Standard Time.    

 At approximately 2:20am this morning Australian Eastern Standard Time, the Triton  reported that it had rescued 88 people and recovered the body of a little baby boy.  Triton has now returned to Christmas Island, and as I said Albany and Bathurst are  on the scene. The search for survivors continues, and that search will continue  throughout the day. That is the latest information that's been provided to me this  morning by Border Protection Command, and I'm very happy to take your questions.   

 QUESTION:  Do you know how old the baby boy was?   

 JASON CLARE: The initial advice to me this morning is the little baby boy was  under one year of age.   

 QUESTION:  And where was the boat from, Indonesia or..?   

 JASON CLARE: The advice to me this morning is that we expect the boat was from  Indonesia, and that the passengers on the boat are from Iran, from Afghanistan, and  from Sri Lanka.   

 QUESTION:  Can you tell me why it took four hours for the Triton to be directed to  go to their rescue?    

 JASON CLARE: I think if I go back to the chronology that I've provided you with, it  indicates that the Triton was directed to pre-position, to be ready to head north if  required, and that shortly after being given the instruction by the Rescue  Coordination Centre, I think at around about 4:45pm Australian Eastern Standard  Time yesterday, five minutes after that at approximately 4:50pm Australian Eastern  Standard Time, BPC directed Triton to proceed north.   

 QUESTION: You said AMSA have put out an alert at 12:30.   

 JASON CLARE: That's correct.   

 QUESTION:  So that alert didn't include Customs vessels. And then at 2:30 BPC is  still talking about it. At 3pm Rescue Coordination Centre is releasing broadcast to all  shipping. So we obviously realised there's a serious situation, but still, it's another  hour and a half before Triton is directed to head north. It seems a long time, doesn't  it?   

 JASON CLARE:  All good questions, and I wouldn't, and I don't think it's appropriate  for me today, to pre-empt or pre-judge the work of our Rescue Coordination Centre  or Border Protection Command. These are the sorts of things that will be looked at  as part of the standard internal review of all matters when a death at sea occurs.    

 In these circumstances, there is always a review conducted by Border Protection  Command. I've spoken to the Chief Executive Officer of Customs this morning, and  initiated that. In these circumstances, it is also open to the West Australian coroner  to conduct an independent inquiry of this search and rescue, and that is a decision  for the WA coroner to make, having a look at all of the information available to him,  including the information I've provided you with now.   

 QUESTION: But we're still waiting, though, for the last review on the capsize on 21  June last year. You haven't released that yet.   

 JASON CLARE: No. In relation to that matter, that's now the subject of a coronial  inquiry by the WA coroner. He's held the first hearings in relation to that matter, and  my understanding is that further hearings will be held later this month. I've made the  point that when the coroner releases his report I will ensure that the Government  releases the recommendations of that review as well. In addition to that, I have also  made sure that the work that Customs and Border Protection and other agencies  have done in relation to that matter have been made available to the WA coroner.   

 QUESTION:  It seems to be, it's a pattern of events isn't it, when we have a safety of  life at sea issue. And I'm not questioning Customs work; I think they do a fantastic  job. But there is always this four-hour delay between getting intelligence, and  actually our boats being told to go and help them. It doesn't seem to have improved  over the past couple of years.   

 JASON CLARE: Again, you’re asking me to second-guess the work of our Border  Protection agencies. The way to do this is through a proper examination of the work  that was done in relation to requests for help. That is the way it has always been  done, that is the way it should be done here. It shouldn't be a Minister second-guessing the actions of our Border Protection Command on a day like this, when  people are potentially still alive in the water, and a search and rescue is underway.    

 QUESTION:  With the shooting in your electorate this morning, in fact one of your  posters actually copped one of the bullets, I was just wondering what your thoughts  are on the recent spate of gun violence in Sydney, and your role in trying to control  the influence of weapons.    

 JASON CLARE: I've seen that story. I haven't had a chance to look at it in any great  detail, I've been focused on this matter. But as you would understand, the people of  Western Sydney are legitimately very worried about the shootings that are going on  in our local community, and they want the governments of Australia, the Federal  Government and the state governments, to work together to make our streets a safer  place. The work that I've been doing, working with the New South Wales  Government, is very important in that regard.    

 Only last week, we agreed as state and federal governments across the nation, to  set up an Australian ballistics identification network, so that where bullet casings are  found at crime scenes right across the country, they can be linked to crimes whether  they occur in the streets of Western Sydney or right across Australia.    

 That's a system that I am funding, that the Federal Government is funding, it will  provide equipment to police across the country and help to solve more crimes.  They're the sort of things that we need to do working together. People in my local  area aren't interested in politicians fighting about this; they're worried about safety on  their streets and they want us to work together to make our streets safer.   

 QUESTION:  And so what specifically, where are we at in terms of stopping those  guns reaching the streets?   

 JASON CLARE: There are around about a quarter of a million guns here right now,  on the streets of Sydney, in the hands of criminals. There are a lot of illegal guns out  there and they are easy for criminals to get.    

 A lot of those weapons are weapons that weren't handed in after the Port Arthur  massacre, or weapons that are stolen. Thousands of weapons are stolen from  legitimate owners every year. That makes it easy for criminals to get them.    

 We need to make it easier for police to get them off the street. That's why one of the  things that I have suggested is giving our police random powers to search serious  criminals for firearms.    

 Often, people know who the criminals are that have these weapons, but they're too  afraid to tell police because they are afraid of retribution. Now one of the ways we  can tackle that is give police more powers to go and search the homes, the houses, 

 the cars of people that they know are serious firearms offenders and search them at  any time.    

 Laws like this exist in South Australia and I think they need to exist right around the  country. The other thing we can do is make it easier for people to anonymously dob  in people that they believe are shooting at their homes or are shooting up their  streets. And recently there has been a campaign to do that, and that's been very  successful, but there is more that can be done in that area.   

 QUESTION:  Can I ask who you're going to give the powers to? Will it be the state  police, or the federal police?   

 JASON CLARE: State police predominantly, because this is an area that state  police often work. This is an ongoing discussion that I have been having with state  police ministers.    

 We had this discussion in June last year, we had it again when police ministers met  in Darwin two weeks ago. South Australia made a presentation and they outlined the  way their firearm prohibition orders work, and how successful they have been in  targeting serious firearm offenders, particularly members of outlaw motorcycle  gangs.    

 They made the recommendation to states that they should consider implementing  similar powers, right across the country. I support that, I've made the case for this on  a number of occasions, and I hope that my state colleagues will see that this is  another tool that will help police to get the guns off our streets.    

 QUESTION:  Minister Clare just one more thing, is there any further details on the  people who are actually still missing as a result of the sinking?   

 JASON CLARE: No, no further details other than the information I have just  provided you with. Okay, thanks very much.   

