---
title: "No 'solution' in PNG deal"
date: "2013-07-23"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397454
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2611857%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Tuesday, 23 July 2013    

 No ‘solution’ in PNG deal   

 The government’s cruel deal with Papua New Guinea will not deter refugees, including  unaccompanied children, who see a boat to Australia as their only option, the Australian  Greens have said.    

 “Kevin Rudd is rushing to extreme refugee cruelty as he rushes to the polls, but the PNG  deal won’t solve the humanitarian crisis in our region,” the Greens immigration  spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.    

 “The Australian Government plans to send terrified refugee children to PNG who have  no family members to look after them, simply because they fled war and persecution in  any way they could.    

 “Minister Burke has said children sent to PNG, who have family in Australia, will not be  reunited with their relatives. This is a cold, cruel policy that the government has wheeled  out for cheap political gain.    

 “We know that there are unaccompanied children in Indonesia who see a dangerous  boat journey as their only path to safety.    

 “Australia should dramatically increase its intake of refugees from Indonesia, giving  these children a safer pathway to protection.    

 “The Houston Panel recommended we undertake an emergency resettlement of 3,800  refugees out of Indonesia but the government hasn’t acted.    

 “More refugees are forced into the hands of people smugglers every day that this  government leaves them languishing in Indonesia.    

 “The Greens are standing up for vulnerable people and want to see Australia lead a  genuine regional approach that cares for refugees.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

