---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Hobart: 10 August 2013: Tasmania Investment; GST; Polls; Mundine; Candidates; Forestry; Debates; Advertising on Asylum Seekers; PNG and Nauru Resettlement Plans."
date: "2013-08-10"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Tasmania Investment"
  - "GST"
  - "Polls"
  - "Mundine"
  - "Candidates"
  - "Forestry"
  - "Debates"
  - "Advertising on Asylum Seekers"
  - "PNG and Nauru Resettlement Plans."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398578
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2658228%22
---

 

 

 Campaign Transcript    

 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER  PRESS CONFERENCE   HOBART   10 AUGUST 2013 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________ 

 

 Subjects: Tasmania Investment, GST, Polls, Mundine, Candidates, Forestry,  Debates, Advertising on Asylum Seekers, PNG and Nauru Resettlement Plans.  _____________________________________________________________  

 

 

 PM: Well good morning, it’s great to be in Hobart. It's a little damp out there but I  really enjoy being in the Apple Isle. I've been many times. I love Tasmania and the  family and I have holidayed here before and I'm sure we will be back again.  

 As you know, the Australian Government stands for economic management, strong  economic management, jobs and job security, fair pay and conditions as well as  managing cost of living pressures for Australian families.  

 We have been speaking in recent days about the absolute importance of jobs.  Everyone has seen the most recent national employment data, the rate is held in the  nation at large but we still have a big challenge here in Tasmania and jobs are  number one and core here in the Island State.  

 Cost of living pressures, we have also been talking about that. You will have seen  our statements on further investment and out of school hours care programs. To  make sure mums and dads right across Australia, who are using out of school hours  care, before school, after school, vacation care, have better access to more places,  more flexible hours and frankly better activities for the kids too.  Homework clubs and  the rest.  

 So this is about ensuring we are going to continue to manage the economy strongly.  Continue to generate jobs for the future, including here in Tasmania, as well as  ensure that we are helping where we can with cost of living pressures.  

 Contrast is pretty clear. What we've seen so far from Mr Abbott is his $70 billion  worth of major cuts to jobs, health and services. And still to provide us with any  detail.  

 We have also seen on cost of living pressures, a very, very important development in  the last week where all the signals from the Liberal Party are that not only will there 

 be a review of the nation's taxation system, it will include the goods and services  tax.   

 And that's been confirmed by both the Leader of the Opposition, the Shadow  Treasurer and by the Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party.  All in the course of the last  week.  

 Which means, if you are going to review the goods and services tax, that is code  language for putting up the rate and/or expanding the scope to include food.  

 So I would say to everybody out there, it's really important to keep a clear focus on  the impact of those sort of changes on cost of living pressures for families.  

 Here in Tasmania we have made multiple investments in recent times. I was down  here not long ago when we announced our $100 million package right across  Tasmania.  And there are projects which have been carefully worked through over  many, many months involving businesses and local authorities across every region  of the State.  

 It's good to be here with our members and candidates who have been strongly  backing that.  Including of course Julie Collins, who is our Cabinet Minister as well as  of course Jane Austin who is our candidate for Denison.  

 Here we are also talking about a further investment in Hobart's future.  That is an  investment here at the Hobart Showgrounds.  

 And what I'm here today to confirm is if the Government is returned, we will provide a  $5 million investment from the regional development fund of Australia to kick start  the redevelopment of these Hobart Showgrounds.  

 I'm from Brissy. We have something up there called the Ekka with the royal  agricultural society of Queensland. I think you blokes would have been to the Ekka a  few times.  

 I'm a big supporter of the concept of agricultural shows right across Australia.  

 In our state of Queensland it's where country meets city. It’s where the bush comes  to town. Most importantly it's a display of our fantastic primary industries.  

 And it's important also for Hobart's and Tasmania’s economy.  

 So this this redevelopment here with this $5 million additional investment will turn  these showgrounds into flexible multi-purpose facilities, better facilities itself for the  Hobart show, more space for exhibitions, also a new retail precinct, better facilities  for sport such as soccer.  Which those brave soccer players are playing out there in  the driving rain.  

 And on the jobs front, in doing all of that, that represents a total investment of about  140 jobs.  So this is practical stuff.  

 If you look at the employment impact of the $100 million investment in Tasmania,  that I launched some time ago, this adds further to what we are doing in practical 

 terms as a Government to make sure that the Tasmanian economy keeps  generating jobs into the future.  

 Of course more broadly here in the Federal seat of Denison we have been investing  as well.  

 $10 million into the stage two development of the University of Tasmania. $3.5  million in the Guilford young college, the Glenorchy art link building. $1.65 million  towards the Hobart community hub, an association with Hobart City Council.    

 I also looked at a few facts and figures about what we have been doing here in  Denison at large.  And again it's good to have Jane, our candidate, with us.  If I look  at what we have done in Denison in recent times, we have invested in 23 new school  classrooms, 19 new school libraries, some 15 new multi-purpose facilities, seven  new science and language centres, as well as two trades training centres benefiting  seven schools in total in the Denison electorate.  

 We have allocated $240 million towards the redevelopment of the Royal Hobart  Hospital and $100 million towards the construction of the women and Children's  Hospital on the Royal Hobart Hospital site.  

 So these are practical investments here in this part of Tasmania. And the reason for  it is that we believe in Tasmania's future. We really believe in Tasmania's future.  

 That is why when there is jobs problem in Tasmania, we are there to step in and  help.  As we've done through the $100 million jobs package, this investment today,  but also our support for the mining industry in this State as well.  Which is capable of  generating further jobs across the State.  

 We also believe in the State's economic future, which is why we launched the  National Broadband Network here in this State. Because we want that to overcome  the tyranny of distance.  

 It doesn't matter what part of Australia you're from. Rural Tassie or down town  Melbourne. Whether you are from Hobart or whether you're from the middle of  Sydney.   

 Everybody should have the same access to broadband because it will do this; it will  boost productivity growth for businesses, small businesses, right across the country  as they access new markets and new suppliers in an instant. It does become the  railway system of the 21st century.  

 So it's great to be here in Tasmania.  Great to be here to support this project here at  the Hobart Showgrounds.  Great to be seeing this as part of an on-going investment  by the Australian Government into this State's future.  And to put on the line my  passion for Tassie and what we want to do to turbo charge this State's future.  

 That's why I want broadband to be key to unlocking Tasmania's economic potential  for the future.  

 My final point is this. I run into so many people around the world, round the world,  not just Oz, who want to come and live here. It's a great place, a terrific place. If they 

 want to come and live here or have a holiday here, they want to be connected to the  rest of the world.  

 And that means having high speed affordable broadband, universally available,  whether it's in hotels in downtown Hobart, up at Cradle Mountain where I've been,  over at Freycinet why I've been, places like that as well as all the businesses who  are here as well.  

 Enjoying the great lifestyle, the fantastic food, the great wine, the quality of life, but  being linked every day totally to the global economy.  

 Over to you, folks. 

 JOURNALIST: You keep repeating this accusation that Tony Abbott is going to raise  the GST. His actual policy is to have a White Paper on tax reform and take any  findings from that to another election. What is wrong with that policy, given that every  time he waged a scare campaign against the carbon price, you railed against that  and accused him of dishonesty? Isn't your scare campaign why voters maybe don't  trust you anymore?  

 PM: Can I say in response to that Latika, is we have a very clear policy which is we  do not support increasing the rate of the GST, nor do we support expanding its  scope to include food. Our policy is clear.  

 Mr Abbott, when asked about the GST, tries to fudge it up a bit and says there is  going to be a review.  

 On many occasions, they have been asked whether they would exclude the goods  and services tax from their tax review and they have said no.  

 I would simply pose this question - if you are going to roll the goods and services tax  into a tax review, are you going to reduce the tax? I don't think so.  

 Are you going to narrow its scope? I don't think so.  

 Therefore I'm just being very clear with the Australian public that there is a distinction  here.  

 We are saying we will not under any circumstances increase the GST or apply it to  food.  

 The other side of politics, the alternative Prime Minister, is saying we could well do  that. I think that is something that is a legitimate basis for debate in this country.  

 JOURNALIST: As Australia's population ages then and as States need more and  more money and you are ruling out changing, or broadening the base of GST, how  will Labor actually make up that fiscal shortfall as the population ages?  

 PM: Well there are three ways in which you deal with the nation's future with an  ageing population.  

 Remember the three Ps. But I’m talking about where that fits in. 

 Because payments to the States go to basic things like health and they are huge.  The three Ps are population, productivity and workforce participation.  

 Population. We support a strong migration program to keep the country as young as  possible, to offset the inherent ageing of the existing population. That's number one.  

 Number two, on participation, you have seen a range of measures from us including  increasing the child rebate from 30% to 50%.  Bringing in the nation's absolute first  paid parental leave scheme to make it possible to boost the participation rate over  time.  

 We also need to look further how we make it easier for older folks to stay in the  workforce longer, if that's what they choose to do, as our median age increases over  time and life expectancy increases over time.  

 The third one is productivity. You have heard me bang on about that for most of the  last week and the seven pillars which underpin our new agenda for national  competitiveness.  

 Those are all critical in terms of pushing the nation's economy forward.  

 On payments to the States, what is the number one problem?  

 Health and hospitals. That's why in 2007 I sought a mandate from the people to  negotiate a new health and hospitals agreements with the States and Territories so  we would bring to a close cost-shift, blame-shift between the two levels of  government.  

 In 2010 I signed a new agreement with the States on that question. It was amended  somewhat by PM Gillard but the bottom line is this; you now have a massive new  taking of the burden from the States by the Commonwealth through the new national  health and hospitals agreement.  

 Point 2. Answer to your question on the goods and services tax. Under the better  schools plan, what are we doing?  

 We are increasing the national Government's investment into the school education  sector right across the country, by a country mile. And so both in school education,  both in health and hospitals, but also in critical areas like urban infrastructure, take  for example the investments in Melbourne and the regional rail network, the a  Australian Government is also now involved.  

 So in these practical areas we are taking financial pressure off the states. That's why  I believe we can handle it without a goods and services tax.  

 JOURNALIST: Today's Nielsen poll shows the Coalition is back in front. What sort of  week do you think you have had since you called the election last Sunday?  

 PM: Well I said on the day that I called the election that we enter this election as the  underdogs. And I said on that day that if an election was held, that day, that we  would lose. And we are just through week one of a five-week election campaign. And 

 that remains the case. I don't gild the lily about any of that so we remain the  underdog.  

 Mr Abbott, I’ll remind you, has already said, he has put attention into writing his  victory speech already. I don't think people like that sort of arrogance myself.  

 But he has said on the record that he has been working on his victory speech.  

 We are the underdogs.  But on top of all of that, I think we have a huge way to go in  this election campaign.  

 It's going to be about jobs. It's going to be about cost of living pressures and about  who people trust for the long-term management of our economy. 

 So we are the underdogs, he is writing his victory speech. There is a long way to go.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you embarrassed Warren Mundine has decided  to assist Tony Abbott on indigenous affairs?  

 PM: Not at all. I'm delighted. The reason is, Warren is a good friend, I've known him  for years.  

 Warren has got to that stage in his life where he is over and above politics. He will  provide advice to anyone and everyone about what should now happen in  indigenous policy in Australia. And as it should be.  

 I'm delighted if he is going to have an input to the other side of politics. I don't think  he has been shy in putting his views forward in the past to whomever. I am not faintly  phased by any of that.  

 On the broader question of indigenous policy, I would however just remind people,  on something as basic as the apology to the first Australians, we did wait many,  many years for that to happen under Mr Howard's Government of which Mr Abbott  was a senior Minister. It didn't happen.  

 It was the first action of the Government that I led back in 2008.  

 I think we have a track record of engaging seriously with the challenges in Aboriginal  Australia, including the first ever national agreement with the Commonwealth and  States on investing in Closing the Gap, in education, health, employment and all the  rest with Indigenous Australians.  

 You will see Warren active across the space and that is as it should be. 

 JOURNALIST: What are Labor's chances of winning back Denison. Andrew Wilkie  said Labor took the seat for granted for years. Why should voters elect a Labor  candidate?  

 PM: As you know from Canberra, I have never been a critic of Mr Wilkie. I don't  intend to be a critic now. I'm just not into that business.  

 What I am however saying is that everyone in an election deserves to have a choice.  

 Our candidate here in Jane Austin, and I'm sure she is tired of all the stories about  her name, is a creative person who is going to put our best case forward.  

 Furthermore, the record of achievement we have here is strong. I've just gone  through the details of that.  

 And on top of that, when I look at the sorts of qualities which Jane brings to this seat,  she has grown up in Burnie, taught at both St Mary's district High and Herdsman’s  Cove Primary school. After a period of time out country she is back here again.  

 She also studied at the Warwick Medical School in the UK completing the first  mental health course in that part of the world.  

 This is a person with considerable experience.  Strong Tasmanian credentials, a  good record of achievement in terms of what we the Government have put into the  Denison.  

 I'm not into the negative politics of having a whack at Mr Wilkie. I'm in the business  of positive politics, here is our record, what we’d like to do here, you have a first  class candidate, you the people of Denison make up your mind.  

 JOURNALIST: Mr Warren Mundine, would you seek to put him in a senior advisory  role as Mr Abbott has said he would do if elected?  

 PM: I think Warren’s number is in my phone here. I would happily chat to Warren any  time of the week and take his advice. He was in my office only a few weeks ago,  frankly. We get along very well. I'm all for taking out the partisan politics from  indigenous policy.  

 If I have one ambition in life, it's to ensure that closing the gap with Indigenous  Australian is taken out of the political ruck and frankly we get to a stage where all  Australians realise this is a national mission for us all.  

 We are judged by the rest of the world on these questions and rightly so. We will be  judged by our children as to whether we have got this right.  

 When it comes to Warren, the door is always open to Warren. As I said, he’s is a  good guy and I welcome his contribution to all sides of politics.  

 JOURNALIST: Why is that $100 million growth package is contingent on the  Tasmanian forestry peace deal passing Parliament which is unlikely to happen and  do you support Tony Abbott's funding to entrench impoverished people?  

 PM: Well on Tasmania we have a strong record of achievement, not just a bit of an  abstract plan for the future. The record of our achievement here and our investment  is formidable.  

 I've run through the investments here at the Royal Hobart Hospital. I’ve just run  through the investments at the University of Tasmania. I could point to the road  infrastructure, the rail infrastructure which we have invested and every primary  school across the State of Tasmania.  

 All of these add up to Tasmanian jobs in the construction phase, but new services as  well.  

 Every time I've gone out to a school anywhere across the island State, they always  say to me ‘Thank you so much for making our school so much better because of the  new facilities we have put in’. 

 So for the future we will be big investors in the State with the jobs package. We will  continue to roll through with that. Obviously, a few other things to sort out in terms of  those forestry issues you referred to. I'm not familiar with the details of what Mr  Abbott may have said here yesterday.  

 Can I just say this, our Government on the question of inclusion and social inclusion,  we have been record investors in social housing.   

 We have been record investors in dealing with the problems of entrenched  homelessness.  

 We have added 20,000 new units of social housing nationwide, a proportion of which  have been built here.  

 We refurbished a pre-existing set of 80,000 units of social housing, which were  getting too difficult to occupy.   

 And we have made a massive impact across the nation on people sleeping rough  through facilities like Common Ground.  

 So on the bread and butter of dealing with people in the most disadvantaged  circumstances, I'm very passionate on the question of housing. I think some of you  know that. I believe our record stands next to none on we've done in this State and  elsewhere on the question of social housing.  

 JOURNALIST: You said today you are still the underdog in terms of polling. You  said that on day one. You also said then who do you trust. A poll today seems to be  them increasingly trusting Tony Abbott. Why do you think that's so?  

 PM: I don't get into the business of the analysis. That's your job.  

 My job is simply to say I'm Kevin, I'm from Queensland, I'm from Australia, I'm the  Prime Minister, this is what we've done so far, this is where we plan to take the  country in the future and it's for the good people of Australia to decide.  

 I actually have a huge amount of confidence in their good judgment because they sit  back and they evaluate, they look at what's said and what's done and they form their  own opinion. So mate, I will leave all the analysis to you. I’ll leave all the character  analysis to you as well.  

 I'm concerned about just putting the best foot forward on the stuff that we've done.  Not a small achievement, keeping the economy out of recession during the Global  Financial Crisis and avoiding mass unemployment.  

 And clear plans for the future. And that is constructing the new economy of the future  through a new way to deal with new challenges. That's all about a big transition and  structural adjustment coming off the back of the end of the China mining boom.  

 JOURNALIST: We are having a debate tomorrow night. Do you think you can beat  Tony Abbott in the debate and what questions do you think, what topics do you think  will dominate the debate?  

 PM: I'm delighted to at last have the opportunity to debate Mr Abbott.  

 Of course, Mr Abbott goes into this debate having been, I presume, preparing for it,  for the last three years and swatting up and all the rest and doing his rehearsals and  stuff. Good on him. That's what politics is about.  

 But the bottom line is this, Syd. I think what the Australian people want to see is Mr  Abbott stop being evasive on where the $70 billion worth of cuts are going to come  from in jobs, health and education.  And what his specific plans are for the future of  the Goods and Services Tax.  

 I think Australians are getting a little tired of Mr Abbott, who puts himself forward as  the alternative Prime Minister, being evasive on such basic things as $70 billion  worth of cuts and the future of the Goods and Services Tax.  

 I think they want some clear cut answers. Mr Abbott's challenge is to answer both  those questions clearly when this national debate is held tomorrow night.  

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, given you say jobs are so important for Tasmania, the  current planning schemes here at the showgrounds are only for open and recreation  space, not for community and, sorry commercial and retail. Won't any jobs here be  years away?  

 PM: You know something, there are certain things that the Federal Government  does well, which is that we partner up with people like the Royal Agricultural Show  here in Hobart and these facilities here at the Hobart Showgrounds. 

 We are not about to get into the micro planning of it all. That properly lies at the level  of the council and State Government and show society itself.  

 We are here to actually provide a helping hand to folk who want to develop these  facilities in a positive way for the future.  

 I'm a big believer in Tassie.  Like the place, I think it's got a great future. This is just  one small way of helping that investment along the road.  

 JOURNALIST: There has been some criticism of the Government continuing to roll  out the advertising on asylum seekers that is appearing in newspapers all over the  place. The suggestion being that's beyond the caretaker protocols. Have you got a  view on that and why you are continuing to do it in Australian news media?  

 PM: The first point I would make is pretty basic. Those of you who have been around  for a bit will remember back in 2004 there was a campaign, I think entitled "Be alert, 

 don't be alarmed". That ran more or less throughout the entire election period of  2004.  

 It involved some to and fro between Mr Howard and Mr Latham at the time but  ultimately we supported that. The reason being is we had a real security challenge  on at the time, in particular following, I think, the bombing of the Australian embassy  in Jakarta (audio drops out). The truth is this: the people smuggling network is both  offshore and it's onshore. There are parts of the diaspora here in Australia who are  linked up with people in other countries supporting people smuggling into Australia.  

 For that reason you need to send a message in both directions. And we are doing it  phenomenally offshore. In South East Asia and South Asia and South West Asia.   

 But we would be undermining the effectiveness of our border security policy, which is  in the national interest, if we were to pull the plug on making sure people smugglers  and those supporting them within Australia, were not being hit with the same  information. So, we think it's the right judgment. 

 JOURNALIST: Is Geoffrey Lake a suitable candidate for Hotham?  

 PM: I've seen these reports this morning for the first time. So I will get a report from  the National Secretary on that and we will make - once I see the report, we will  speak to you further.  

 JOURNALIST: Does that extend to the candidate for Kennedy also, Mr Rudd?  

 PM: I've seen that report for the first time this morning as well. It's always good to  read the newspapers. So the National Secretary will look at that as well.  

 JOURNALIST: When do you plan to get the kids out of the Pontville, is it on the  cards, the Pontville Detention Centre?  

 PM: I don't want to go into the detail of that. I don't want to rush into an answer to a  question like that where I'm not across the detail. I would much rather that was  directed at the relevant Minister. I don’t believe in misleading people.  

 JOURNALIST: So far we have seen most of the election campaign focused up in the  north of the State. Can we expect to see more announcements down here in the  south in Denison and Franklin?  

 PM: I'm here. It's Hobart. It's week one of the campaign as we have just been talking  about.  

 Tasmania, I know full well is a State of great regional diversity. As soon as someone  says they are from somewhere in Tasmania, then the argument starts about why the  other region of Tasmania is much better. Look, I understand that.  

 I love Tasmania.  Period.  

 North-east, north-west, south, city, country. I'm sure you will see more of us back  here. Last question.  

 JOURNALIST: Are you concerned there could be backlash against Labor in the polls  today because of your PNG and Nauru resettlement plans?  

 PM: Look, our decisions on people smugglers are hard decisions. I think I said at the  time or just after, that these decisions are not necessarily popular decisions. They  are hard decisions.  

 I found them amongst the hardest decisions I have made because you are dealing  with real live human beings, who are asylum seekers and some of them bona fide  refugees.  

 At the same time dealing with the other reality that the more this keeps up and the  more it increases, the number of people being drowned goes from the hundreds to  the thousands each year.  

 And finding a way through which also preserves the domestic political support in  Australia for our orderly migration system. Putting those three factors together, it's a  hard decision, it really has been.  

 I had to think long and hard with my colleagues about whether it was the right way to  go.  

 I make no apology whatsoever for the decision we have made in the national interest  to send a clear cut message to people smugglers that if you bring people by boat to  Australia, they will not be allowed to settle in Australia.  

 Folks, we had better zip it because we are already going to be late for Lonnie which  is in a different part of Tasmania, but I’ve got to get up there as well.  

 END 

 

