---
title: "Another Expert Panel recommendation implemented"
date: "2013-03-12"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391841
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2294757%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Tuesday, 12 March 2013    

 ANOTHER EXPERT PANEL RECOMMENDATION IMPLEMENTED   

 The Federal Government has implemented another of the recommendations of the Expert Panel on  Asylum Seekers by awarding contracts to two service providers to assist people in regional  processing countries with their protection claims.  The successful tenders are Craddock Murray  Neumann Lawyers and Playfair Visa and Migration Services.   

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Brendan O’Connor said refugee status determination  processing would begin on March 18 in Nauru, following an announcement by the Nauruan  Government.    

 Under Nauruan law, a person may apply to the Justice Secretary for Nauru to be recognised as a  refugee.    

 “The Expert Panel recommended that the government ensure that assistance be provided to  irregular maritime arrivals who are transferred to a regional processing country in preparing their  claims for refugee status,” Mr O’Connor said.    

 “The first of the successful tenderers, Craddock Murray Neumann Lawyers, will help transferees  prepare their protection claims.  This claim assistance is expected to begin in coming weeks.”   

 On August 13 last year, the Government endorsed in principle all of the recommendations of the  Expert Panel.     

 The Government has already implemented numerous recommendations, such as regional processing  arrangements and expanding Australia’s humanitarian program to 20 000 places in 2012-13.   

 “Asylum seekers who have their claims processed in Nauru will be provided with protection and  welfare arrangements consistent with Australian and Nauruan responsibilities under international  law, including the refugees’ convention,” Mr O’Connor said.   

 “These arrangements quite rightly include assistance with preparation of protection claims.   

 “The Government is determined, however, that asylum seekers achieve no advantage by engaging  with people smugglers.   

 “Assistance with preparing asylum claims should not be taken as an indication that they will be  considered ahead of those who come to Australia through regular channels.”   

 

 Media Adviser:                 Maria Hawthorne 0407 015 986   

