---
title: "'Credit where credit is due': address to the Victorian Women's trust"
date: "2013-11-10"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "Office of GILLARD, JULIA, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211400501
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2837219%22
---

 

 1 

 Hon Julia Gillard 

 Victorian Women’s Trust: ‘Credit Where Credit is Due’  Speech Notes: 10 November 2013   

 

 I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet  and in a spirit of reconciliation pay my respects to elders past and  present.     

 Graham, Leanne and Dure - thank you for your welcome to country.   

 And thanks to the wonderful choir and to Brownyn - both were simply  delightful performances.   

 To Mary Crooks, I also say thank you, for both your generous  introduction and your wise leadership of the Victorian Women’s Trust.   I thank Mary for extending her life long commitment to fairness so  that it encompasses the concept that credit should be given where  credit is due.  Mary, that means a lot to me.   

 I also thank Rob Hulls for his introduction and for being here today.   Rob showed day after day as Attorney General of this great State his  passionate commitment to equal opportunity and equal justice.  The  women of this State see their faces reflected in our judiciary because  of his work.   

 To my friend and colleague Tony Windsor - thank you for everything  including your contribution today.  Tony’s favourite saying is ‘the  world is run by those who show up.’    

 Well, Tony - you showed up - in the most difficult of circumstances for  the biggest reforms.   

 In his first speech to the Federal Parliament, Tony spoke about acting  on climate change, getting fairer funding for regional universities and  regional students, ending the laziness of not completing the structural  separation of Telstra and improving insurance arrangements.   

 

 2 

 With Tony, the government I led acted on all these issues and  brought change for the better.  One of the lesser know outcomes of  our work together is that flood insurance coverage nationally has  gone from only 3% of premises to around 83%, so fewer families will  face the heartache of no home and no insurance when flood waters  rise.  Bill Shorten led this work for the government and did a superb  job.   

 Tony is very much his own man but with Rob Oakeshott, he formed a  very dynamic duo.  I acknowledge Rob Oakeshott too with warmth  and affection.  His contribution to politics over 17 years was much  more than a 17 minute speech and the achievements of the 43 rd  parliament would have been impossible without him.   

 So many friends join me here for this celebration today but I would  like to specifically acknowledge Joan Sturton-Gill.  Joan recently gave  me this card, which says ‘well behaved women rarely make history’.   Never a truer word spoken.   

 And while we are on the subject of Joans and women who are  occasionally badly behaved, I spoke to Joan Kirner this morning who  along with Kaye Setches sends her apologies for not being with us  today.  Joan and Kaye we miss you both and send you strength and  love.    

 I am grateful Jenny Macklin is here - when I speak about the  government I led today I will in so many ways be speaking about  Jenny’s work and achievements.  It is simply impossible to imagine  this period of Labor Government without her contribution.   

 I was proud to lead a government where women in historically large  numbers played major roles.   

 I despair that we have gone so far backwards on women’s  participation.   

 

 3 

 I despair even more when I read the false debate about equality  versus merit which is adding insult to injury.    

 The simple reality is equality and merit go hand in hand.  If you  believe, as I do, that merit is equally distributed between the sexes,  then if any institution - a Cabinet, a court, a corporate board - does  not comprise around 50 per cent women and 50 per cent men,  women of merit have been excluded.   

 Aiming for equality is not a denial of merit.  Quite the reverse.  The  proponents of the status quo, even though they dress their arguments  up as about merit, are actually ensuring merit is not rewarded.   

 With our history being one of twenty six men before the first woman,  reason tells you women of merit have been excluded. Our shared  challenge is to see a future where it becomes so routine for a woman  to hold the office of Prime Minister or be a Cabinet Minister that no  one bothers to comment on it any more.     

 Getting to that future of truly equal opportunity required some one to  be the first woman.  That woman was me.  Smashing through a glass  ceiling is a dangerous pursuit.  It is hard not to get lacerated on the  way through.   

 But for all the dangers, the joys overwhelm.   

 And for any woman who has warily watched my experience and is  wondering whether the highs and lows of politics are for her, I would  urge - jump right in - provided you are clear about your purpose,  about what you want to achieve for our nation.   

 As Australia’s 27th Prime Minister, I knew what I wanted to achieve. I  wanted our nation to have the courage to shape the future.  I wanted  our nation to value above all - rewarding effort; caring for each other  in times of need; and creating and fairly distributing opportunity,  particularly by ensuring every child gets a quality education.   

 

 4 

 I wanted us to have enough self-belief to make sure our voice and  our values are heard as loudly as possible in the world and the self  awareness to know that the journey of reconciliation is nowhere near  complete and requires more effort from all of us.   

 I enjoyed some success, saw some failures - such is the nature of  being human and being in the imperfect business of politics.   

 But I am proud of so much.   

 Forever and a day ago, a popular feminist bumper sticker read  ‘Women need work needs women”.  A short but powerful advocacy of  the need for women to take their full and equal place in the economy  and how much better equal opportunity workplaces will be.   

 It could have been the bumper sticker for our approach to managing  the economy.   

 To create and fairly share opportunity, the economy must be strong.   

 During volatility in global economic conditions, we delivered strong  growth, very low debt, productivity rises and over a trillion dollars of  new business investment.   

 We secured jobs and protected working conditions. During my Prime  Ministership, our economy created 41 jobs for every 1,000 people,  whilst at the same time the US lost 8 for every 1,000 and Europe lost  12 for every 1,000.   

 During our period in government more than half a million more  women entered the Australian workforce in new jobs, while globally  13 million fewer women were in work over that period.   

 We helped families with their budgets through well structured direct  support.   

 We were the only government to keep underlying inflation inside the  target range and to help the Reserve Bank deliver the lowest official  interest rates since records were kept.   

 

 5 

 As Prime Minister, I achieved the gold standard for economic  management - a triple A rating with a stable outlook from all three  major and independent ratings agencies.   

 Now I could say twenty six blokes before me tried and failed to do this  but I would prefer to say for this achievement credit is due to one  bloke in particular - Wayne Swan.   

 I saw a Guardian piece yesterday that suggested George Clooney  could play Wayne Swan in the forthcoming movie being made from  Kerry Anne Walsh’s book “The Stalking of Julia Gillard”.  To that I  say, why the hell not!    

 But while growing the economy, as a government we also worked on  the lack of equality our economy can generate for working women.   

 A few simple statistics paint the disturbing story:    

 o The gender pay gap across all sectors of the economy  stands at 17.5 per cent.    

 o There is also a gender savings gap - men hold around 63%  of total superannuation account balances, compared to 37%  for women. Female superannuation balances are lower than  the male balances in every age group, which demonstrates  this problem is not magically going to fix itself as new  generations move in to the workforce.   

 o Women’s workplace participation at 58.7% lags men at  71.2%. Goldman Sachs has recently estimated that simply  by equalising these we would add $200 billion in real terms  to the national economy.   

 On these persistent issues of workplace gender equality, we acted.   

 For women’s rights at work, the foundation stone was the Fair Work  Act.  It was working women who bore the brunt of Work Choices and  had the most to gain from decent and collectively based workplace  laws.   

 

 6 

 But we went further and ensured a genuine equal pay principle, one  that would work.  Prior to the Fair Work Act sixteen separate  applications for equal pay in various sectors dominated by women  had failed.   

 Under the Fair Work Act the social and community services sector  succeeded.   In 2012, the Fair Work Commission awarded around  150,000 workers, most of them women, phased-in pay rises of  between 23 and 45 per cent. Equal pay for them at last.   

 On the gender savings gap we knew that the group most affected  were low income women because of breaks in their career and the  consequences of unpaid caring responsibilities.    

 To that end, we introduced a measure to give relief to 3.6 million low  income workers from paying around $1 billion a year superannuation  taxes.  Around 2.2 million of these workers are women.   

 The end of this measure by the new Government is to be deeply  regretted.    

 In government, we worked tirelessly to improve access to work and  workplace participation for women.    

 We introduced Australia’s first ever paid parental leave scheme and  made major investments in improving the quality, affordability and  availability of child care.     

 We also removed silly distortions in the tax system, like the  Dependent Spouse Tax Offset, that perversely encourage women not  to work.    

 We ensured working people could earn up to $18,200 per year and  pay no tax.   

 Indeed, the highest level ever for women’s workplace participation  was achieved during the term of the government I led and the  average achieved during my term as Prime Minister was the highest  of any PM.    

 

 7 

 In our approach to welfare we put work first, understanding that being  locked out of the workforce for the long term means being locked in to  social and economic exclusion, with that disadvantage likely to  become inter-generational.  So for indigenous Australians, teenage  parents, people with disabilities, we put in place policies to help  people into work.     

 Controversially, we took the same approach for single parents.  While  views in this room are likely to vary from mine, we did so from the  best of motivations for the future of mothers and children.   

 Closest to my heart was improving the opportunity for the next  generation.  We live in a wonderful country, a nation in which a girl  educated in local state schools could rise to become Prime Minister.   

 But I understood as Prime Minister, that as good as Australia is we  still let children down - children from poorer homes, indigenous  children, children with disabilities are more likely to miss out on a  great education.   

 At the same time for all our children, in a world of hard competition,  we knew we had to keep improving their education to ensure their  place in tomorrow’s global economy.   

 So we boosted early child hood education and improved schools.   Fully rolled out our needs based funding model will ensure every  school has the ability to properly resource the education of the  children in that school.   

 This funding will support a quality improvement agenda that we know  works - better teaching, a focus on literacy and numeracy, longer  engagement in school based activities, empowered school principals,  involved local communities.   

 Together with improved school buildings, more computers and a  national curriculum written by experts, I am proud of the work we did  for our nation’s children.   

 

 8 

 We also faced up to the uncomfortable need for our nation to better  understand how to keep our children safe by commencing the  Royal Commission into child sexual abuse in institutional settings.   

 Creating and fairly sharing opportunity also meant reshaping our  universities and expanding apprenticeship numbers.   

 Any one who cares about equality should rejoice that our reforms are  seeing more students from disadvantaged backgrounds get access to  a university education than ever before.   

 And to those who shudder and say as soon as a poor kid gets in  quality must drop, I remind that for the first time ever we have  national oversight of the quality and accreditation of universities.   

 As a nation, we should judge ourselves on whether the child born to  the toughest circumstances gets a great education.   

 As a nation, we should judge ourselves too on whether we are doing  enough to support each other in times of need.   

 For Australians with disability, we clearly haven’t been doing  anywhere near enough.   

 A rights issue, an equality issue, a service delivery issue.   

 An issue as practical as whether some one gets to have a shower  every day and as profound as whether we avert our eyes or extend  an embrace.   

 I am delighted that Disability Care started on 1 July this year, that this  reform cannot be undone, that it will stand with Medicare as a great  institution of fairness and that Sophie’s picture of me will be one of  the defining images of my Prime Ministership. Sophie is a beautiful  young girl, a keen photographer and has, but is not defined by, Down  syndrome.   

 Disability Care stands on the shoulders of what we achieved in  health.  Access to good quality health care for all is one way we show  caring and that every individual is valued.  Disability Care is another. 

 

 9 

 

 So I salute the 11,000 more doctors and 26,000 more nurses now in  the system, their delivery of record bulk rates at over 82% and their  undertaking of the highest number of operations, ever done in  Australia in a single year, over 660,000 of them.   

 Our reforms mean that today nearly 9 out of 10 Australians now  receive their surgery in the clinically recommended time.   

 Good health care won and with plain packaging big tobacco lost.    

 A reform that took courage, as did so many of the changes my  government brought.   

 I always want our nation to be brave enough to shape the future, not  to be passive and overwhelmed.   

 To be big enough for the big infrastructure projects, like ubiquitous  fibre to the home broad band.   

 And gutsy enough to do the hard things that are right - like pricing  carbon.   

 Nothing truly worth doing is ever easy.   

 Sometimes change means staring down the most reckless of fear  campaigns.   

 But carbon pricing is here and it is working with our renewable energy  output up almost 25 per cent and emissions in our national electricity  market down over 12 million tonnes - that’s the equivalent of taking  3.5 million cars off the road for a year.   

 The cost of living impact has not been no more than the predicted 0.7  per cent, a less than one percent increase for which 9 out of 10  households received assistance.     

 

 10 

 Job numbers during carbon pricing have grown by 160,000 and  during Labor’s term, direct employment in the renewable energy  industry more than doubled to over 24,000, wind capacity trebled to  over 3,000 megawatts and over 1 million solar systems have been  installed, up from just over 7,400 under the Howard Government.   

 Carbon pricing is working and if it is to be replaced with any other  system then it is incumbent on those advocating the new approach to  show that it will cut emissions by at least five per cent by 2020 and it  will do so at a lesser cost per tonne of carbon abated.   

 Why should our nation have a system that is working replaced with  one that will not have us meet our five percent carbon pollution  reduction target?   

 Why should our nation have a system which means the nation is  paying more than it needs to in order to reduce carbon pollution?   

 Friends, I had the privilege of leading a government ambitious for our  country, which delivered achievements that will endure.   

 A government that won the public argument on education and  disability reform so convincingly the politics became bipartisan.   

 A government that created and shared opportunity, better shared risk  and was preparing us for the future.   

 A government that understood the transformation going on in this  century as economic and strategic weight shifts to our region of the  world.   

 A government that saw our mission through in Afghanistan and on  Remembrance Day and every other day we honour the sacrifice and  the service of the brave men and women of our defence force.     

 A government that pursued prosperity and security in our region by  strengthening both our alliance with the US whilst taking a major  stride forward in our relationship with China.   

 

 11 

 A government that saw us elected to United Nations Security Council  and asked to chair the G 20 in 2014. 

 

 A government, led by a woman, which increased our support to  women around the world through our work with UN Women and  directly through our aid program. 

 

 But all this work, all this change, all this achievement brought forth  calls women were ‘destroying the joint’ and that the ‘witch needed to  be ditched’.  

 

 What is it about a woman assuming the Prime Minister’s role for the  first time that called forth so much that was so ugly? 

 

 The truth is I do not believe we entirely know yet.  I stand by the  words I said on the night of the 26th of June that being the first  female Prime Minister: 

 ‘does not explain everything (about my Prime Ministership), it doesn’t  explain nothing, it explains some things and it is for the nation to think  in a sophisticated way about those shades of grey.’ 

 

 In doing that sophisticated thinking, we must face the fact that what  has been brought to our society by the gender revolution of the last  fifty years is not as deeply embedded as we hoped. In too many  ways, that change has done no more than create a brittle veneer and  when the veneer cracks what lies beneath is deeply held cultural  stereotyping, anger and misogyny. 

 

 Our nation has nothing to fear and much to gain by having the most  frank conversation about achieving genuine gender equality. 

 

 And I have nothing to fear from any frank and fair analysis of how I  became Prime Minister or my actions as Prime Minister. 

 

 I undoubtedly made mistakes.    

 

 

 12 

 Principal among then, I did not take the Australian people in to my  confidence in 2010 about why I became by Prime Minister.  My  unwillingness at that stage to canvas issues critical of Kevin Rudd  allowed a myth about a conspiracy of faceless men to be publicly  substituted for the more complex truth.   

 Another bad error was effectively conceding the terminology ‘carbon  tax’. Our carbon pricing mechanism is an emissions trading scheme  with a fixed price for the first three years and I should have clearly  said so. 

 

 If I had my time again I would have been more precise in those  election television interviews, in particular that Channel 10 interview  about ‘no carbon tax under the government I lead’ and instead  emphasised what I said to Paul Kelly and Dennis Shanahan in The  Australian newspaper two days later by saying and I quote: “"I don't  rule out the possibility of legislating a Carbon Pollution Reduction  Scheme, a market-based mechanism… I rule out a carbon tax."   

 I regret our government and our parliament was not better able to  handle refugee and asylum seeker policy.  As the current government  is already discovering this is a policy area that defies the easy  certainties of sloganeering.   

 Regrets, I have a few, including wishing I had worn flat shoes in India  and ones strapped on during the Australia Day quick escape.   

 But the highs out way the lows, the achievements the regrets, the  laughter the tears.    

 And I thank you for coming to remember it all today.   

 When the Women’s Anthem was sung so beautifully for us by the  choir, I noted the line ‘for every heroine that’s named there are a  thousand nameless, who live to make a better day with acts of love  and justice’.    

 

 13 

 

 

 Across my Prime Ministership as my resilience was tested, I took  inspiration from the every day heroines I met.  The women in  factories, the teachers at schools, the mums of children with a  disability, whose persistence, decency and incredible generosity of  spirt towards me renewed me.   

 To conclude I want to tell you the story of one such woman who is the  audience today - Jodi Dack.   

 Jodi is a long term friend who has faced a major battle with cancer.   As she continues to make a life with her partner Brendan and be a  mother to her daughter Una, she has found the time to create a  charity called Baldilicious which provides assistance for women who  have lost their hair but cannot afford the expense of beautiful hat. You  can check it out yourself on Baldilicious.net.   

 To Jodi, I say thank you for giving me an example which inspired me  during some of the hardest days of my Prime Ministership.  I thought  of you often and it always gave me a much needed sense of  perspective.     

 Thank you for your creativity, courage and caring.   

 To Jodi, I say ‘credit where credit is due’.   

 And to each of you, thank you for saying the same to me today. 

