---
title: "31 boats in just 20 days this month"
date: "2013-05-23"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211394670
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2478247%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 31 boats in just 20 days this month 

 Thursday 23rd May 2013 

 Thirty one illegal boats have arrived in just 20 days this month, following 65 more people in the latest boat 

 announced today, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister 

 for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said.  

 

 “Fresh from a record 46 boat arrivals last month, there have already been 31 boats arrive so far this month 

 with more than 2,250 people on board,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “Twice as many boats have arrived in 20 days this month under Julia Gillard’s failed border protection 

 policies than arrived over the entire final six years of the Howard Government.  

 

 “Every month is just getting worse for illegal boat arrivals under this government and the cost, chaos and 

 tragedy grows every day under Julia Gillard’s leadership.  

 

 “The Australian people have a choice at the election. Either three more years of record boat arrivals under 

 Labor or a Coalition government that will stop the boats and end Julia Gillard’s chaos on our borders,” Mr 

 Morrison said.  

 

 Mr Keenan said: "This latest boat arrival, carrying 65 people, was intercepted on Sunday - bringing it to a 

 total of 3 boats carrying 221 people in just one day.  

 

 "Yet once again we are only hearing about this boat arrival four days after it was intercepted.  

 

 "Under Labor's failed border protection policies there have already been 31 boats in May - one boat for 

 every day of the month.  

 

 "As much as they try, Labor cannot hide from these figures, which clearly indicate to all Australians that 

 they cannot protect our borders and do not have the resolve to do so," Mr Keenan said. 

 

