---
title: "Over 18,000 arrivals in may fresh from $10 billion blow out under Labor"
date: "2013-05-19"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211394327
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719420%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling OVER 1,800 ARRIVALS IN MAY FRESH  FROM $10 BILLION BLOW OUT UNDER  LABOR May 19, 2013

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat, with 135 people on board, has taken boat arrivals this month to more than 1,800 and  follows Labor's budget on illegal arrivals blowing out by more than $10 billion, Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Another Labor budget saw yet another blow out in the cost of their failed border protection policies,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Labor's budget blowout on their border failures has now eclipsed $10 billion. Yet at the same time they are cutting funding  to put AFP officers on the beat in Indonesia to go after people smugglers. 

 “Labor's priorities and instincts on protecting our borders have always being wrong. Their heart is just not in it, and never  has been.

 “The longer Labor stays in office the longer boats will continue to arrive in record numbers and the bigger Labor's legacy  of failure will be,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “One of the main reasons Julia Gillard gave for ousting Kevin Rudd was his mismanagement of  Australia’s borders.

 “However since Julia Gillard took over there have been 540 boats carrying nearly 35,000 people - this is more than triple  the rate of boats that arrived under Kevin Rudd.

 “It has also been revealed that Labor has in fact cut 40 per cent of AFP staff in Jakarta who were there to assist the  Indonesian National Police is combating people smuggling.

 “Because of this decision, come June 30, there will be only three AFP officers in Jakarta who are there to fight the  booming people smuggling trade - yet last month was the biggest month for illegal boat arrivals ever on record.

 “So not only has this Government cut the AFP’s funding by a further $45.2 million but they have reduced their ability to  assist the Indonesian Police in their fight against people smuggling,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 OVER 1,800 ARRIVALS IN MAY FRESH FROM $10 BILLION BLOW OUT UN...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

