---
title: "Labor denies inquiry into their light touch security for convicted terrorist, despite majority support"
date: "2013-06-03"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395299
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719378%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LABOR DENIES INQUIRY INTO THEIR LIGHT  TOUCH SECURITY FOR CONVICTED  TERRORIST, DESPITE MAJORITY SUPPORT June 03, 2013

 Labor  has  voted  against  the  establishment  of  a  parliamentary  inquiry  into  their  decision  to  place  a  convicted  jihadist terrorist  in  low  security  family  accommodation  in  the  Adelaide  Hills  for  seven  months  in  full  knowledge  of  his  serious criminal convictions, in response to a motion put forward by the Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship today.

 Mr  Morrison  said:  “Having  first  rejected  a  request  for  a  briefing  and  provide  answers  to  written  questions  as  well  as rejecting  the  Coalition's  call  for  an  independent  inquiry  into  this  national  security  scandal,  the  Government  has  now teamed up with Tony Windsor and Rob Oakeshott to deny the Parliament the opportunity for an inquiry into this serious affair.

 “Despite the Coalition gaining a simple majority in the Parliament on the motion to consider the Inquiry, with the support of Andrew Wilkie and Bob Katter, an absolute majority was not present, allowing the Government to avoid further scrutiny. 

 “This Government chose to give a convicted jihadist terrorist the benefit of the doubt, by placing him in a facility that is secured by a pool fence for seven months, before their negligence was exposed by the media and they moved him to a high security location.

 “Labor’s vote against the inquiry in the Parliament today once again confirmed to the Australian people that Labor is a light touch  on  our  borders  and  a  light  touch  on  national  security,  when  it  comes  to  immigration.  That  is  why  the  people smugglers are making the most of every single day they have to cash in on the Gillard Government's border failures.

 “More than 700 boats have arrived since Labor came to power, with 230 more people in just one day on the latest two. 

 “The Coalition will continue to pursue the Government for their light touch approach through the Parliament, and hold the Minister for Immigration accountable. Minister O'Connor has offered not a word of concern about this appalling incident, preferring to offer lame excuses for a convicted jihadist terrorist instead,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr  Keenan  said:  “235  people  on  2  boats  have  arrived  on  the  first  day  of  June,  as  May  surpassed  April  as  the  biggest month for boat arrivals ever on record - 47 boats carrying 3,399 people.

 “As  the  record  numbers  of  boat  arrivals  continue  to  be  broken  with  every  given  month  under  Labor,  the  lack  of  border protection policies has put Australia at risk of national security breaches as we have no way of knowing who is coming into our country.

 “It is certainly not reassuring to know that a convicted Egyptian terrorist, who is guilty of the most serious crimes including premeditated  murder,  slipped  through  our  borders  undetected  and  was  held  in  a  low  security  environment  even  after  it was confirmed he was the subject of an Interpol red notice.

 “This man is a member of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad terrorist organisation, that in 2001 merged with al-Qaeda just prior to  the  September  11  attacks,  yet  despite  being  notified  by  both  ASIO  and  the  AFP,  the  Government  failed  to  act  on  this information.

 “Labor’s failure to put a stop to the people smuggling trade has placed Australia’s national security in a vulnerable position 

 Page 1 of 2 LABOR DENIES INQUIRY INTO THEIR LIGHT TOUCH SECURITY FOR CON...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

 that is easily penetrable by criminals,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 2 of 2 LABOR DENIES INQUIRY INTO THEIR LIGHT TOUCH SECURITY FOR CON...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

