---
title: "Carr fails to protect aid budget from cuts"
date: "2013-05-13"
creators:
  - "Rhiannon, Lee"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211436012
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2439055%22
---

 Media release - 13 May 2013   

 Carr fails to protect aid budget from cuts    

 Foreign Minister Bob Carr's has walked away from a promise to keep aid increases on track, said  Greens spokesperson for overseas aid Lee Rhiannon following confirmation that the aid will be  targeted in tomorrow's budget and that aid money will continue to be diverted to pay for onshore  asylum-seeker costs.     

 "Foreign Minister Bob Carr has shown himself to be a poor advocate for the overseasaid budget. He  has failed to quarantine the aid budget from being raided for onshore asylum seeker costs and he  has entrenched aid as a honey pot to dip into to boost the budget's bottom line", said Senator  Rhiannon.    

 "Neither the Labor government nor Tony Abbot can be trusted to stand up for Australia's aid  commitments.    

 "The decision to again push back promised aid increases and to lock in diverting aid money to  domestic asylum-seeker costs is small-minded, mean and goes against public support for Australia to  give its fair share to end global poverty.   

 "The Greens have a bill ready to go that would lock in a timetable to meet Australia's obligations to  increase aid and would make clear that the aid budget should not cover the cost of onshore asylum-seeker programs.    

 "Rather than working with the Greens to lock in a timeline to increase aid, the Gillard government is  doing the work of Tony Abbott to shave down the aid budget.   

 "Minister Carr's decision in December to divert $375 million from the aid budget forced the closure  of women's rights, education and health programs across the region. The decision to continue  diverting money to prop up onshore asylum-seeker programs is a misuse of the aid budget.    

 "Australia's aid contribution is already well-behind many OECD countries, including the debt-laden  conservative British government which this year met the target of spending 0.7 per cent of gross  national income on aid.   

 "As a wealthy nation, there is no excuse for Australia to shirk responsibility and short-change our aid  programs and the people that rely on Australian aid", said Senator Rhiannon.   

 Contact 0487 350 880   

