---
title: "New South Wales unites to celebrate Refugee Week 2013"
date: "2013-06-20"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396072
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2802579%22
---

 

 

 New South Wales unites to celebrate Refugee  Week 2013  Thursday, 20 June 2013 

 People across New South Wales will join together to celebrate the contribution of  refugees to Australian communities as part of World Refugee Day 2013 today. 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Brendan O'Connor, Minister for Multicultural  Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, and Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs  Senator Matt Thistlethwaite, said as well as marking the contribution and diversity of  refugee communities around the country, there is an extra occasion to celebrate,  with the settlement of 800 000 refugees and humanitarian entrants in Australia since  World War II. 

 Refugee Week, which coincides with World Refugee Day on June 20, has been  celebrated in Australia since the 1980s and in New South Wales a wide range of  community events and activities are planned in celebration. 

 Mr O'Connor said the week's celebration - from June 16-22 - was a unique  opportunity to recognise the plight of refugees around the world and acknowledge  the work of both government and non-government organisations to assist refugees  to contribute to Australian society. 

 'Australia has a long and proud history as a refugee resettlement country and a  cooperative international partner, which is demonstrated by the settlement of 800  000 refugee and humanitarian entrants under the humanitarian program,' Mr  O'Connor said. 

 'The Gillard Government is committed to ensuring that people settling here have the  help they need to rebuild their lives and become active participants in the  community, and this week is an important time not only to recognise this  commitment, but also the diversity which has grown through the humanitarian  program.' 

 Senator Lundy said Australia's resettlement tradition was central to providing new  opportunities for those in humanitarian need. 

 'The contributions of people settled under Australia's humanitarian program are  enormous in both economic and social spheres, and this week is an important 

 occasion to reflect on the amazing impact these entrants have had in carving  Australia's identity,' Senator Lundy said. 

 Senator Thistlethwaite said Refugee Week offered an opportunity to reflect on the  contributions of refugees to Australia. 

 'The stories of humanitarian entrants who have created success and new lives in  New South Wales are numerous and Refugee Week is the perfect occasion to  celebrate these individuals,' Mr Thistlethwaite said. 

 One of the people who has benefited from Australia's humanitarian program is  Aminata Conteh Biger, originally from Sierra Leone and now living in the Sydney  suburb of Belmore. Ms Biger came to Australia in 2000 along with her sister after  fleeing war in her country. 

 'I was fortunate enough to meet my husband here and now have a baby daughter  and a successful life,' she said. 

 Ms Conteh Biger, who is an ambassador for the United Nations refugee agency,  UNHCR, is starring in a major Sydney theatre production about her and is setting up  a new venture to help address infant mortality in Sierra Leone. 

 Australia's contribution to international protection and humanitarian efforts continues  this year, with 20 000 people to be welcomed through the humanitarian program in  2013-14. 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/bo/2013/bo204727.htm  Last update: Thursday, 20 June 2013 at 13:22 AEST 

 

