---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 24 July 2013: Better Schools Plan; Investment in La Trobe; Asylum seekers; Economy; Development assistance; Debate with Opposition Leader"
date: "2013-07-24"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Better Schools Plan"
  - "Investment in La Trobe"
  - "Asylum seekers"
  - "Economy"
  - "Development assistance"
  - "Debate with Opposition Leader"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397539
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2613982%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  MELBOURNE  24 JULY 2013 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:      Better Schools Plan; Investment in La Trobe; Asylum seekers;  Economy; Development assistance; Debate with Opposition Leader   

 PM: It’s great to be here at Brentwood Park Primary School. I'm here with Laura  Smyth and she's our local member. And this is a great Australian state school.    

 We're here to talk about the Better Schools Plan and our investment in schools  right across Australia, including here at Brentwood Park.    

 I've just had a look at some of the investments we've made at this school in the  past, including this fantastic multipurpose facility.   

 And what we're talking about now is how we invest further in the future.    

 This is an important plan for the country. The Better Schools Plan is about lifting  the standards for all Australian schools, lifting the standards for all Australian  school kids, so that there is enough funds to provide for that special one-on-one  attention when you need it: if one of the kids is falling behind a bit or needs a bit  extra for them to surge forward.    

 Now, I've been talking to the kids and the teachers here who are learning  Chinese, this is a great thing.    

 It's important that they're doing so because it reminds us that our schools are  part of the world. And there's a bit of a competition going on around the world as  to which kids are going to emerge with the best skills in the future.    

 Here in our part of the world in Asia, four of the top five school systems in the  world are just next door. Really. Hong Kong, Korea, and Shanghai in China and  in Singapore.   

 And so under the better schools plan we want Australian school kids to be able to  match their competitors, match the other kids from these schools into the future.    

 Just to underline that one more time. What we want is for Australian school kids  to be able to compete properly against kids graduating from schools in Korea, in  China, and in other parts of the world like Singapore.  

 

 Why? Because we want our kids to get the best jobs possible and for their living  standards in the future to be high as well.    

 Across Australia we're putting out this Better Schools Plan. This represents, if we  get agreement across the whole country, a further $15 billion investment into  Australian schools.    

 This is a huge investment. It will apply to Government schools, to Catholic and  independent schools.    

 Yesterday, Bill Shorten and I announced the agreement of the Australian  Catholic school system to support the Better Schools Plan. The Catholic school  system has 1700 schools across Australia, they educate 20 per cent of the kids  in this country so I welcome them coming on board.    

 The independent schools have done the same. State Governments in New South  Wales, and South Australia and Tasmania have done the same.    

 And yesterday, I sat down with Premier Napthine to see if Victoria could come on  board as well. Victoria is a big state, it’s the second biggest one in the country.    

 You’ve got more than half a million kids in school in Victoria and I want them to  benefit from the Better Schools Plan and we want them therefore to have the  best resources for the future.    

 In Victoria, if Premier Napthine signs up, you will see a $4 billion additional  investment in Victorian schools.    

 That is a lot of funding in order to make schools like Brentwood Park be the best  they possibly can, and providing those extra resources to help kids, who might be  falling behind a bit or if you really want to turbo charge a few kids who are doing  particularly well, a bit of one-on-one to make sure they become the state's best.    

 Let me give you a practical example. If Premier Napthine signs up to the Better  Schools Plan, this school here at Brentwood Park would be $2.8 million better off  over six years.    

 That represents a 48 per cent increase per student in terms of the overall school  budget. This is not just a small amount, it's actually a large amount.    

 It's designed to make the job of our teachers and our principals easier than it is,  raise the standards, extra resources and produce better outcomes for our kids.    

 So my challenge though is not just to Premier Napthine, with whom I had a good  conversation yesterday. My challenge is also to Mr Abbott who puts himself  forward as the alternative Prime Minister of Australia.    

 Mr Abbott has decided to be 100 per cent negative about this plan to invest $15  billion extra into the Australian school system. I think Mr Abbott needs to be  asked why.   

 I don't know a single mum and dad in the country who could understand why you  would not want to invest more in our schools. It’s so important for our kids’ future.   

 I think Australians are sick and tired of such wall-to-wall negativity on things such  as that.    

 The last thing, before taking your questions, is just to reflect also on what Laura  has been doing here in the local community more broadly.   

 I mentioned this multipurpose facility, which has been built here at Brentwood  Park. In fact, in the electorate which she represents, we've made similar  investments in around 61 schools and we've had a total of $110 million  investment through the school improvement program.   

 And that includes 15 multipurpose facilities like the one at the back here, it  includes building 28 new school libraries across this region, and 20 new  classrooms.    

 At the secondary school level, we've also provided the funding for more than  7,000 new computers to go into the region's secondary schools.    

 Also, a few kids when they've gone through primary school want to pursue not an  academic but a career in the trades. We've actually also invested in building  three new trades training centres so that they get the best opportunities possible  as well.   

 The Better Schools Plan I have just mentioned.    

 One final point about the record here in La Trobe, in the electorate which Laura  proudly represents, is that it's not just in schools that we've made this investment,  but in health as well.    

 For example, the Berwick GP Super Clinic, $2.5 billion investment from us.  Before it didn't exist, now it does. It’s a very practical thing for us to do for this  community.   

 Also in local infrastructure, roads are important here in Melbourne. We've  invested just under $70 million for the Monash Freeway in the Warrigal Road to  Clyde Road section.   

 And also, I remember myself committing to a $30 million investment for the Clyde  Road upgrade, which I understand is getting closer to completion. That's our  funding as well.    

 NBN, we will have an investment in this part of Victoria by mid-2016, we should  have something in the order of 22,600 homes either under construction with the  National Broadband Network connection or already connected in the biggest  engineering projects in the country's history.    

 So whether it's infrastructure and roads, whether it's the new infrastructure, the  National Broadband Network, whether it's very practical things like local health  services and the Berwick GP Super Clinic or, frankly, the huge investments in  schools like Brentwood Park, our mission is to make a difference and to try and  make these communities better.   

 And that's why we are pleased to be able to represent this community through  Laura in the Parliament and the Government of the country.    

 Journalist: What's the latest on the boat that's sunk off Indonesia?    

 PM: I've just received some advice on that and I think it's far wiser that we leave  it to the relevant Minister, Minister Jason Clare to provide a rolling update on the  facts.   

 But I would say that all of our agencies are actively following this and ensuring  that everything that can be done is being done.    

 This underlines the need for policy changes in Australia on asylum seekers policy  which sends a very clear message to people smugglers to stop sending people  by boat to Australia.    

 We are seeing too many drownings, too many sinkings, too many innocent  people being lost at sea.    

 Journalist: There is news this morning that there are up to 100 people  unaccounted for from a boat that has sunk off Indonesia.    

 This will take the total of people who have boarded boats since you announced  your policy on Friday to more than 400. Is this an indication that your policy is  already [inaudible]   

 PM: Can I just make a very clear statement about this. Number one: the asylum  seekers policy we've adopted is about sending a very clear message to people  smugglers that if you try to come to Australia by boat you'll not be settled in  Australia. Very clear message.    

 In fact, if you are proven to be bona fide refugees you'll be settled in another  country, Papua New Guinea.    

 That is all about destroying the people smugglers' business model. That's why  we're doing it.    

 Secondly, as I said and others said on the day we launched this - just Friday last  week - that the boats would not stop coming straight away. We also said this  would take some time. Very clear about that.   

 We also said that the people smugglers would in fact try to test our resolve to see  whether we’re actually able to implement this policy.    

 I say there is a huge national interest involved in making sure this policy works.    

 And so you're going to have naysayers, like yourself, saying that - that underpins  your question - that there are problems.    

 I'm saying this is one of the most difficult areas of public policy in Australia. And  we have taken a considered decision on what we regard to be the best response  to a challenge for Australia.   

 And it's not been one taken lightly. It also will take time to implement.    

 Let me add one other thing, though. That's our policy, it’s clear cut. But you've  raised the question of asylum seeker policy, let me put to you what the  alternative is.    

 We have said very clearly that we intend to break the business model for asylum  seekers by saying to them that if you send people by boat to Australia, you will  not settle in the country. It's very simple; it’s a very clear message.    

 And it's going to be tough in the implementation phase. I’ve said that right from  the beginning. People will challenge it and do all sorts of things.    

 This is a strategic direction for the long term, and there will be bumps on the road  - conceded that.    

 The alternative - because Mr Abbott wants to become Prime Minister and he  should be held to account for what he puts forward - Mr Abbott initially welcomed  this policy, then on the second day he attacked it and said it wouldn't work.    

 Well, I would simply say to Mr Abbott: the previous policy adopted during the  days of the Howard Government, it didn't work either, you know why? Because  their Pacific solution simply became a way-station on the way to Australia - 75%  of people who went off to various re-settlement centres ended up in Australia a  few years later.    

 It didn't send any signal at all over time to people smugglers.    

 And then we come to Mr Abbott's new alternative policy, his three-word slogan:  stop the boats.    

 The Australian people want, however, a six-word slogan, which is: how will you  stop the boats? That's a legitimate question.    

 I want to finish on one point and then I'll come back to you. I’ve said I won't be  adding to the detail of it because the relevant Minister, Jason Clare, is in contact  with the maritime authorities and he'll give you the most relevant update.    

 The question is about the alternative policy on asylum seekers. And that is what  the Australian people are out there considering and what they'll ultimately make  up their mind on.    

 So what I'm saying very simply is this: it is in the national interest that this policy  of ours works. Because we need to make sure that the business model of people  smugglers is destroyed.    

 But while it's in the national interest for the regional resettlement agreement to  work, it seems to me increasingly that Mr Abbott has judged that it's not in his  political interest for it to work.    

 And so, what I see now is him just changing his language. Nationally welcoming  it the first day, the second day attacking it and saying it wouldn't work.    

 The effect of what he is saying is to muddy the message to people smugglers  around the world, because each of them listen carefully to everything that is said  in the national debate - including by those who put themselves forward as the  alternative Prime Minister.    

 So therefore the effect of Mr Abbott's statements is to muddy the message to  people smugglers, because I think Mr Abbott has reached a political conclusion  that he'd much rather see this policy not be effective.    

 And I say again, very bluntly: that if you put yourself forward as to be the Prime  Minister of Australia, the national interest should come first. And partisan politics  aimed to, frankly, derail the regional resettlement agreement is just an appalling  approach to the responsibilities of the highest office of this land, and frankly  causes many people to question whether he is in fact fit to hold that office.  

 

 Journalist: [Inaudible]   

 PM: It’s a responsible thing to ask, to respond to your question about an incident  which is ongoing, it’s a responsible thing to say in response to an unfolding  incident  that - as I am here in Melbourne - the responsible Minister is Jason  Clare and he will be in touch with the relevant authorities now.    

 We take every incident in the sea involving the possible loss of life deeply  seriously.  

 All of the resources of the State are dedicated to do whatever we can, and  therefore that is underway at the moment. But if you’re asking me about an  incident that is unfolding, then I will not respond for the simple reason that the  Minister is in touch with the authorities.    

 Journalist: Moving on then, has the Government, is the Government looking for  an extra $6 billion to make up saving measures for possible revenue shortfalls?    

 PM: All Governments around the world are facing pressure on their budgets.    

 The expenditure review committee of our Cabinet wouldn't be doing its job if it  wasn't continually looking at the overall shape of the Budget. In terms of its detail  work, that's a Cabinet-in-confidence matter.    

 But we take our fiscal responsibilities seriously. What are they? Number one,  keep the economy strong, number two, return the Budget to balance, number  three, deal with any challenges on the revenue side and to deal with any way in  which we can continue to tighten expenditure.   

 That's the responsible course of action. And given that we are in the business of  alternatives, Mr Abbott's alternative Treasurer said that they have a $70 billion  black hole for the Opposition to account for in their Budget numbers.    

 And by virtue of their position on the fringe benefits tax it's just gone up to $72  billion.    

 So I'd wait for them to answer the questions about where they'd fund that black  hole from.    

 Journalist: SBS last night, a show described the situation in Manus Island and  sexual assaults and abuse amongst detainees. I wondered what your response  is.   

 PM: We take any such reports seriously and they should all be investigated. And  I understand that the Immigration Minister is investigating this.    

 I think he's sought some evidence from the journalist in question when this was  first raised a week or so ago. Where that has got to the in represent days, I'm  unsure.    

 But any allegation of this nature should be properly investigated thoroughly and I  imagine that will occur.    

 I go back to the general question of asylum seekers policy. What I’d say is that  we have a clear policy direction, which is saying to the people smugglers "if you  send people to Australia by boat they will not be settled in Australia".    

 I'm still waiting to hear what the alternative policy is in detail.    

 This morning, here in Melbourne, I was interviewed by Neil Mitchell on this  subject. And what did Neil Mitchell say? He said “well, if you want to have a  debate on asylum seekers, will you do it on my program, 3 AW”. I said "fine, I'll  do it tomorrow morning”.    

 Myself, Mr Abbott explaining our different policies on how to deal with challenge  of asylum seekers. People have to right to know.    

 Our policy is out there, we're seeking to implement it. What’s the alternative apart  from a three-world slogan, we don’t know.    

 Once again on Mr Abbott's chosen grounds for debate, he's refused to show up.   

 A couple of weeks ago, I said “well, you want to fight the election on debt and  deficit, come and debate me at the National Press Club”. He didn't show up.   

 A week or so ago, I announced that we'd be scrapping the carbon tax and  moving to a floating price. He said he wants to campaign on this in the election, I  said “come to the National Press Club and debate that, your chosen subject”.  Didn’t do that.   

 This morning on asylum seekers, we're in the midst of the debate which you are  legitimately asking questions about. That’s what your job is.   

 And so what I've said is "put your money where your mouth is, on to a debate  offered by Neil Mitchell on 3 AW”. I said I'd be there tomorrow morning and he's  declined because he's too busy. Why add this to Mr Abbott?   

 If you’re too busy tomorrow morning, Mr Abbott, to have a debate on asylum  seekers policy on 3AW, you pick the day, any day within the next week, and I’ll  come to Melbourne and join that debate.   

 Hour-long debate, straight Neil Mitchell, myself and Mr Abbott. And Mr Mitchell  can be the person in the middle, always gives me a hard time, I'm sure he gives  Mr Abbott a hard time as well, good on him, that's his job.   

 But I go back to the point whether we're talking about the economy, whether  we're talking about asylum seekers, if you're serious about being the next Prime  Minister of Australia, you’ve got to step forward and engage and say this is what  we'd do differently and why.    

 Journalist: [Inaudible]   

 PM: Our undertaking through the joint arrangement with the Government of  Papua New Guinea is that we will work with their authorities to ensure the safety  and security of those who are assessed in Papua New Guinea.    

 And furthermore, those if they're determined to be bona fide refugees, those who  would be settled in Papua New Guinea.    

 We take those Convention responsibilities seriously. And for those reasons we  spent several weeks discussing this with the UNHCR.    

 Journalist: Does the same debate invitation apply to Jon Faine at the ABC?    

 PM: Well I'll just take the one I was presented with this morning. There's a pretty  clear invitation out there, so let's see if Mr Abbott's response to today is "I'm too  busy tomorrow to come to Melbourne to debate the Prime Minister of Australia".    

 Well, fine, I'm sure he's got a lot of stuff on. I've got a few things on as well. I'm  trying to negotiate a new schools agreement with the Government of Victoria  worth $4 billion.    

 But let's just say he's really busy. The challenge is, within one week, name the  day, I’ll come back to beautiful Melbourne. Just organise better weather then.  And I’ll be up for that debate.   

 In terms of other programs, we'll take all those in sequence.    

 Journalist: How much extra will this new AusAID program to PNG cost?    

 PM: I said earlier that a number of the measures that we've adopted to support  our friends in Papua New Guinea will come through reallocations within the  development assistance budget. A number may be funded elsewhere.    

 We've also said that this will be fully accounted for when the government delivers  its economic and fiscal statement.    

 Journalist: Can you give us a round-about figure?    

 PM: That’s why we have an economic and fiscal statement so it's not round-about.    

 But I’m saying we already have something in the vicinity of a $5 billion  development assistance budget globally.    

 Secondly, our one with Papua New Guinea is about half a billion dollars.   

 Thirdly, it will be fully accounted for.    

 Now that you ask that question, let me flip this into reverse one more time.    

 Mr Abbott told the Australian people a lie yesterday. He told them a lie. What he  said was that the Australian Government was providing unaccountable cash  grants to the Government of Papua New Guinea.    

 That is a bald-faced lie and I would ask those of you in the media to hold him to  account for that.    

 Where is his evidence? Every single dollar that we provide any country in the  world through development assistance cooperation is done on the basis of that  bilateral agreement, which we monitor the implementation of, to ensure that it is  spent on the right purposes: hospitals, schools and the rest.    

 In fact, as Foreign Minister, I oversaw an independent review of aid effectiveness  in 2011, with an independent panel, which concluded that the Australian aid  budget was the most efficient and effective budget for development assistance  anywhere in the world, with one of the lowest levels of fraud in the world.    

 So if Mr Abbott is seeking to be truthful with the Australian people today, maybe  the national broadcaster could ask him this question: Where's his evidence?  Where’s the evidence?    

 I think it's time we had some truth in the national debate. I've told you what we  stand for in asylum seekers policy and there are challenges and difficulties and  I've acknowledged all of those.    

 What's the alternative policy? He's said we're providing cash grants to Papua  New Guinea. Where’s your evidence? Where’s the truth? Where are the facts?  Or is it a wild political assertion in order to obtain political office.    

 Thanks for your time.   

 [ENDS] 

