---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Fairfield: 17 September 2013: Abbott Ministry; women in Cabinet; no science portfolio; paid parent leave; Budget; asylum seekers; party reform"
date: "2013-09-17"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "Office of BOWEN, CHRIS, MP"
subjects:
  - "Abbott Ministry"
  - "women in Cabinet"
  - "no science portfolio"
  - "paid parent leave"
  - "Budget"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "party reform"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211440367
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2732985%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 INTERIM LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON   

 TRANSCRIPT   

 DOORSTOP,  FAIRFIELD   

 TUESDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2013   

 

 

 SUBJECTS: Abbott Ministry, women in Cabinet, no science portfolio,  paid parent leave, Budget, asylum seekers, party reform.   

 CHRIS BOWEN: Well thanks for coming everybody. Well the new Government  hasn’t even been sworn in and we’re seeing senior Liberals agree with the  arguments that the Labor Party has put about the make-up of the new cabinet.    

 Yesterday we pointed out that it was a sad state of affairs that the Liberal Party  and National Party could only provide one woman to serve in the Cabinet of  Australia. John Howard’s first Cabinet, a long time ago, had two women. We had  six women in the outgoing Cabinet. 

 

 All Cabinet appointments should be based on merit. We had six talented women,  who were appointed on merit to the Cabinet, and for Tony Abbott to say that he  could only find one woman, in his view, talented enough to serve in the Federal  Cabinet of Australia, is a sad indictment. This has been supported by Senator 

 Boyce, and I saw Mr Dennis Jensen earlier today, say that the Cabinet wasn’t  being appointed on merit.    

 Also, we pointed out that there are great gaps in this Cabinet. No Minister for  Science; no Minister for Skills; no Minister for Multiculturalism; No Minister for  Aging or Seniors; and no Minister for Disability Care. Now it’s all very well to say  somebody’s responsible in the Cabinet, but it’s important for a government to  highlight its priorities, to highlight specific responsibilities for its most senior  ministers. Australia’s had a science minister since the early 1930s. James Scullin,  as Prime Minister knew that science was important enough to have a portfolio,  but Tony Abbott’s seems to think it’s not.   

 And again, Dennis Jensen said earlier today, that this was a problem, he was  confused by this policy, and he said it wasn’t too late for Mr Abbott to change his  mind and to put a science portfolio forward.   

 Also today, Mr Jensen has agreed with exactly the points we’ve been making  about the paid parental leave scheme of Mr Abbott. We pointed out that it was  too expensive, and it would be paid for by Australia’s self-funded retirees and  seniors. Mr Jensen called for it to go to the Productivity Commission, and said  that it was paid for by a whack on Australia’s seniors. He said it was something  that somebody had thought of, and it hadn’t been properly thought through.    

 Well, Mr Jensen’s telling the truth. He’s saying exactly what we said before the  election; Mr Jensen is saying it after the election in a sign of disunity before the  new government has even been sworn in. But we made these points before the  election.    

 So again, we’re seeing what is frankly, in my view, a botched Cabinet reshuffle,  key portfolios being left off, the embarrassment of only one woman being put  into the Cabinet, and key Liberal back benchers pointing out the errors in the  paid parental leave scheme, which will be paid for by Australia’s Seniors, self-funded retirees, part-pensioners and Mum and Dad investors.    

 Happy to take some questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Why do you think he has only appointed one woman?   

 BOWEN: Well that’s a matter for him to explain, he said that there were  talented women knocking on the door to get into Cabinet. Well, Prime Minister-elect, open the door, let them into the Cabinet. There are, and I say in the spirit  of bi-partisanship, there are women in the Liberal and National Party rooms who  do have ability and should be represented at the most senior policy making table  in Australia, as I say, all appointments should be made on merit. I happen to  think, it’s a very sad day, in 2013, if the Prime Minister-elect of Australia, says I  made my appointments on merit, and only one out of twenty of those  appointments on merit is a female.   

 JOURNALIST: Who do you think then should have been appointed, as opposed  to the male counterparts?   

 BOWEN: Well, there’s a whole range of people in the Liberal and National Party  rooms, it’s not my place to appoint Liberal and National Party Ministers, but I  could point to a whole range of them. Some of them still on the back bench.  Kelly O’Dwyer, some parliamentary secretaries, who should be very seriously  considered for Cabinet positions. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Are you saying the male counterparts who have been put into  the Cabinet, do you think they haven’t been won on merit?   

 BOWEN: Well what I’m saying - Dr Jensen said that - and what I’m saying is  that if the Prime Minister-elect of A ustralia in 2013 thinks that on merit, he can  only find one woman out of his entire combined Liberal and National Party rooms  I think that’s a sad day for Australia.   

 

 JOURNALIST: Do you think that a lot of the campaigning he did with his  daughters, and all the other women around, do you think that was a sham?   

 BOWEN: No, I’m not saying that. I’m saying what is important is matters of  substance, and important appointments of substance and none are more  important than appointments to the Federal Cabinet of Australia. And I think it’s  a sad indictment that in this modern era, a new Prime Minister could only find  one female who he thinks is up to the job of serving in the Federal Cabinet.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, will you be publicly boosting either Mr Albanese or Mr  Shorten?   

 BOWEN: No I won’t. I’ve made it clear several times Joe that I won’t be  endorsing either candidate as interim Leader of the Labor party. That would be  inappropriate.   

 JOURNALIST: Will you be attending either of their campaign functions in any  capacity?   

 BOWEN: No, if there were any joint functions that they were both attending, I  would consider that, but I won’t be attending any functions that are only  supporting one.   

 JOURNALIST: I know we’re early on in the process, but is there anything you  can point to at the moment that will tell us about how this issue is going, how it’s  playing with the membership and so forth?   

 BOWEN: Well it’s very popular with the members in terms of getting a vote, and  we’ve involved in the Labor Party and playing a role the important decisions  about  been, I’m told, deluged with applications to join the Labor Party in the last  few days. Now, people who join the Labor Party now of course won’t get a vote,  it’s people who were members of the Labor Party on election day who will get a  vote, that’s the important thing. It’s a development that I support, that  everybody, every financial member of the ALP right up till election day will get a 

 vote, gets to have a say in who is our alternative Prime Minister. That’s a good  thing, and I think it will re-energize our party membership. We want people to  join the Labor Party, but we don’t just want them to join the Labor Party to hand  out on election day, we want people’s involvement right across the country.  Suburbs, regions, inner-city, bush, all across the country, small business people,  farmers, unionists, students, retirees, we want all sorts of people who should  lead the Labor party.   

 JOURNALIST: You mentioned before that there is no science Minister, what  effect does this have? I mean it’s still being shared across two other ministers.   

 BOWEN: You need a science minister at the table, making a case for science. If  you talk to the science community, they will tell you for example, that Barry  Jones was a very important Science Minister, that Kim Carr was someone who  understood science, and still understands science and understands the  importance of public policy for science. There are a whole range of areas,  whether it be science, whether it be resources and tourism, are another  example, so important in our economy. I mean the Labor Party gave the  resources sector two talented Ministers who understand the resources sector as  well as anybody else in the country, Martin Ferguson and Gary Gray. Now we  find the entire portfolio has been abolished, and you’ve got, apparently resources  being thrown in with manufacturing, with science with industry, and I don’t think  that those key areas of the economy with get the necessary attention. Financial  Services is another field, an area of great potential for Australia. I’m a former  Financial Services Minister, who sat at the Cabinet table, I know what difference  it makes to have a Minister, dedicated to improving the lot of one particular part  of the Australian economy, and this is sadly lacking in this new Cabinet.    

 JOURNALIST: Does it surprise you that so far after the election you’re still the  Treasurer?   

 BOWEN: Well, we had a budget emergency that needed to be fixed urgently  apparently, that’s no longer the case. Now we hear that the mid-year forecast  won’t be released until January when you would all be, I hazard a guess, all be  on holidays, in an attempt to avoid scrutiny. And this is, I think, symptomatic of  saying one thing before the election and doing another thing after the election. If  we had a budget emergency, Mr Abbott could have sought to have himself sworn  in by now, he could have had Mr Hockey sworn in by now, and he could have  put in place the measures he thinks are so urgent. Now we see, not only no  swearing in but, I see speculation that the new Treasurer is going to spend more  money, add to debt, when I thought the debt was a national emergency. I see  that the Prime Minister-elect, who said he’d go to Indonesia in his first week in  office, is now not doing that and Minister Bishop will catch up with Minister 

 Natalegawa for a coffee in New York. So we’re seeing a very different approach  from before the election to after the election with this government.   

 JOURNALIST: So you think a lot of his promises are going unanswered?   

 BOWEN: I think he campaigned saying one thing and is governing doing  something completely different so far. Okay, I think we’re covered. Thanks very  much guys.   

 Ends   

