---
title: "Angus Taylor maiden speech: Pursuing global opportunities through openness will secure our nation's prosperity"
date: "2013-12-10"
creators:
  - "Taylor, Angus"
source: "Office of TAYLOR, ANGUS, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211401710
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2901147%22
---

 

 

 MR ANGUS TAYLOR MP  Member for Hume 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE  

 

 ANGUS TAYLOR MAIDEN SPEECH: PURSUING GLOBAL OPPORTUNITIES  THROUGH OPENNESS WILL SECURE OUR NATION’S PROSPERITY   

 Federal Member for Hume Angus Taylor says Australia’s future prosperity will be secured  through openness to global opportunity and letting go of the sectors that are uncompetitive.    

 Delivering his maiden speech in the House of Representatives Mr Taylor said Australia was  on the brink of a boom in demand for its food and fibre, with “tens of millions of people in the  developing world moving each year from agrarian poverty into urban and middle class lives”. 

 “But it is only a chance. We could easily botch this one. Many of our competitors are eyeing  this prize.”  

 Mr Taylor said the world was signalling that Australia should focus on what it does best.  

 “It is also signalling that we should let go where we are not competitive. Our response will  define our future. 

 “Resolving the clash between liberal economics and economic isolationism - between  openness and insularity - is the first order priority in taking advantage of our changing world,”  he said.  

 “To those who argue for fortress Australia, Madam Speaker, they are wrong. The pursuit of  global opportunities in sectors where we can excel, will strengthen us. This is how we will  sustain our sovereignty - not by putting up new barriers. 

 “The monumental benefits of openness are not sufficiently clear to many Australians from all  sides of politics…We need the big licks of capital and the skills that others can provide.” 

 Mr Taylor attributed his resolve - in leaving a successful private sector career for politics - to  the example set by his grandfather Sir William Hudson, commissioner and chief engineer of  the Snowy Mountains Scheme. 

 “My decision to enter public life was not an easy one. In the end though, it was influenced  heavily by my grandfather’s record and impact as one of our nation’s great public servants.”   

 For media inquiries please call Sarah Bucknell on 6277 4662 / 0448 111 669. 

 

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 1 

 

 Madam speaker, I rise with great pride on behalf of the people of the electorate of 

 Hume. As the crow flies, the closest Hume border is 10 kilometres from where I 

 stand, but Madam Speaker, it is in many respects a world away. 

 Uniquely in this country, the Hume electorate spans the fringes of two capital 

 cities. It is bounded by outer Sydney in the North, the ACT in the South, and small 

 Western towns like Stockinbingal and Quandialla. Taking in 12 local government 

 areas, it is the electorate of historic small towns, villages and rural hamlets. From 

 the rugged, high country of Crookwell - where snow often settles in winter - to 

 the flat, sometimes dusty and dry red dirt of Caragabal, we have windswept 

 tablelands and gentle slopes and plains. In the earliest settled agricultural region 

 in Australia it is a joy to me that we have some of the best livestock country and 

 some of the highest yielding wheat and canola crops in Australia. 

 

 Yet, Madam Speaker, with the nation’s biggest transport corridor running 

 through its heart, Hume is more diverse and more connected than you might 

 think. Over 30 percent of the Hume workforce commutes into Sydney or 

 Canberra each day. My constituents range from ultra-progressives, particularly 

 close to Canberra, right through to hard core conservatives.    

 

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 2 

 

 

 But in the middle is a great swathe of people who are fairly moderate, mostly 

 tolerant and who want government to get off their back so they can get on with 

 their lives. They work on farms, in shops and in hospitals and schools. Like 

 country people all over, they typically have a lot of common sense. Madam 

 Speaker, people in Hume are great detectors of spin.   

 Hume’s representatives have been as fearless and wise as the great explorer after 

 whom the electorate was named. I am honoured to follow the exceptional Wal 

 Fife, John Sharp and, of course, Alby Schultz. I thank them for their service and I 

 aspire to the high bar set by each of them. 

 In the early nineteenth century my Taylor ancestors set out from Yorkshire on 

 their pilgrimage to make a better life. Let’s just say they were not on the side of 

 the establishment, and being offered no land from the government, they kept 

 moving South. They made their way via Berrima to Taylor’s Hill - now Mount 

 Taylor -just a few kilometres from here. For his assistance to the Rum Corp in 

 deposing Governor Bligh, James Taylor was given land. But some in the family 

 were pushed South again.   That side of the family was sceptical of power and 

 dismissive of the political establishment long before federation or Canberra was 

 conceived.   

 

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 3 

 

 I was born an hour’s drive South of here, and now I live an hour to the North on 

 the edge of a beautiful frost plain near Goulburn. My childhood home sits on the 

 Monaro, high on the great divide. My three brothers and I had a freedom and 

 independence that most children these days - and even then - could only dream 

 of.  It was not until the mid-nineties that on our place we switched from horses to 

 motor bikes for our stock work. So I spent much of my childhood and young 

 adulthood on the back of a horse.  

 

 We rode 10km across the paddocks to pony club in Nimmitabel. We fished in the 

 big dam for yabbies and trout. We rode our pushbikes to the school bus. We 

 mustered, drenched and marked our way through school and university holidays.  

 At a young age, it was unexceptional to be sent to pick up a mob of sheep or cattle 

 many miles away with just a lunch pack and a horse - and if we were lucky, a 

 good dog.  

 

 We had exceptional parents. Dad was busy running the farm and later even 

 busier making a contribution to rural politics - during that extraordinary era 

 when farmers were leading national reforms.  

 

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 4 

 

 

 Our mother was devoted to us. She taught us all to read and write well before we 

 went to school. Education was paramount and we learnt to approach every task 

 as if our lives depended on it, and to never, ever give up. Mum was strong but 

 gentle. She was unfailingly kind, loyal and generous - with the strongest moral 

 compass of anyone I have known.  We lost her to breast cancer when she was in 

 her forties - the age I am now. She would be proud if she were here today 

 because she believed in service of any kind.  

 

 She was deeply influenced by her parents and their values - especially her father. 

 My grandfather, William Hudson was and remains a pervasive role model in my 

 life. He was the Commissioner and Chief Engineer of the Snowy Mountains 

 Scheme and led it from its inception in 1949 until just before completion in 1967. 

 

 He conceived of the idea and insisted, against resistance, to bring in large 

 numbers of refugees from war torn Europe. He insisted that people from over 

 thirty countries who had just been fighting each other in the second world war 

 live and work together in multi-ethnic camps. The Snowy Scheme, quite literally, 

 changed the face of our nation.   

 

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 5 

 

 

 My grandfather treated every single person with whom he came into contact - 

 from humble truck drivers to his senior engineers - with equal dignity and 

 respect.  He abhorred snobbery and judged people on character and conduct, not 

 rank. He worked prodigiously and was extraordinarily humble. The Snowy was 

 never about him. He retired to Canberra - a stone’s throw from here - and he 

 died owning a modest home and modest possessions.  He never focused on 

 accumulating material wealth. 

 

 On nation building Madam Speaker, we can take many lessons from the Snowy 

 Scheme.  There was, even then, a rigorous cost benefit analysis. The project met a 

 clear and universal public need which could only be achieved through 

 government involvement - while setting new benchmarks in the use of private 

 contractors. Legislation ensured it was insulated from party politics. It was 

 forward thinking: its safety regime was the world’s best at the time. After a 

 quarter century of construction, the scheme came in under budget and before 

 time.   

 

 Madam Speaker, at the peak of a rewarding career in the private sector, my 

 decision to enter public life was not an easy one. In the end though, it was 

 influenced heavily by my grandfather’s record and impact as one of our nation’s 

 great public servants.  

 

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 6 

 

 At Sydney University I found law interesting and rigorous - but it never pushed 

 my buttons like economics. Economics is about making smarter use of limited 

 resources to make people better off. It shapes history and society at every level. 

 Good economics is the key to good government, job creation, and funding for 

 world class schools, health services, roads, railways and broadband networks.    

 

 At University I read Smith, Bentham, Burke, Mill, Marshall, Schumpeter, 

 Galbraith, Keynes and Friedman. But Madam Speaker, 20 years ago I stepped into 

 McKinsey. Since that time I have learned that no single economist, thinker or 

 philosopher has the answer for everything.   

 

 At McKinsey and then at Port Jackson Partners I worked alongside some of the 

 world’s best management thinkers. From mines and farms in South America, 

 Africa and the Pilbara to ports, smelters, steel-mills and railways across Asia and 

 Australia - and even to cowsheds and woolsheds deep in rural New Zealand - I 

 learned about what really drives growth, jobs and productivity.  

 

 I learned to think strategically - to focus on the two or three things that really 

 matter. I built a career on helping clients understand the phenomenal rise of 

 China and India and the changing role of minerals, energy, food and water in the 

 global economy.   

 

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 7 

 

 Helping some of the biggest companies to shape their long term plans gave me 

 licence to think long and hard about Australia’s place in the world - a world 

 where ideas, people, money and products cross borders faster and with more 

 intensity than ever before.  

 

 I have witnessed the lasting benefits that massive private sector investment can 

 bring. I have witnessed extraordinary personal leadership turn organisations 

 around. But I have also seen successful organisations - including governments - 

 grow big, lazy and complacent when discipline is lost.  

 

 In my own personal involvement with small businesses, particularly in 

 agriculture, I have learned the necessity of experimentation, the value of 

 persistence and I have felt the ignominy of failure. In this place I will never forget 

 it is an army of small business people and entrepreneurs - who put their necks on 

 the line, their noses to the grindstone and their faith in humanity every day. They 

 contribute more to our economy than big business ever will.   

 

 Madam Speaker, the heaving and irresistible force of globalisation now well and 

 truly bears down upon us, fuelled by rapid Asian growth.  It is creating huge new 

 opportunities, and the world is signalling that Australia should focus on what we 

 do best. It is also signalling that we should let go where we are not competitive.  

 

 Our response will define our future.  

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 8 

 

 

 Since John Macarthur put his first bale of merino wool on a ship to England - we 

 have depended upon trade, foreign investment, immigration and innovation. 

 More than ever, our future prosperity will stand on these four pillars.   

 

 The last federal government put at risk a huge opportunity in our resources 

 sector. Although the remaining prospects are strong, this must never happen 

 again.   

 

 With tens of millions of people in the developing world moving each year from 

 agrarian poverty into urban and middle class lives, our small country is poised on 

 the brink of yet another prospect:  a boom in demand for our food and fibre. But 

 it is only a chance. We could easily botch this one. Many of our competitors are 

 eyeing this prize.  

 

 Resolving the clash between liberal economics and economic isolationism - 

 between openness and insularity - is the first order priority in taking advantage 

 of our changing world.  

 

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 9 

 

 

 To those who argue for fortress Australia, Madam Speaker, they are wrong.  The 

 pursuit of global opportunities in sectors where we can excel, will strengthen us.  

 This is how we will sustain our sovereignty - not by putting up new barriers.   

 

 However, the monumental benefits of openness are not sufficiently clear to many 

 Australians from all sides of politics. That is partly because the raw appeal of 

 populism is an easy grab on the evening news. But, Madam Speaker, it is also 

 because our policy settings are not right.  

 

 We must hungrily seek out fast growing new markets to our north. We need the 

 big licks of capital and the skills others can provide. We must boldly expound and 

 stay true to a narrative that explains the benefits of openness.  

 

 At the same time we must guard against the voracious thirst of vested interest 

 and monopoly. Madam Speaker, whether it manifests in companies, unions, or 

 the most powerful monopoly of all - Government - monopoly will exploit if left 

 unconstrained. Our competition watchdog must be given everything it needs to 

 encourage competition and see off exploitation in a more global economy - so 

 that consumers and small businesses can prosper. We need to stop giving public 

 money to rent seekers, and we must be strong against the loud voices of 

 narrowly focused interests. Laws passed in this place must not drag down the 

 living standards of the majority by benefiting a few. 

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 10 

 

 

 This government has shown it understands the urgent need to step up and focus 

 on bilateral trade deals that position our best exporters to win. New Zealand has 

 shown that backing its strengths delivers enormous benefits, and that 

 agriculture, in particular, has much to gain.  

 

 Tax and welfare policy must encourage participation and productivity - 

 recognising that capital, businesses and highly skilled people now move quickly 

 to more attractive countries. But we must also ensure that global companies and 

 investors can’t game our tax system at our expense.   

 

 In immigration, like any self-respecting nation, we must control our fortune - not 

 have it foist upon us. Along with a generous humanitarian program we should be 

 unapologetic about actively seeking out new citizens - and many of them - who 

 bring us skills, a strong work ethic, and who will contribute to the fabric of our 

 nation.    

 

 Meanwhile, we must embrace innovation from all over the globe, focusing our 

 research and development on our strengths. Our industrial relations system and 

 our research sector will need to be more flexible and more outward looking. 

 

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 11 

 

 

 Australian school and university students now compete with those beyond our 

 borders, billions strong, whose appetite for learning is unprecedented. This year, 

 there are more university students in China than the entire Australian 

 population. Our competitors know that you don’t need to spend billions more on 

 education to achieve outstanding outcomes. We need to get smart, stop the 

 ideological warfare and focus on great teaching.  

 

 Madam Speaker, in the shorter term, we face clear challenges. This Government 

 has been left with a deep structural budget deficit. Consumers are saddled with 

 debt, and are nervous. Our dollar is stubbornly high. Mining investment is on the 

 skids. 

 

 In time export growth is the hope of the side, but to pick up the slack, we must 

 strongly encourage non-mining investment - particularly infrastructure and 

 housing - finding clever means of attracting investment without drowning 

 ourselves in more red ink.  

 

 Making the most of every dollar of government expenditure is now more crucial 

 than ever. The productivity revolution has been sweeping through the private 

 sector for decades, and it is now time for the public sector to follow. Whether it is 

 in health, education, defence or welfare, it is time for governments to treat every 

 dollar of expenditure as if it was our own. 

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 12 

 

 

 I want these things Madam Speaker because I want grain, meat and cherry 

 producers in my electorate to be selling without barriers into fast growing Asian 

 markets now. I want the children in Hume’s schools to have the same 

 opportunities as their Asian competitors. I want to know we will look after our 

 most vulnerable and elderly, as their numbers continue to grow. I want the 

 Barton Highway - connecting 12 000 of my constituents to Canberra each day - to 

 be the road it should be. I want more rural doctors and hospitals installing new 

 technology and offering new services - not cutting them. I want mobile phone 

 reception and internet connectivity improved quickly, so more of my 

 constituents can better run their small businesses or work from home, creating 

 more local jobs.   

 

 At the same time we must protect our basic values and bedrock institutions. I 

 first encountered political correctness as a student in Oxford. It was 1991 and a 

 young Naomi Wolfe lived a couple of doors down the corridor. Several graduate 

 students, mostly from the North East of the US decided we should abandon the 

 Christmas tree in the Common room because some people might be offended.  I 

 was confused.  

 

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 13 

 

 

 My friends from Oklahoma, Alaska and Oregon explained this new kind of moral 

 vanity which was taking hold in America. A few of us pushed back hard. In the 

 end we won because we were the mainstream.  But Madam Speaker, we must 

 resist the insidious political correctness which would have us discard those core 

 values that have made us great. 

 

 In our times, the world over, the foundation of democracy - free speech - and the 

 foundation of capitalism - property rights - is being chipped away by shrill, elitist 

 voices who insist they know what is best for people who are not remotely like 

 them.  I can tell you Madam Speaker, I will always defend property rights and 

 free speech. And in this place I will back the parliament over the executive and 

 the judiciary - because it is through this parliament that each of us here is 

 accountable to our constituents.    

 

 Madam Speaker I owe so much to many people.  To Alby Schultz and 

 Gloria, thank you for the faith you placed in me, your support and your famous 

 generosity of spirit. To the one thousand people across Hume who helped on 

 polling day. To the core Hume campaign team: Michele Costello, Nancy Roberts, 

 Paula Clegg, Graham Templeton, Sam Rowland, Brooke Hilton, Jane Reardon, 

 Danny Kennedy, Ian Norris, Ian Weakley, Geoff Pearson, John Plews, Ruth Gibson, 

 Sarah Bucknell, Holly Campbell, Bob Rogers, Tim Meares, Frances Douch, Geoff 

 Kettle, Maree Ireland, Holly Hughes - and many others who volunteered not for 

  ANGUS TAYLOR MP | Federal Member for Hume 

 Tuesday 10th December, 2013 | 14 

 

 days but for weeks and in some cases (Paula and Nancy) months of their time: 

 Thank you. You set the gold standard. I thank state MPs Pru Goward and Jai 

 Rowell, as well as a host of current and former Federal MPs who visited the 

 electorate. I thank those who provided wise counsel, including Bill Heffernan, 

 Malcolm Turnbull, John Howard and the Prime Minister.  

 

 Finally, to my family. I met Louise 25 years ago. She was - and still is - talented, 

 clever and warm. She was a girl from the bush who was interested in big things: 

 politics, God, and the world around her and she came from a family that was 

 brimming with love.  I was lucky to find her and her parents Paula and Richard - 

 who are so generous and supportive to us and everyone who inhabits their 

 world.  

 

 To our beautiful children:  Hamish, Olivia, Adelaide and Roo. We love you dearly. 

 I thank you from the bottom of my heart for accepting such a dramatic change in 

 our lives.  

 

 Some people say that politics is about power. I don’t agree. It should be about 

 leadership, service and making an enduring difference to the lives of others. I 

 hope that the work I do in this place makes a real difference, and will one day 

 make my children proud.   

 

 Thankyou Madam Speaker. 

