---
title: "Boat arrivals expose Labor's asylum budget as fiscal fantasy"
date: "2013-02-07"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390201
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2215460%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Scott Morrison 

 Boat arrivals expose Labor's asylum budget as fiscal fantasy 

 Thursday 7th February 2013 

 The arrival of two more boats, with a total of 138 people on board, comes as Labor’s revised asylum 

 budget figures released today claim that costs will fall by almost $1 billion next year, Shadow Minister for 

 Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.  

 

 “Today’s asylum budget update is as mythical as Wayne Swan's vanished surplus. The arrival of two more 

 boats demonstrates that Labor is locked in their perpetual failure on our borders,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “The asylum budget update is pure fiscal fantasy. Boats are continuing to arrive in record numbers under 

 Labor’s border failure and yet next financial year [13/14] they are budgeting that the cost to taxpayers will 

 plunge by almost $1 billion.  

 

 “Labor then wants the Australian people to believe that spending in 14/15 will plummet by almost another 

 $1 billion. Labor seems to be budgeting for the implementation of the Coalition's policies on our borders, 

 rather than their own proven policy failures.  

 

 “Minister O’Connor’s first action as Minister for Immigration has been to follow the lead of his predecessor 

 by attempting to pull the wool over the eyes of the Australian people about the impact his government’s 

 failed border protection policies are having on the budget.  

 

 “Labor has sought to hide their budget blow outs on our borders at every single opportunity, blow outs that 

 that have reached over $6 billion and counting. Taxpayers are being forced to pay for Labor’s failure, they 

 shouldn’t have to put up with the added insult of Labor's shameful spin and denial,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

