---
title: "Transcript of press conference: 30 May 2013: Convicted terrorist housed at low security Inverbrackie detention centre"
date: "2013-05-30"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395144
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2723342%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE May 30, 2013

 Subject:  Convicted terrorist housed at low security Inverbrackie detention centre

 E&OE……………………….……………………………………………………………………………………………………………

 MORRISON:

 Thank you for coming together at such short notice in relation to the most recent revelations in Senate Estimates today. I will  ask  Michael  Keenan  to  run  through  the  details  of  these  matters  and  then  Jamie  Briggs,  the  local  Member  to  go through the local implications of all of this. What we have had occur today and has been revealed at Senate Estimates is what  the  consequences  of  the  Gillard  government’s  light  touch  approach  to  national  security  means.  What  has  been revealed today is a national security scandal.

 We  have  had  a  convicted  jihadist  put  in  a  low  security  detention  facility  in  South  Australia  for  a  period  of  five  months during  which  the  Department  of  Immigration  was  fully  aware  of  this  individual’s  serious  national  security  risks.  This   incident  demonstrates  just  how  low  this  government  has  set  the  bar  when  it  comes  to  national  security  issues  and  the protection of our community when it comes to the consequences of their chronic border failures. With the level of arrivals by boat, illegally, that we have seen we have seen those arrivals crush the infrastructure of the assessment capabilities of ASIO, the Department of Immigration, we have had our vessels at sea involved in interceptions literally cracking under the pressure  and  what  we  have  seen  today  is  the  entire  system  of  national  security  crack  under  the  pressure  through  this incident.

 Now this is not a one off incident. We all know the incident of Captain Emad, we all know how that happened. We know the other incidents where you have had people accused of murdering their girlfriends let out on the community on bridging visas. This is the par for the course that this Prime Minister sets with her light touch approach to national security when it comes  to  these  matters.  It  also  demonstrates  the  incredible  dysfunctionality  of  how  this  government  operates  when  it comes to handling these matters. They are literally all over the shop when it comes to this. Agencies not talking to one other, agencies not understanding each other, Ministers not across the details. I mean the question for Brendan O’Connor  is how has it taken him so long to act to actually take this person back to more formal detention? And why is this person still in the country today and for what purpose? It goes back to the previous Immigration Minister, Mr Bowen. How long did he  know  about  this?  Was  it  even  brought  to  his  attention?  I  am  not  sure  what  is  worse  but  what  it  does  show  is  a government  that  has  not  put  a  priority  on  national  security  when  it  comes  to  their  failures,  it  demonstrates  the dysfunctionality and all of that adds up to a genuine national security scandal. I will ask Michael to go through the detail.

 KEENAN:

 Thank  you  Scott.  What  we  have  known  for  some  time  and  it  was  revealed  by  the  media  was  that  we  had  an  Egyptian national arrival courtesy of a people smuggler into Australia and astonishingly he had been placed in Inverbrackie which is a  low  security  detention  environment.  We  have  been  seeking  further  details  by  the  government  about  this  but  none  of them  have  been  forthcoming  until  the  AFP  revealed  more  details  in  Estimates  today  and  I  just  would  like  to  run  you through exactly what was revealed because as Scott said this is a grave breach of national security. What we do know is that  this  Egyptian  national  is  a  convicted  terrorist.  He  has  been  convicted  of  terrorist  activities  both  inside  and  outside Egypt. The offences he has been convicted of include premeditated murder, destruction of property, firearm possession, possession of explosive devices without a permit, membership of a terrorist group and forgery of documents. He arrived in Australia on the 9th of May last year and subsequently he was placed in Inverbrackie detention centre even though the  AFP  had  concerns  about  this  particular  individual.  They  weren’t  able  to  formally  identify  him  as  the  individual  who  has   been  the  subject  of  the  Interpol  red  notice  and  of  someone  who  has  been  convicted  of  such  serious  crimes  until  14 November  2012.  Then  they  advised  DIAC  and  as  Scott  mentioned  DIAC  did  nothing  about  it  until  it  was  raised  in  the media. The organisation of which he was a member of was the Egyptian Islamic Jihad - an organisation that has since  been  merged  with  Al  Qaeda.  These  details  reveal  what  is  as  Scott  said  a  national  security  scandal.  We  have  had  a convicted Egyptian terrorist arrive in Australia even after he was formally identified as such the government did absolutely nothing about it. There are very serious questions to answer for both the Immigration Minister but also the Home Affairs Minister. Why is it that no action was taken after this man was formally identified? I call on the government to give a free and full account over exactly how this has been allowed to occur.

 BRIGGS:

 Well thank you Michael and Scott. This is shocking, shocking to my community that the centre they were assured was a low  security  centre  that  would  only  house  people  who  were  families  who  were  low  risk  according  to  the  website  the

 Page 1 of 6 JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE > Michael Keenan MP

 13/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

 Inverbrackie  Alternative  Place  of  Detention  fact  sheet.  Minister  Bowen  when  he  attended  the  public  meeting  after  his government foisted the centre upon the people of the Adelaide Hills with no notice, told the Adelaide Hills community in no uncertain terms that this was a low security centre. So much so that it is surrounded by a pool fence and now what we know is a convicted Egyptian jihadist was a pool fence away from freedom. This is a scandal, an utter scandal and I want the  Minister  for  Immigration  today  and  the  Minister  for  Home  Affairs  to  assure  my  community  that  there  are  no  further examples of this in the centre today. The Minister for Home Affairs likes his big conferences when they relate to Australian sports people well let’s have a big press conference about this issue. This is a scandal.

 MORRISON:

 Questions - remembering also today the Prime Minister was directly questioned on this matter by the Deputy Leader in the Parliament today and she described the security arrangements and assessment procedures as ‘satisfactory’ and she  is comfortable with them.

 QUESTION:

 One of the problems Mr Morrison is that he is obviously claiming asylum, what would you propose doing if you were the Minister given the application that is before the Australian authorities?

 MORRISON:

 The Refugee Convention does not oblige any country, any signatory to provide safe haven to people of this nature. The Convention specifically relieves a country from giving safe haven to a convicted terrorist.

 QUESTION:

 Is the country of safe haven obliged to at least test the allegations?

 MORRISON:

 No.

 QUESTION:

 Doesn’t he also have access to the courts given he arrived before the no advantage test was applied…

 MORRISON:

 Well this fellow does not have an asylum claim when he has been found to be a convicted terrorist. There is a conviction against this individual. That is a known fact and the Convention does not provide protection for people who are convicted terrorists.

 QUESTION:

 Doesn’t Australia also have issue in terms of we can’t send somebody back to another country where they might face a potential death sentence?

 MORRISON:

 Well those are issues relating to other conventions but that does not relate to asylum claims and so at the very least this person should be locked up and they should have been locked up the minute this government knew about it. Instead they put him behind a pool fence.

 QUESTION:

 That trial where he was convicted, many, many people were put forward at this trial and several of them were sentenced to death. If this man has been sentenced to death would this change your mind with the..

 MORRISON:

 Well  there  are  lots  of  ifs  in  that  and  I  think  they  are  questions  for  the  Minister  to  respond  to  but  the  first  question  the

 Page 2 of 6 JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE > Michael Keenan MP

 13/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

 Minister has to respond to is why did he allow a convicted jihadist to be in a low security facility for so long? Why didn’t he  know about it if he didn’t know about it and if he did know about it why didn’t he lock him up and start addressing the very  issues that you raise? There could be many permutations that go beyond from this but the first one, the first hurdle this government failed to clear was they didn’t lock him up.

 QUESTION:

 What would you do with his wife and kids?

 MORRISON:

 Well again we would have to look at the specific circumstances of those cases but in terms of this individual I just think there is no shadow of a doubt in terms of how the government should address this matter and they were found wanting. This government always exceeds my lowest expectations of them when it comes to border control and national security and today they have done it again.

 QUESTION:

 Why would the AFP not go and pick him up if he was such a dangerous person?

 MORRISON:

 Well I might let Michael comment on that but that’s a very good question.

 KEENAN:

 David  I  think  that’s  a  very  good  question.  The  AFP  notified  DIAC  once  they  had  confirmed  his  identity  apparently  in November last year. May I suggest that they are very good questions to put to the Minister for Home Affairs.

 QUESTION:

 The situation in Egypt has been extremely confused over the last two years or so, is it possible that this man hasn’t been  processed in a way that could be equivalent to our system of justice?

 MORRISON:

 Well  look  the  government  might  want  to  look  to  make  excuses  for  convicted  terrorists  that  are  allowed  to  go  into  low security detention facilities. I am certainly not about to. I think the government has set a very low bar here.

 KEENAN:

 And can I just say the convictions were recorded in April 1999.

 QUESTION:

 In regards to resourcing, ASIO in Senate Estimates today has talked about how under triage conditions only 10-15 per  cent  of  asylum  seekers  released  into  the  community  are  properly  screened  for  security.  If  the  Coalition  wins  power  in September would you quarantine ASIO and the AFP from any funding cuts to make sure that those security screenings take place?

 MORRISON:

 Well let me first say this - the likelihood of someone having a negative or qualified ASIO assessment for those who have arrived illegally by boat is 20 times higher on ASIO’s own figures and that is based on comprehensive ASIO assessments. Assessments that are done for bridging visa release are what the Department of Immigration have described as a light touch.  So  what  this  demonstrates  is  that  the  community  dumping  policy  the  government  has  engaged  in  because  the detention  centres  are  just  full  has  massive  holes  in  it  particularly  when  it  comes  to  national  security.  To  your  specific question, those questions have to be addressed in the broader budget but I think the Coalition’s record when it comes to  national  security  and  ensuring  the  appropriate  resources  are  in  place  speaks  for  itself.  In  1996  it  was  the  Howard Government that quarantined the  defence budget for example. So  our record when  it comes to these serious matters I don’t think is in question here. The record that is being destroyed today by this incident is that of the Gillard Government.

 Page 3 of 6 JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE > Michael Keenan MP

 13/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

 QUESTION:

 What would the Opposition do to ensure this sort of thing doesn’t happen if you are elected in September? Would there be  any sort of review of everyone in community detention?

 MORRISON:

 Well I called for this David as you know some months ago when I said this government does not know who is out there or where they are. I asked the government to do a full review and suspend releasing any more people into the community until they did exactly that. Now they rejected that proposal, they dismissed it and the Prime Minister has even derided it. Now those are the sorts of things we would have to come to terms with if we were elected to government later this year, remembering  that  by  that  time  we  expect  there  will  be  some  30,000  people  in  the  system,  more  than  half  of  those  will already be in the community and so cleaning up Labor’s legacy caseload and Labor’s mess is going to be a significant  task.

 QUESTION:

 Mr Morrison you have accused the Federal Government of having a light touch when it comes to national…

 MORRISON:

 Well no that was the Department of Immigration, they called it a light touch. 

 QUESTION:

 Either way, you have repeated those claims today…

 MORRISON:

 Yes I have repeated the Department’s description of ASIO’s assessment process.

 QUESTION:

 Yes. There were media reports today that Tony Abbott the Opposition Leader had not sought a national security briefing from ASIO for the past three years, does the Coalition have any credibility? Is it a light touch as well?

 MORRISON:

 No  I  just  dismiss  the  question  frankly.  First  of  all  the  allegation  put  is  not  true  and  not  only  has  the  Leader  of  the Opposition been in some of the hottest spots where our people are serving and receiving constant briefings on all of those matters whether it was from Defence or other places and I have been with him on some of those occasions whether it is on border security or whatever it happens to be, right across the Coalition frontbench we have been into these issues in some exquisite detail. I mean it has been the Coalition on every occasion, working on occasion as the media has done, to expose these breaches. It is the government’s record here that is in tatters. It is actually the Prime Minister herself when she was Deputy Prime Minister couldn’t even be bothered going to National Security Council meetings, the actual National Security Council, instead sending her bodyguard so I don’t think there is a comparison.

 QUESTION:

 After this evening what should be happening, what should be done with this man? Where should he be?

 MORRISON:

 Well this person should be in the highest security section of the detention environment that exists. He should have been there for some time. There shouldn’t be an assessment of this person’s claim because they are a convicted terrorist and  they should be taking steps to remove, subject to other obligations that may exist.

 QUESTION:

 Mr Morrison it was DIAC that left the man in low security for several months…[inaudible]

 Page 4 of 6 JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE > Michael Keenan MP

 13/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

 MORRISON:

 What I think is important is what is the culture being set by the Minister? The Minister has to direct and set the tone, the Prime  Minister  has  to  set  and  direct  the  tone.  That  is  why  the  government  has  form  on  being  a  light  touch.  This  is  a government that refused and a Minister previous who rejected only one visa on character grounds for the more than 100 people who were involved in the Christmas Island riots. One, out of hundreds. This is a government that has done this serially so I think you are right to suggest there is a cultural problem but the cultural problem comes from the top from a government whose heart is just not in border security, it is not in national security and I think that is what we are seeing the consequences of. Jamie, do you want to say something?

 BRIGGS:

 Well I think my community would like an explanation as to why the Minister and his Department didn’t act when the AFP  told his Department in November that this person was who he was and that he was in a low security centre that they had assured my community was a low security centre that they put a pool fence around because of that. I understand and I could  be  corrected  if  I  am  wrong  here  but  the  Department  was  made  aware  this  person  was  there  by  the  media,  by  a newspaper  article.  So  this  is  chaos,  this  a  shambles  and  it  is  a  scandal.  What  the  Minister needs  to  really  explain  and assure the community is that this is not happening today.

 QUESTION:

 Do you fear that others may have fallen through the cracks?

 MORRISON:

 I have serious concerns about that and I don’t think the government even knows the answer to the question because how could they?  Their  process  of identifying  people,  how  they  release  them,  the  conditions  in  which  they  release  them,  the controls that exist around that, the processes all of these things are appalling and they are abysmal. This government has no  clue  about  what  is  going  on  out  there  and  the  government  are  the  ones  supposed  to  be  running  the  system  and  it would seem that the smugglers and the terrorists and others are running them.

 QUESTION:

 Do you think there is any possibility the various agencies may have decided that this man was not as dangerous as he appeared or do you think they just misunderstood and just let him through not realising how dangerous he was?

 MORRISON:

 Well the two scenarios you just painted are equally frightening. I mean I am not sure what is worse - that they knew and  discounted  the  risk  or  they  were  so  dysfunctional  that  they  were  unable  to  act.  But  both  of  those  scenarios  you  have explained  I  think  are  a  damning  indictment  on  what  is  a  national  security  scandal,  a  scandal  that  the  Prime  Minister

 describes by her own words in the Parliament today as ‘satisfactory’ and that is unforgivable.

 QUESTION:

 Sorry just one more question Mr Morrison in regards to political donations, was it a mistake by the Liberal leadership team to initially endorse the changes that…

 MORRISON:

 Well you will note that none of us here are responsible for those matters so you can direct the questions to …

 QUESTION:

 But as a member of the Liberal leadership team…

 MORRISON:

 Well I’m not actually.

 Page 5 of 6 JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE > Michael Keenan MP

 13/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

 BRIGGS:

 You have been promoted on the spot.

 MORRISON:

 Thanks for the vote of confidence.

 QUESTION:

 Given that the issue has reverberated…

 MORRISON:

 As you are well aware I always address matters in my portfolio as do my colleagues. Thank you.

 Ends

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 6 of 6 JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE > Michael Keenan MP

 13/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

