---
title: "Illegal boats bringing over 400 people every week"
date: "2013-04-30"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435284
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2408341%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Illegal boats bringing over 400 people every week 

 Tuesday 30th April 2013 

 The latest illegal boat, with 70 people on board, comes as an average of over 400 people are arriving by 

 boat every week this year under Labor’s catastrophic failure on our borders, Shadow Minister for 

 Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border 

 Protection, Michael Keenan said today.  

 

 “This year has so far seen an average of almost one illegal boat a day and more than 400 people arriving 

 every week. Less than four full months of the year have passed and already more than 7,000 people have 

 arrived as Labor’s border crisis grows,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “This is only the second time more than 7,000 people have arrived within a year. The first time this mark 

 was reached was last year and that wasn’t until the end of July.  

 

 “More boats with more people on them heighten the risk of further tragedies at sea and show a full suite of 

 proven border protection policies is necessary to stop people smugglers as opposed to Labor’s half hearted 

 offshore processing failures.  

 

 “The end result of Labor’s border failure come budget time will be higher taxes on Australians. Originally 

 having budgeted for just 450 arrivals a month this financial year and with arrivals currently running just shy 

 of seven times that amount, Labor have set Australians up to pay for yet another illegal boat blow out in 

 addition to the over $5 billion in blow outs they have been responsible for since the last election,” Mr 

 Morrison said.  

 

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest boat arrival carrying 70 people is the 310th boat to arrive this financial year 

 which still has two months to go.  

 

 “This is more than triple the amount of people that arrived in the entire 2011-12 financial year - with a total 

 of 8,311 people arriving - thus far in 2012-13 19,070 people have arrived on unauthorised boats.  

 

 “It is impossible for our hardworking men and women at Border Protection Command to sustain this rate of 

 arrivals. They have been working at breakneck speed since this Government unwound our border 

 protection policies in 2008 and are well past the point of needing a break.  

 

 “The Australian people deserve better than a Government that has not protected our borders and has 

 delivered 498 boats and 31,632 people since polling day,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

