---
title: "Burmese strikes on Kachin show army's grip on power still strong"
date: "2013-01-09"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211387694
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2155257%22
---

 Burmese strikes on Kachin show  army’s grip on power still strong  Australian Greens spokesperson on Burma, Senator Scott Ludlam.  9 January 2012.   

 More than two weeks of ferocious military strikes against Kachin rebels and  civilians in Burma show the army still has a strong grip on power in the country,  the Greens warned today.   

 Greens spokesperson on Burma Senator Scott Ludlam said Australian authorities  had “enthusiastically pursued renewed diplomatic and trade relations with  Burma without considering the ongoing violence and repression within the  country - undermining the incentive for further reform”.   

 “Since Christmas Eve the Burmese military has been using artillery, fighter jets  and helicopter gunships against the Kachin Independence Organisation.  Almost  60,000 Kachin taking refugee under the protection of the KIO are at risk and,  trapped along the Chinese border, have nowhere to go.   

 “Kachin spokespeople assert that Burmese forces are blocking aid efforts from  reaching internally displaced Kachin civilians in dire need of help.   

 “The Burmese military admitted using air power against the Kachin twenty-four  hours after the Burmese Government denied it was happening - which raises the  question; who is really running the country?   

 “The United States and United Nations have raised grave concerns about the  assault.  The Australian Government must take a strong against this offensive,  and against the ongoing persecution of ethnic minorities in Burma including the  Kachin.”   

 

 

 Media contact:  Giovanni Torre - 0417 174 302   

