---
title: "Transcript of joint Press Conference: Melbourne: 16 August 2013: Subjects: The Coalition’s border protection policies; Kevin Rudd’s border protection failures; the Coalition’s commitment to abolish the carbon tax; Ray King - the Liberal Party candidate for McMahon; costings"
date: "2013-08-16"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Subjects: The Coalition’s border protection policies"
  - "Kevin Rudd’s border protection failures"
  - "the Coalition’s commitment to abolish the carbon tax"
  - "Ray King - the Liberal Party candidate for McMahon"
  - "costings"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399009
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2835401%22
---

 Joint Press Conference, Melbourne  August 16, 2013

 Subjects: The Coalition’s border protection policies; Kevin Rudd’s border protection failures; the Coalition’s commitment to abolish  the carbon tax; Ray King - the Liberal Party candidate for McMahon; costings.

 EO&E...........................................................................................................................................

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Mr Rudd changed the border protection policies that worked back in August of 2008 and since then the situation on our borders 

 has gone from good, to bad, to worse and it's just getting worse all the time under Mr Rudd.

 We've had 50,000 illegal arrivals by boat. We've had more than 800 boats, we've had $11 billion plus in border protection blow-outs and tragically we've had more than 1,000 deaths at sea. All of this has flown because Mr Rudd was not man enough to leave 

 well enough alone when it came to border protection.

 So, the message that Scott Morrison and I give to the Australian people is that if you want to stop the boats, you've got to change  the government and if you can't stop the boats you're not capable of governing this country.

 Now, a couple of weeks back, Scott and I launched Operation Sovereign Borders. We announced Operation Sovereign Borders 

 which is our policy to stop the boats and to prevent new arrivals. Today we announce our policy to deal with the old arrivals, that's  to say the 30,000 people who have come illegally by boat and who have not yet been processed by the current Government. And 

 the key to our position here, it's been a strong and consistent position for 10 years now, is that people who come illegally by boat  will not be granted permanent residency. People who come here illegally by boat will get temporary protection visas.

 So, after they have been assessed, the 30,000 people currently here who have come illegally by boat are waiting assessment, 

 won't get permanent residency, they will get temporary protection visas. There's also going to be new fast-track processes for the  assessment of people who are here illegally by boat and I'll get Scott to talk about those in a moment, but the essential point to 

 make is that this is our country and we determine who comes here.

 That was the position under the last Coalition Government that will be the position under any future Coalition government.  Tragically for Australia and tragically for so many people, it hasn't been the position under the current Government. I want to thank 

 Scott for his extraordinary work in this area. Scott has been a remarkably effective Shadow Minister. He's shown tremendous  strength, tremendous consistency and forthrightness but he's also shown a touch of compassion which you have to show when 

 you are dealing with an issue as sensitive as this. So, I'd ask Scott to support these remarks.

 SCOTT MORRISON:

 Thank you very much, Tony. As Tony said, there are twin challenges for an incoming government and if the Coalition was elected  these are those challenges. Firstly, you've got to stop the boats and that's what Operation Sovereign Borders is all about. The 

 policy that we're handing out today is about dealing with the legacy backlog of Labor's border failure over the last five, six years.  Over 50,000 people have turned up. Around 15,000 of those Labor had given permanent visas to already.

 There are 30,000 people now who are still in that system and are waiting a decision that they will get on the other side of the 

 election. Kevin Rudd wants you to pretend that these 30,000 people are not here. Those 30,000 people will be the most  enthusiastic about a Labor victory because those 30,000 individuals will have the opportunity of a permanent visa under Kevin 

 Rudd that they will not have under an Abbott-led Coalition government. That is because temporary protection visas are important  not just as a deterrent to stop boats coming, but also to deal with this very significant challenge of the 30,000 people that Kevin 

 Rudd has already let in and if he has the chance on the other side of the election, he will give them a permanent visa with family  reunion rights, with pathway to citizenship and the ability to come and go as they please.

 Temporary protection visas have been our policy for over a decade. What's announced here in this policy today goes over again 

 how those policies and how those visas will operate. They will run for a period of up to three years, the specific period of time that 

 Tony Abbott Federal Member for Warringah | Leader of the Opposition

 Page 1 of 7 Joint Press Conference, Melbourne > Tony Abbott

 11/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 will be given will be done on a case by case basis working through the Department. What will happen at the end of that period of a  temporary protection visa is there is the opportunity to once again assess someone's refugee status and if they're found not to be 

 a refugee at that point, well, they will be put on a removal pathway. Those who are given temporary protection visas will, if they  receive welfare benefits, be required to work for those welfare benefits.

 Work rights were part of the last temporary protection visa scheme under the Howard Government and they would be consistent 

 with our international obligations under this scheme. Also, under what you've got today, no longer will anyone waiting at a camp or  waiting offshore, family members of Australians whether they've come from Africa or they’ve come from Myanmar or other places, 

 no longer will it be the case that someone who comes on a boat will take the place of someone who would otherwise get that visa  under our refugee and humanitarian programme.

 Under the Howard Government, over 5,000 special humanitarian visas were being given a year. That figure in 2011/12 under the 

 Labor Party fell to just over 700. Thousands of people have been denied the protection that Australia would have decided to give  them as a sovereign country and they have been denied that under this Government because this Government is handing out 

 those visas to people who come on boats. That will end under an Abbott government.

 Thirdly, those who throw their documents away and can be reasonably found to have done that, they won't go to the back of the  queue to wait longer for their permanent visa as is the policy of the Labor Party, they won't be in the queue at all. If you throw your 

 documents away then under section 91W of the Act we will use the powers there to deny status in those cases.

 And fourthly, we will end Labor's tick and flick approach to assessments. Over nine out of ten people who are coming by boats are  being recognised under Labor's scheme as they've hardwired appeals back through the Refugee Review Tribunal back into the 

 courts. What this has produced is cases where, even where there is a no decision being provided by case officers, under this  Government's appeals process around 80 per cent of those no’s are being turned into a yes. No wonder Australians are 

 questioning whether this is a fair dinkum system which has been operating under this Government.

 So, based on the detained fast track system in the UK, which I had the opportunity to look at firsthand earlier this year, we will put  in place a similar system. What that will do will enable us to triage the case load of 30,000 people and start working through that 

 system to process those where a decision can be made readily and prioritise those who on an initial screening looked to be likely  negative.

 So, we can get on with the job of removing people far more quickly than this Government has been able to do and there's been 

 some very impressive results of that in the UK where we have 62 per cent of people with negative decisions being removed within  three months and twice as likely to enable people to be removed in the UK in detention than they are when they’re left in the 

 community.

 The final point is this, and this relates to the point of offshore processing. You would have seen in the economic statement that the  Government is looking to spend $58 million on establishing a detention centre in Singleton, not in Nauru, not in Manus Island, but 

 in Singleton.

 Offshore processing is not done in Singleton, it's done in Manus Island and it's done in Nauru. And that's why the Coalition will  scrap Labor's plans for a $58 million detention centre in Singleton and we will use that resource to expand the capacity that I had 

 the opportunity to announce when I was in Nauru several weeks ago. So, that's how we will be able to fund that commitment.

 So, they're the commitments Tony and I'll hand over to you.

 QUESTION:

 Mr Abbott, the standard you've set today is - if I've got it right, if you can't stop the boats you're not fit to govern. So is it your  commitment that if you don't stop the boats in the first term of an Abbott government you will resign?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 It is my commitment to make a difference from day one and it is my commitment to bring about, again, the happy situation that 

 was brought about by the Howard Government in its last two terms.

 QUESTION:

 How long will it take you to stop the boats and if you haven't stopped them within your first year, again, will you see yourself as not  being fit to be prime minister?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Page 2 of 7 Joint Press Conference, Melbourne > Tony Abbott

 11/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 Over the last five years of the Howard Government, there were, on average, three boats a year. Under the Rudd/Gillard  Government we have, on many occasions, had three boats a day. So, I will regard myself as having succeeded very well if we can 

 get back to a situation of having three boats a year. Obviously our ideal is to have zero boats. That's our ideal. But my  commitment is to re-establish the quality of border protection and the effectiveness of border protection which operated under the 

 Howard Government.

 QUESTION:

 Mr Abbott, how long will it take you to get to three boats a year? If that's your benchmark how long are you giving yourself to meet  that benchmark?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well, I'm confident we can make a difference from day one and I'm confident that by the time we are well into a term we will have 

 re-established the levels of border protection that operated under the Howard Government.

 QUESTION:

 By the 2016 election we should have it down to three boats a year, is that what you're saying?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 That's my confidence.

 QUESTION:

 Are you going to be moving people who are currently in community detention into more formal detention and if so how are you  going to do that given that those centres are full at the moment? I note you're saying people who won't - refuse to be returned to 

 go to Christmas Island, that's close to capacity, where's the room going to come from?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 I'll make some general observations and then I'll throw to Scott. Operation Sovereign Borders, which we announced a few weeks  ago, is designed to deal with people who are coming here from the time that the Coalition goes into government, should we win 

 the election. The policy that we announce today is designed to deal with the people who are already here, who have come  illegally by boat. Now, the point is that if you are here already and you are found to be a refugee you will get a temporary 

 protection visa, you won't get permanent residency. If you are here already and you are found not to be a refugee you will go back  into detention until you go somewhere else but you won't come here, you can’t expect to get permanent residency in Australia. 

 You just can't get expect to get permanent residency in Australia if you come illegally by boat.

 SCOTT MORRISON:

 On the issue of capacity, the detention network will be re-tasked. The point of triaging the caseload of 30,000 people is to work  through those who would be in the community and those who would be in detention. Those who would be in detention would be 

 those who were being fast-tracked because they're going through an assessment process and those who would be in detention  would be those also who have got the no and are awaiting removal. So, the detention network will be re-tasked to prioritise those 

 two key tasks. What the Labor Party is doing is they’re building more detention centres in Australia for more people coming on  boats to be in Australia, not on Nauru and Manus Island. So, that is where the distinction is.

 QUESTION:

 This morning Joe Hockey wouldn't say whether your spending cuts would include cuts to health and education. Can you rule that 

 out now?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 We'll have a lot more to say about health and education in the next couple of weeks. We've already had quite a bit to say about  both health and education. For instance, we've said that we will match Labor's school spending over the forward estimates period 

 because we want the argument about schools to be an argument about quality, not about funding. On health, we've already said  that we want to move more strongly in the direction of community-controlled public hospitals. We have said that we will absolutely 

 quarantine medical research from cuts. We've said that we want to get drugs more swiftly through the Pharmaceutical Benefits  Advisory Committee process and on to the PBS so we've had a lot to say on these policies. I don't rule out that we might be 

 spending money more wisely in these areas but certainly I don't intend to make cuts in these areas.

 Page 3 of 7 Joint Press Conference, Melbourne > Tony Abbott

 11/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 QUESTION:

 Mr Abbott, you went to a business this morning that's been a fairly strong supporter of carbon pricing. In fact back in 2011 Linfox 

 put their name to a statement by a company backing the Government backing carbon pricing and their trucks featured fairly widely  in the ads. Isn't it the case they don't think much about direct action, in fact, would prefer the current scheme to remain?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well, I think if I may say so actions speak louder than words and the fact that I was at Linfox this morning says something about 

 where people's views are as we move into the election in 22 days’ time. The interesting thing about Linfox is that Linfox have  achieved very dramatic reductions in their carbon emissions and they've done that because it was the right thing for them to do 

 both environmentally and economically and they didn't need a carbon tax to do it. I mean back in 2007, long before anyone had  thought of a carbon tax, long before Julia Gillard's notorious, “There will be no carbon tax under the government I lead,” pledge, 

 three years ago today, Linfox had said we're going to get our emissions down because it's good for our business as well as good  for the environment. So, I think Linfox are a terrific example of direct action at work.

 QUESTION:

 Were you surprised to learn today that your candidate for McMahon in western Sydney, the former police officer Ray King, 

 admitted at the royal commission into police corruption that he was socialising with a large-scale heroin dealer?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Look, he certainly was before the Wood Royal Commission back in the mid '90s, as so many New South Wales policemen were,  no adverse findings were made against him…

 QUESTION:

 He admitted to socialising with a heroin dealer…

 TONY ABBOTT:

 No adverse findings were made against him and that's the key thing. No adverse findings were made against him…

 QUESTION:

 Isn't it an adverse finding?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 There are all sorts of reasons for all sorts of things happening. No adverse findings were made against him. He was promoted 

 three times subsequent to the Wood Royal Commission and he finished his career as the Liverpool local area commander, a very,  very highly respected policeman and I'm very proud to have him as our candidate and I recommend to the people of McMahon 

 that if they want someone to serve our country with distinction in the Parliament as he has served our country with distinction in  the police force. If they want someone who will definitely vote to repeal the carbon tax, who will definitely vote for stronger border 

 protection policies- Ray King is their man.

 QUESTION:

 Are you buoyed by the fact that Labor’s approval rating in the central cost of New South Wales, in seats like Robertson and Dobell  keep slipping?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 The short answer is, polls come and go, the commentariat obsesses about them. I think this is going to be a very close, very hard 

 fought election and even now it could go either way. Of course if it goes Labor’s way, well almost certainly it will be a weak  minority government, enthralled to the Greens. But nevertheless that is still a real prospect with three weeks to go. My own 

 judgment is that the next election should turn much more on the last six years than on the next three weeks but nevertheless there is no doubt that the Labor Party are preparing to throw everything they possible can into a highly negative campaign over the next 

 three weeks and no one, no one, should take the outcome of this election anywhere for granted.

 QUESTION:

 Page 4 of 7 Joint Press Conference, Melbourne > Tony Abbott

 11/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 Just in regards to your plans, especially in removing access to the Refugee Review Tribunal and under a Coalition government 

 are you confident that it would survive a High Court challenge?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 I’ll ask Scott to add to this, but essentially the position that we want to restore is the position that operated under the Howard  Government and that to the best of my recollection was able to withstand legal challenge, but I’ll ask Scott to add to that answer.

 SCOTT MORRISION:

 This is a complicated and detailed area and as you probably know there is a review process currently under way, that DIAC has 

 undertaken. What we are saying here very clearly is what the objective is of how we want the process to change and what we  want it to refer back to. There are very detailed specific things that would have to be worked through with officials and others in 

 government. You have got to give your public service clear direction, you have got to give it leadership, you have got to tell it  where you want to end up and where we want to end up is this. We want to end the tick and flick approach of this Government 

 that has seen nine out of ten people found to be refugees when that doesn’t match what we are seeing in other places around the  world and we want to end the process where no’s turn into a yes in 80 per cent of cases by these processes and where our courts 

 and our appeal systems are being gamed and used and promoted by the people smugglers to put people on boats. So, we will  work through that detail in government as is appropriate. It is a complicated area but you have got to give clear direction and 

 leadership as to where you want the process to end up. Now, I should also stress this, the UNHCR and their executive committee  are the ones who made it very clear, you can have a judicial process or an administrative process - but you don’t have to have 

 both and we want to go back to the non-statutory administrative process because that is what worked very well under the previous  Government and we think that is the fairest system. It is what’s practised by the UNHCR all around the world and we think that is 

 the more appropriate system than the tick and flick approach that we have under Labor now.

 QUESTION:

 If you are fast tracking 30,000 people through this process how confident are you that there won’t be any mistakes made?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well, I am confident that the processing system that operated under the Howard Government, that operated under the last  Coalition Government, that was for a period of time administered by my friend Phil Ruddock who is with me on the campaign trail 

 now, I am confident that will deliver a fair deal. Even under our system there is assessment, there is a second assessment then  there is a review. So, it’s not lightly done. There is the assessment, there is if you like a check of the assessment, a quality control 

 of the assessment and then there is a review. So, I am very confident that we will get this as right as it can be.

 SCOTT MORRISON:

 If I can just add to that, as Tony said there is the triage which is going across the 30 and doing the screening and this is based on  the UK model. What they do is they triage the case load, they look across it, then they move to those decisions where they think 

 they can make them quite readily and then that is reviewed by a further person. Now, what that has produced in the UK is that 93  per cent of those decisions are being upheld. Now, that is because they are working through the case load methodically there. 

 They are triaging it, then they are selecting cases and then they are making decisions. So, you must do it in an orderly fashion  and the Labor Party and Kevin Rudd want you to think that these 30,000 people are just not here and that there is not an issue 

 with that. They must have already rubber-stamped in their own mind their permanent visas for the other side of the election. That  won’t happen under us. We will go through this methodically, we will do it carefully and we will do it with priorities and we will get 

 to the outcome, which is the right outcome.

 QUESTION:

 Julie Bishop this morning said that the Coalition’s costings would be released in the final week of the campaign. Is that the case  and do you think that’s long enough for voters to get a good grasp of what exactly would be in store under a Coalition 

 government?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well, we will be announcing policies between now and the last week of the campaign and in many instances we will be saying,  when we announce the policy, exactly how it is going to be funded. Now, by far the most expensive commitments that we have 

 given in this campaign were the commitments to keep the carbon tax compensation without the carbon tax and to deliver a  company tax cut over the forward estimates. Those two commitments cost $17 billion and as I've said until I'm blue in the face, in 

 my Budget Reply and in my National Press Club speech, I committed us to savings totaling $17 billion over the forward estimates 

 Page 5 of 7 Joint Press Conference, Melbourne > Tony Abbott

 11/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 period.

 Now, in a few days' time we'll have another very significant signature policy to be announced and we will tell you exactly how we  are going to fund our paid parental leave policy. So, along the way we are telling you, certainly in the case of the more expensive 

 policies, we are telling you how they are going to be funded. So, I think to some extent this is frankly a confected problem, by a  political Party, the Labor Party, which hasn't got a single figure right, which hasn't got a single figure right and which before the 

 2007 election and the 2010 election, released its own costings document at 5pm on the Friday before the polls opened at 8am the  following day.

 So, we're going to be straight with people. We can't tell you everything now because inevitably we've got to have something to say 

 for the next three weeks of the campaign. But the last thing we are going to do is to add to the trust deficit by playing silly games  with people the way this Labor Party has constantly.

 QUESTION:

 Can I just get to the numbers of this and what it means? If 9 out of 10 are coming in at the moment under this announcement 

 today will it be 5 in 10, will it be less than 50 per cent and how do you respond to claims that for the people who don't get in by  removing access to the review tribunal you're denying them procedural fairness?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Well, our obligations under the refugee convention are somewhat different from the obligations that we would ordinarily regard 

 ourselves as having to Australian citizens, but we are absolutely confident that by dealing with people in the way outlined in this  policy, we are dealing with them in accordance with our convention obligations and in accordance with basic human decency. But 

 we also have to send a very clear signal to people, don't turn up illegally by boat. Don't turn up illegally by boat and Operation  Sovereign Borders is about doing that for would-be future arrivals and this particular policy is about doing that for those who are 

 already here as a deterrent as well to those who might contemplate coming in the future. But the point I make and, again I'll ask  Scott to add to it, the point I make is that what we are proposing we believe fully complies with our convention obligation and fully 

 complies with the basic obligations of human decency towards another human.

 SCOTT MORRISON:

 The single case officer review process is what was in place last time when we were there and as I said before, the UNHCR  practiced that around the world. There are many different ways you can run an appeal system. I mean this does involve a review. 

 There's a triage, there’s a decision and there’s a review and that's the process that we would have in place and that’s the process  we had in place last time.

 So, that’s consistent with our obligations as was proved to be last time and that’s the direction we'll give to the Department to take 

 us back in that direction and take us away from the direction we've been going the last five years where they've just added, layer  after layer after layer. So, what the ultimate number will be is the number it should be and that is those who are genuine refugees 

 are found to be refugees but those who are trying it on, don't get the benefit of the doubt under Labor's tick and flick approach.

 QUESTION:

 What's your understanding of that number? Is it four in 10, is it five in 10?

 SCOTT MORRISON:

 That would be like asking you to predict court decisions or anything else. It will be what it should be and the process should be  tight and should have integrity and claims should be rigorously assessed and the decisions should be made. We shouldn't have a 

 tick and flick approach which gives the benefit of the doubt where people are throwing their documents away to undermine that  decision making system. That's Labor's approach. That's what they're doing now, that's what will end.

 QUESTION:

 The circumstance under which someone on a temporary protection visa could transition to permanent residency and are there no 

 circumstances under which someone on a TPV could seek family reunion? So, if a parent arrived by boat and was granted a TPV  would you deny them family reunion for 10, 20, 30 years?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 Sam, people on temporary protection visas don't get family reunion, full stop, end of story. And no-one is going to go through this, 

 ‘are you a refugee determination process’ and end up with a permanent visa at the end of it. No-one is going to go through the 

 Page 6 of 7 Joint Press Conference, Melbourne > Tony Abbott

 11/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

 assessment process and come out of it with permanent residency.

 QUESTION:

 Are there no circumstances under which you will grant someone a TPV and later allow them to transition to permanent residency  under that policy?

 TONY ABBOTT:

 I can't say what might happen in 10, 20, 30, years’ time but what I can say is that if you come here illegally by boat you should 

 never expect to get permanent residency. We will discharge our ordinary humanitarian obligations to you, but you just should not  expect to get permanent residency. If you turn out not to be a refugee, if you are found not to be a refugee, you will be in 

 detention, that's where you will be, you will be in detention indefinitely.

 If you are a refugee you will be on a temporary protection visa and you should expect to be on a temporary protection visa  indefinitely because we've got to send the strongest possible signal, the strongest possible signal to people smugglers and their 

 clients that we are in charge of this country and we will determine who comes here. That is the signal that we are sending and I  want to say to the Australian people, I particularly want to say to anyone contemplating coming to Australia illegally by boat, we 

 have the will to stop this evil trade and only the Coalition has the proven record and the will to control the borders of this great  country.

 [ends]

 © Tony Abbott MHR 2010 | Authorised by Tony Abbott MHR, Level 2, 17 Sydney Rd, Manly NSW 2095

 www.tonyabbott.com.au

 Page 7 of 7 Joint Press Conference, Melbourne > Tony Abbott

 11/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

