---
title: "Labor breaks their personal best on border protection failure as another 2 boat arrive"
date: "2013-04-26"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435151
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719457%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LABOR BREAKS THEIR PERSONAL BEST  ON BORDER PROTECTION FAILURE AS  ANOTHER 2 BOATS ARRIVE April 26, 2013

 The  arrival  of  another  two  illegal  boats  with  a  total  of  116  people  on  board,  means  Labor  has  once  again  broken  their personal best to set a new record of failure for the biggest number of boat arrivals to illegally enter Australia in a month, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “Almost 2,600 people have arrived so far in April, breaking last month’s record of 2,500 arrivals, making it the largest  number of arrivals ever in one month,” Mr Morrison said.

 “On average more than one hundred people are arriving illegally by boat every day this month. 

 “Even more concerning is the fact that 100 boats have already arrived this year in 2013 with more than 6,500 people on  board, making it the third largest year on record with eight months still to go.  

 “These new levels of failure day after day, week after week, will guarantee more budget blowouts next month. The  Government budgeted for 12,000 arrivals in 2012/13 and so far we have had more than 18,000 this financial year. 

 “The Government must come clean in the budget on what the real costs of their border failure will be not just this year, but  in the years to come, if their failed polices are our allowed to continue.  

 “Labor has completely lost control and credibility on our borders and our budget,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “April is the biggest month for people arriving illegally by boat ever on record - with almost 2600 people  having arrived on 37 boats.

 "The 100th boat arrival of the year was intercepted on Wednesday as Labor's border protection failures are set to make  2013 the biggest year for boat arrivals ever.

 "There has already been well over three times the amount of illegal boat arrivals this year than the same time last year.

 “As these unprecedented numbers of boat arrivals continue to flood our borders, it is clear that the people smugglers’  closing down sale is bringing in record breaking profits for them,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 LABOR BREAKS THEIR PERSONAL BEST ON BORDER PROTECTION FAILU...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

