---
title: "$21 million for trades training facility In Darwin"
date: "2013-02-25"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, SKILLS, SCIENCE AND RESEARCH"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391077
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2255810%22
---

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, SKILLS,   SCIENCE AND RESEARCH   

 SHARON BIRD MP 

 PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR HIGHER EDUCATION AND  SKILLS   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 25 February 2013 

 

 $21 MILLION FOR TRADES TRAINING FACILITY IN  DARWIN   

 The Gillard Government will provide $21.3 million to Charles Darwin University (CDU) to  establish a trades training facility at its Casuarina Campus in Darwin, Minister for Tertiary  Education, Skills, Science and Research, Chris Bowen MP, and Parliamentary Secretary for  Higher Education and Skills, Sharon Bird MP, said today.   

 Ms Bird was in Darwin today to announce the funding under the Regional Priorities Round of  the Education Investment Fund (EIF) for CDU’s VET Infrastructure Development to Address  Skills Needs and Economic Change in the NT project.   

 “The new facility will support students across the Northern Territory by providing training in  mechanical, civil and green skills, as well as electro-technology, building and construction,  and process engineering,” Ms Bird said.   

 “The project will also provide targeted pathways and educational support for Aboriginal and  Torres Strait Islander people, recent migrants and refugees in skills relevant to the liquefied  natural gas, energy and resources, and personal services sectors.”   

 Mr Bowen said the Government is committed to investing in trades training to build a highly  skilled workforce and meet the needs of our economy.   

 “Projects funded through the Government’s Regional Priorities Round will develop world  class teaching and learning facilities to ensure regional students have better quality  education opportunities,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “This new VET training facility is expected to produce an additional 750 VET graduates per  annum at Certificate III level and above.” 

 

 The trades training facility will comprise internal open and flexibly configured learning  spaces using mobile equipment, classrooms, a computer laboratory, a student common  room, and staff office space.  It will also include specially designed safe, open areas for  dangerous and elevated skills training.   

 Modern ICT will be incorporated to enable the use of e-learning methods, including those  requiring the high bandwidth capability of the National Broadband Network.   

 The technological capability of the facilities will support remote delivery into more than 100  Indigenous communities.   

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 (Bowen)  Melinda Little 0425 372 618 (Bird)   

