---
title: "The journey makes migrant communities feel at home"
date: "2013-02-19"
creators:
  - "Carr, Kim"
source: "MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390759
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2241193%22
---

 

 MEDIA RELEASE  SENATOR KIM CARR  Minister for Human Services   

 

 Tuesday, 19 February 2013   

 The journey makes migrant communities feel at home    

 More than 50 per cent of Australians were born overseas or born in Australia to migrant  parents, and the Australian Government’s The Journey magazine is  a roadmap to the  services they need.   

 Minister for Human Services Senator Kim Carr said The Journey provides useful  Government information for migrant community organisations.   

 “Australians have immigration to thank for the riches we enjoy today. Our economy and our  community are stronger because of migrants,” Senator Kim Carr said.    

 “Our job in Human Services is to help all our people give their full potential - whether they  were born in this country or made the choice to come here.”   

 “The Department has a large range of services and information for people who are new to  Australia or come from diverse ethnic backgrounds. Through The Journey, it works with  community groups to bring the service to the people.”   

 The Journey is a bi-monthly e-newsletter the Department sends to over 1,000 community  group subscribers and has been widely read since its first edition was published 16 years  ago.   

 It allows migrant communities across the country to keep people up to date with the  Department’s services and payments, including Centrelink, Medicare and Child Support.    

 The February edition includes information about the Teen Dental Plan, the Superannuation  Clearing House and the Department’s latest smartphone app - Express Plus Seniors.   

 It also profiles Multicultural Service Officer Noel Murray, an Irish national based in Victoria,  who is one of 70 specialists nationwide helping to link migrant and refugee communities to  Australian Government services.   

 “Officers like Noel help build valuable relationships with migrant communities and become  an important point of contact to help people settle into a new country,” Senator Kim Carr  said.   

 “The Department of Human Services provides multicultural services to around five million  people, and offers free interpreting in over 235 languages by almost 3,000 interpreters.    

 “If you speak a language other than English, you can use the Translating and Interpreting  Service for Medicare and Child Support by calling 131 450 or 131 202 for Centrelink.”    

 Community organisations and interested readers can read and subscribe to The Journey at  http://journey.centrelink.gov.au/    

 Further information for migrants, refugees and visitors can be found online at  humanservices.gov.au   

 Media contacts:        Minister Carr’s Office (02) 6277 7200            

