---
title: "Migration Institute of Australia conference: speech, Cairns"
date: "2013-07-12"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT"
subjects:
  - "Migration Institute of Australia (MIA)"
  - "Skilled migration"
  - "Skill shortages"
  - "Immigrants"
  - "Employment participation"
  - "Conferences"
  - "Visas"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397043
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2593097%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O'CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT  MINISTER FOR SKILLS AND TRAINING    

 MIGRATION INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALIA CONFERENCE  RYDGES TRADEWINDS HOTEL, CAIRNS    

 9AM FRIDAY 12 JULY 2013  ***CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY***    

 Thank you for inviting me to address this important conference.    

 It’s an ideal opportunity for me to share with you the Government’s policies and approaches to  skilled migration and addressing skill shortages.   

 The Federal Labor Government has a strong and positive relationship with the Migration Institute of  Australia, and the input and professionalism of your members helps support our world-class  migration programs.   

 Migration and Australia   Australia is a nation built on migration. Of our 23 million people, more than a quarter were born  overseas and a further 20 per cent have at least one overseas-born parent.     

 I myself am a migrant. I was born in London to Irish parents who, in search of a better life for  themselves and their children arrived in Australia in 1968.   

 My parents were both assigned factory jobs and worked in factories all of their lives. And I feel I am  a testament to not only their efforts but also the inclusive nature of this country’s migration  program.   

 Migrants have made, and continue to make, a major contribution to our economy, our society, and  to our quality of life.   

 You need only walk a couple of blocks here in Cairns to see the vast multicultural diversity of modern  Australia.   

 As the Minister for Employment and the Minister for Skills and Training, I recognise the important  role migration programs play in contributing to Australia’s economic prosperity.   

 It will come as no surprise that our aim as a Government is to strike the right balance between  prioritising jobs for Australians and in the way we design our migration programs to strengthen the  contribution of migrants to Australia's ongoing economic capability.   

 I would like to acknowledge the important role the Migration Institute of Australia can play in  providing the migrants Australia needs, both temporary and permanent.    

 Through the highly professional advice provided by migration and education agents, the MIA  ensures a consistent and highly valued approach to migration for large numbers of prospective  migrants, education institutes and employers.     

 The MIA also has a role to play in promoting the Migration Program to its clients.  By providing high  quality information, advice and support for migrants, the MIA can assist in promoting Australia as a  positive migration destination.   

 

 This role is vital as we move into a world where the global competition for skilled migrants is  increasing and the framework of migration can shift swiftly in response to economic changes.     

 Skilled Migration, and Skills and Labour Shortages   

 Australia’s economy is the envy of the world. There are however, skills and labour shortages in  certain sectors and certain regions, some of which are due to years of neglect during the Howard  years.   

 As a nation we cannot sit by while skilled jobs go unfulfilled and risk the hand brake being applied to  our economic growth.   

 Skilled migration can be used to address skill shortages, and skilled migrants makes up two thirds of  the permanent migration scheme, which I believe that is the right balance.   

 But the Federal Labor Government knows that the best way for the country to address these skills  shortages is through training people here - be they citizens or permanent residents.   

 By comparison, the Tony Abbott wants to make temporary skilled migration the “mainstay” of our  migration system and undermine work conditions for Australian workers.   

 There is nothing more important to this Government than jobs and over the past six years, Labor has  been working to develop a more highly skilled and qualified workforce.    

 Having a recognised qualification is not only the best pathway to a secure job and decent wage; it is  also the pathway to a stronger economy.   

 Only a Labor government will continue to invest in the skills and training Australians need.   

 The Labor Government has invested a record $19 billion in building the skills of Australia’s  workforce, a 77% increase compared to the Howard Government’s investment    

 We have created the environment to be responsive and flexible to address skill shortages.    

 We’ve increased the support for people seeking training and for employers who want to train  people. A record 450,000 people are now undertaking apprenticeships and traineeships in  December 2012, up from around 404,000 in December 2007, an increase of around 12.5%.   

 If Australia is to grow and successfully compete in the Asian Century and manage the challenges  posed by global financial markets, then our industries and businesses must be equipped with the  highly skilled workforce of the future.   

 There’s no doubt Australia's skilled migration program is among the best in the world, and its key  features have inspired similar programs in the United Kingdom and across Europe.   

 It is critical therefore, that we strike a balance between flexibility in accessing foreign workers and  ensuring employers invest in training our own people.   

 As a result, our skilled migration programs are highly targeted to specific areas of market need, with  a strong regional focus.     

 

 Reforms to the 457 visa program  Reforms to the 457 visa program have helped to ensure that we have our settings right.   

 Here in Cairns 457 visa holders are making an important difference in health care and social  assistance.     

 This is a very useful visa to fill skill shortages Australians cannot meet, and the Government has no  plans to scrap it or cap its use.   

 But let me be clear, ensuring employment and training for Australians and permanent residents of  this country is the first and foremost priority for the Government.    

 We have 683,000 unemployed Australians, including too many young Australians who need training  so they can fill these skilled jobs in the future.   

 That’s why we have introduced labour market testing to ensure that employers have to look locally  before bringing in temporary skilled workers.   

 The 457 program will continue to address genuine short-term skills shortages. But I am sure you will  all agree it is important that this program maintains its integrity. This is why the Government has  acted to ensure the program’s use matches its policy intent.   

 More broadly, the focus of Australia’s skilled migration program has shifted.     

 Where once we sought skilled migrants across a broad range of occupations, reacting to general  demands from the labour market, we now seek migrants with the specific skills Australia needs.   

 While the employer sponsored program was being remodelled, the independent skilled migration  programs were also being refocused onto the medium to long term skill needs of Australia.     

 In 2010, we implemented a more targeted Skilled Occupation List - the SOL - for the General Skilled  Migration visa program.   

 The new SOL is developed by the Australian Workforce and Productivity Agency, formerly known as  Skills Australia. The SOL is based on economic and labour market data to ensure it captures the  highly skilled occupations Australia needs, where there are genuine medium to longer term  shortages.   

 The list is reviewed and updated annually - and the latest list came into effect on 1 July.   

 In 2011, the Points Test was recalibrated to include a stronger focus on English language proficiency,  on the-job work experience and higher levels of education, all of which are factors which contribute  towards success in the labour market.     

 Better Assistance for newly arrived migrants  It’s not enough to focus solely on the skills aspects of our migration policy. It is essential that we  provide newly arriving migrants with the right assistance to become part of the mainstream  Australian workforce and productive members of our society.   

 It’s clear that migrants arriving in a new country, especially those arriving on humanitarian visas,  face greater challenges getting themselves set up than other job seekers. It is not just a foreign  culture to navigate, it’s the long learning curve migrants face tackling government and community 

 structures, often on their own with little or no access to any local community or family networks,  and at the same time battling language difficulties.   

 The ABS Characteristics of Recent Migrants Survey in November 2010 showed that the  unemployment rate for recent migrants was 8.5 per cent, compared to 4.6 per cent for the  Australian-born population.   

 The Government is committed to providing the best assistance to migrant and refugee job seekers.  To this end, the Government has recently launched the Migrant Communities Employment Fund.   

 The Migrant Communities Employment Fund (MCEF)  This initiative will invest $6.6 million over the next two years to support the creation of innovative,  sustainable employment projects for underemployed migrant and refugee job seekers.    

 Not only will these projects address migrant and refugee employment issues at the local grass-root  level, they will provide better engagement with employers to improve perceptions of employers  about migrant and refugee job seekers and workers.   

 All Australians deserve a chance for a better life and this program will help new Australians who can  work, get the opportunity to benefit from having a job.    

 Each project can be funded up to a maximum of $200,000 and a maximum of two years duration.  Applications for the first round projects will close on 19 July 2013 and there will be further funding  rounds over the next two years.   

 Conclusion  The Migrant Communities Employment Fund is just the latest of the Government’s ambitious and  wide-reaching reforms to strike the right balance between prioritising jobs for Australians and filling  critical gaps in our labour force.    

 This Government has introduced a number of ambitious and wide reaching reforms to strike the  right balance - strengthening the contribution of skilled migrants to Australia's ongoing prosperity  while ensuring that our first priority of jobs for Australians and permanent residents is not  compromised.   

 Targeted skilled migration enables Australia’s economy to grow by addressing skills gaps and  bottlenecks.   

 It is important, however, to ensure that there is an appropriate balance in how we meet the skills  needs of the nation, and both immigration and training play a role in the skills agenda.   

 Thank you for your time today.   

 [ENDS]   

