---
title: "UNHCR figures reveal Australia remains soft touch for people smugglers under Labor"
date: "2013-03-25"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392497
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2326629%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 UNHCR figures reveal Australia remains soft touch for people  smugglers under Labor 

 Monday 25th March 2013 

 Figures released by the UNHCR reveal that Australia has once again outpaced the rest of the world with 

 the growth in asylum applications received in 2012, with a 37% increase, almost five times the global 

 average of just 8%, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.  

 

 “The growth in asylum applications last year continued to surge by 37%, driven by record illegal boat 

 arrivals, most of whom have not yet had their claims assessed as yet, with processing frozen since August 

 13 last year,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “With the growth in asylum applications in Australia running at almost five times the global average, and 

 total asylum claims worldwide still more than 20% less than when the Howard Government stopped the 

 boats in 2002, Labor has no excuse for the chronic failure that has occurred on our borders on their watch.  

 

 “These figures demonstrate yet again that Labor remains a soft touch for people smugglers.  

 

 “This is a Government that cannot control themselves, let alone our borders and with illegal boat arrivals in 

 2013 getting off to the fastest start on record, things only seem to be getting worse.  

 

 “While Australia experienced a 37% increase in asylum applications in 2012, in Europe there was just a 9% 

 increase, with the UK increasing by only 6%. Applications increased by 10% in the United States, while in 

 Canada, the number of applications continued to fall, this time by 19%.  

 

 “The UNHCR report shows that since 2008 the number of asylum applications in Canada has fallen by 44% 

 compared to Australia where there has been a 230% increase.  

 

 “Growth in asylum applications in Australia has been dominated by Afghans and Sri Lankans that 

 increased by more than 75% and 500% respectively. This compares to increases of just 1% and 18% in 

 asylum applications worldwide for these two nationality groups.  

 

 “The increase of 1,950 Sri Lankan applications in Australia in 2012 accounts for more than the total 

 increase of just over 1,500 Sri Lankan applications globally, while the volume of growth on Afghan 

 applications (1,358) in Australia is three and a half times the total increase in Afghan applications around 

 the world.  

 

 “Under Labor, Australia remains the top shelf product of people smugglers, and the continued surge in 

 illegal boat arrivals this year demonstrates they have no trouble in shifting this product.  

 

 “Labor has had more than five years to clean up the mess that they have created on our borders, and all 

 they have delivered is further chaos, cost and tragedy. Only the removal of the Gillard Labor Government 

 can turn this mess around. The Coalition stands ready to restore order to our borders and remove the 

 chaos that plagues the Labor Government,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

