---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 21 August 2013: asylum seeker policy; implementation of regional resettlement agreement"
date: "2013-08-21"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "asylum seeker policy"
  - "implementation of regional resettlement agreement"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399243
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2678527%22
---

 

 

 Campaign Transcript    

 MINISTER TONY BURKE  PRESS CONFERENCE TRANSCRIPT  SYDNEY  21 AUGUST 2013 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________ 

 

 Subjects: Asylum seeker policy; Implementation of regional resettlement  agreement.   _____________________________________________________________  

 

 BURKE: I gave an extensive media conference yesterday in Jakarta, so if anybody  wants to ask questions regarding the summit that was convened at the invitation of  President Yudhoyono, I’m happy to deal with that in questions, but I feel that I’ve  given a pretty strong explanation of everything that went through with that in the  course of yesterday.    

 What I’d like to provide now is a progress report on latest developments with the  implementation of the regional resettlement arrangements.    

 I’ve been letting you know for some time about the initial capacity on Manus Island  where the old soccer field was, all the accommodation for that is now up, so that’s  five different marquees taking 80 people each with a partition down the middle  dividing them into two sections of 40 people which will be available for single adult  males. In terms of the building and structures they’re all complete.                                       

 The ground, they have a crushed coral process that they put down to avoid the  ground being too soggy to make sure that it’s appropriate for people to be able to  walk back and forth and those products are going down today. So the structures are  all up and it means that in the course of next week, we will be able to be putting  people into that additional compound for processing as the planes continue to go  across to Manus Island.    

 The returns, I’ve let you know for some that that we had people who have been  talking to the International Organisation of Migration saying that they wanted to go  home. They are overwhelmingly but not exclusively Iranian.    

 The process, I said that we had a limited number of people who hadn’t destroyed  their documents, so the ones who still have passports are the ones who go home  first, and for people who we need to organise travel documents that takes a longer  period of time.     

 I know that people want numbers at every point, but because they shift, I’ve said that  what I’ll be providing is numbers as people depart.    

 From Christmas Island, the first person to return has now returned to Iran and is  back now, from Manus Island, we have two people who have now left Manus Island  and are also in transit now on their way back to Iran. There will be more to report in  the coming days, but the process that has taken some weeks before we got to the  very beginnings of it is now underway, and in the coming days and weeks you will  see an increasing number of people returning home, and returning home for one  very simple reason: they paid money, they paid good money because they were told  they would get to live in Australia, and they’ve now realised that that was not true.     

 They’ve realised that by coming by boat without a visa after the announcement of the  regional resettlement arrangement, meant that they would not be settled in Australia  and therefore the whole purpose of their original voyage turned out to be a waste of  money and a waste of time, and an unnecessary risk. So the process of those  returns has commenced.    

 The comments from the Opposition, there’s always been a next threshold where  initially Tony Abbott was saying if we didn’t send people across within 24 or 48  hours, then we weren’t serious. Obviously that wasn’t something that we were willing  to do because it would have meant that people didn’t have their health checks.    

 The next comment was, well, the arrangement wasn’t a memorandum of  understanding therefore it couldn’t be enforced, it then became a memorandum of  understanding and they complained about that.    

 The next argument that was put by our opponents was, well you’ve only been  sending single adult males. As of today, the first family groups have arrived in Nauru.  In Nauru this morning, the first plane load landed involving 26 people from family  groups. They comprise seven different family groups, each family group contains  one adult male, one adult female, so seven adult males, seven adult females. For  the remaining 12 children, four are boys, eight are girls, and the age range is from  five to 15 years of age for the children. They are in a different section of Nauru to  where the single adult males are staying at the moment, and in a different section  again to where the vandalism occurred some weeks ago.    

 Be in no doubt, we said we would implement this arrangement and it is being  implemented. We said everybody who arrived by boat ultimately would have these  new rules apply to them, and I also said that I wouldn’t be sending people until I was  confident that there was appropriate accommodation, appropriate services and I was  confident they would be safe.                           

 For single adult males, that was ready relevantly quickly. For family groups, that is  now ready and had now commenced. There will be more family groups in the coming  days continuing to go across to Nauru.    

 And then before long, we will be in a situation where unaccompanied minors also  find their way across to either Manus Island or to Nauru.     

 Whoever wants to test our resolve will find that we are serious about this, and if it  takes for them to be wheels down on Manus Island or Nauru before they realise that  we’re serious, so be it.    

 But every time a boat arrives, whether it’s containing two people or whether it’s  containing 200 people, that will representing the exact number of people who will be  sent overseas again, either to Manus or to Nauru or home.    

 We need to take away to the product that has been sold. People smugglers have  been working on the basis that they can for a fee guarantee settlement in a particular  country, and the particular country they’ve wanted to guarantee settlement for is  Australia. Some people at first questioned whether we would be able to guarantee  settlement outside of Australia at all. The beginning of the returns now, and there’s a  much larger number of people who are going through the process of seeking their  documents so that they can be added to those numbers, has now commenced.    

 People will be returning home, there will be some people who stay, and the people  who stay on Manus Island or Nauru will have their refugee claims processed and  they will be settled in accordance with the United Nations Refugee Convention, but  they won’t be settled in Australia.    

 They will have durable outcomes organised for them, either in Papua New Guinea or  in Nauru, or in another participating country. But that settlement option will not  include Australia.    

 The people smugglers do not have a product to sell, and however many people  choose to test our resolve, the response will be exactly the same.    

 I should finally refer to some comments that have been made by my opponent,  where in typical dramatic fashion, he has turned up outside a detention facility today  because a number of people escaped, and there are reports now being prepared  both by my department and by Serco, the provider, because obviously here are  consequences for their contract and penalties under their contract when this sort of  event occurs.     

 Can I just, before the rate of hysteria goes up any more notches from Scott Morrison,  can I just flag a note of caution: yes, it is unacceptable whenever there is an escape,  but Scott Morrison may not have been in Parliament during the years of the Howard  Government, but there are plenty of people who do remember when 157 people  escaped from Womerah. There are plenty of people who also know that 19 of them  were never found, are still at large somewhere.    

 All examples of escape are unacceptable, but to try to turn this into something that is  a Liberal-Labor divide, when the largest escapes occurred under the Howard  Government, just beggars belief.    

 When I first got this portfolio, I said something and put out a level of hope which has  failed utterly, which is, I asked for us to have a mature debate and mature  discussion. The level of hysteria from my opponent continues to go to a new notch  each year,  and the arguments tend to work on the basis that the Howard 

 Government existed when it suits his argument for it to have existed, and the rest of  the time he’s willing to ignore history.    

 On this issue, this is a complex issue. There have been good and bad events, no  matter who has been in charge at different points in time.     

 But no one should doubt the following. In the first instance, when escapes happen,  and they shouldn’t, there are consequences for the provider, and there is work that is  then done in trying to make sure that people are found again and detained again as  quickly as possible, and obviously I have a strong view about these individuals,  about the level of security that should apply in any future detention environment for  them. 

 

 And I also have a view that in terms of priority for processing, they have put  themselves at the very back of a very long queue once they are found. But to ignore  events like Womerah is simply either hoping nobody will notice, or a convenient  ignoring of the facts.    

 The other thing I will say, is this. The regional resettlement arrangements with Papua  New Guinea and Nauru are being implemented exactly as I predicted they would be  implemented. Exactly. We are making sure that capacity at each centre remains well  in excess of what will be required, well in excess. And we continue to identify  additional locations.     

 The comments from the Papua New Guinea government, I think the most telling  ones were the comments from Minister Pato when he said if we need to build, we will  build, there will be as much capacity as is required and it will apply to everybody how  arrives - whether they are single adult males, whether they are family groups,  whether they are unaccompanied minors and for family groups when they were first  told at Christmas Island in the course of yesterday, that they were about to go to  Nauru, the news from some people as I understand it wasn’t taken well. But we are  simply implementing exactly what we said we would implement. And people who are  thinking about whether or not they should pay a people smuggler need to understand  one very simple fact - of all the things they are buying it might involve death at sea, it  will certainly involve high levels of risk, but it will not involve settlement in Australia.     

 I’m happy to take any questions.     

 JOURNALIST: The pipeline is still pushing people through, (inaudible) is it working  or has this policy now failed.      

 BURKE: Let’s not forget the number of people that you have on the ground in  Indonesia and it would be possible, I mean the figure of 10,000 is often thrown  about, I don’t think anyone would have a precise figure, but that’s a figure that is  often thrown about. Even if you had more than half the people immediately say that’s  it we are not getting on a boat, you still have a significant number of people that the  boats would be able to continue for a period of time. So it’s always been my view  that there would be a period of time when the boats kept coming.   Some of the numbers when we draw a neat line of before announcement, after  announcement, that then means we are including people, who I have met on Manus 

 Island, who were at sea at the time of the announcement. Now to think that we were  going to have a deterrent effect on those individuals, I really think is a logical stretch.  But there were quite a few people who came in the period immediately after the  announcement who do buffet those figures up.     

 But not withstanding that, we are not in charge of criminal actions, that’s not what we  do. What we do is the response to them. And it doesn’t matter how many people  decide to pay people smugglers, the response from the Government of Australia, will  be exactly the same. So if there are a large number of people on the beaches of  Indonesia at the moment, thinking that they want to get on boats, I can’t stop them  from getting on a boat. What I can guarantee, is that they won’t end up being settled  in Australia and that is exactly what we are implementing.     

 JOURNALIST: There seems to be some confusion with the Nauru understanding.  Will the people who are sent to Nauru, will they ever be settled in Nauru?    

 BURKE: We need to remember with Nauru, because I think often we try to explain  the Nauruan circumstance through the prism of Australia’s immigration system and  visa system. Nauru is a nation of 10,000 people. So the complexity of our visa  system of permanent residents versus citizenship versus temporary visas and all the  different visa classes, is not a level of infrastructure you have a in place when you  have a nation of 10,000 people. The best parallel that has been put to me by Minister  Adeang, the Minister for Justice of Nauru, is that they intend to deal with those who  are settled, the same way they dealt with phosphate workers. So they will not be  offering citizenship but with the phosphate workers, they remained on Nauru for  some decades, were allowed to live and work there integrated with the community,  and when the Nauruan economy turned down on mass they all left. And that was a  very significant, it was more than 1,000 people as I recall, about one a half or  something like that. Now that is the parallel that they expect, so the expectation from  Nauru is that people will not remain there permanently and they justify that on the  basis that their entire history has been that people other than Nauruans do not  remain there permanently. But they certainly remain committed to being able to  provide people the outcomes that are guaranteed through the convention.     

 The convention does not demand citizenship, and I think one of the reasons that  people when they look at the Nauru agreement have said oh, doesn’t this fall a bit  short, is because the Papua New Guinea arrangement goes further than what’s  required by the convention.    

 Minister Pato, Rimbink Pato, the Foreign Minister and Immigration Minister for Papua  New Guinea made clear in Jakarta again yesterday that under the PNG rules, after  eight years you can apply for citizenship, and they intend for that to be available for  people who have been settled in Papua New Guinea.    

 Nauru is offering what the convention offers and I think that’s the most logical frame  to see it within.     

 JOURNALIST: With Nauru, what sort of education will children who are there get?    

 BURKE: They’ll be attending the local school. 

 

 JOURNALIST: And how quickly will you be assessing their claims?    

 BURKE: The final decisions when you have offshore processing are actually made  by officials of the host government, so work on their claims will begin relatively  quickly. The design of the centre itself is one where you still have curfew  arrangements and things like that-  

 

 PRESENTER: That’s where we’re going to leave the Immigration Minister Tony  Burke there.    

 BROADCAST OF PRESS CONFERENCE ENDS   

