---
title: "First 100 days of Operation Sovereign Borders finishes with no illegal boat arrivals"
date: "2013-12-27"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403011
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2928960%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Scott Morrison  27 December 2013  

 First 100 days of Operation Sovereign Borders finishes with no  illegal boat arrivals 

 For the fourth time since Operation Sovereign Borders commenced on 18  September there have been no persons transferred to Australian immigration  authorities during the past week from suspected illegal entry vessels (SIEVs),  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison said today. 

 While more monsoon-like conditions are beginning to set in, for most of December  the weather conditions have been highly favourable to making these voyages. 

 The latest nil reading for transfers of illegal maritime arrivals (IMAs) to immigration  authorities was accompanied by a further 42 IMAs being sent to Nauru in the past  week, bringing the total population at Nauru to 841, with  a further 1229 at Manus  island, where there were no transfers during the past week. 

 So far in December there have been 355 IMAs on 7 boats. This represents a 70 per  cent decline on last December, when there were 1149 IMAs on 20 boats.  So far this  is the lowest number of arrivals in December for five years. 

 This latest reporting period brings up the first 100 days of Operation Sovereign  Borders. 

 During the first 100 days of Operation Sovereign Borders there have been 1106  IMAs and 45 crew on 22 SIEVs transferred to immigration authorities. This  represents an 87 per cent reduction on the 100 days that preceded the  establishment of this operation. 

 During the first 100 days of Operation Sovereign Borders there has been an average  of just 145 IMAs on 3 boats arriving a fortnight. This compares to around 920 people  on more than a dozen boats each fortnight between the introduction of the previous  government's regional resettlement arrangement with Papua New Guinea and the  establishment of Operation Sovereign Borders. 

 The Coalition's experience since coming to government has shown that no single  measure and no single partner is responsible for the dramatic fall in arrivals. Rather  it is the combination of all measures, backed by the strong and consistent resolve of  a government that believes in stronger border protection measures, as opposed to  the previous government that had to be dragged kicking and screaming to make any  positive changes. 

 During the first 100 days of Operation Sovereign Borders the government has been  focussed on implementing the policies we took to the election which have seen: 

 • $67 million in additional promised funding to expand disruption and  deterrence operations across the region, as part of our regional 

 deterrence framework, in cooperation with our partners not just in  Indonesia, but in Sri Lanka and Malaysia as well. This has seen more  than 1500 people prevented from coming to Australia. Visits to boost  cooperation have been conducted to Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Sri  Lanka, Myanmar and source countries in the Middle East.   • filling the $1.2 billion funding black hole from Labor that left offshore 

 processing facilities underfunded, ill equipped and under capacity -  physical capacity has been doubled and a new 48 hour transfer policy  is ensuring that offshore processing under the Coalition is a reality for  those who seek to come here illegally, not just more talk as it was  under Labor   • the salvaging of resettlement arrangements with PNG that were little 

 more than a blank sheet of paper under the previous government and  commencement of construction on post assessment accommodation at  both Nauru and Manus island for IMAs found to be refugees   • expansion of our maritime operations under Border Protection  Command to provide active deterrence to those seeking to enter  Australia illegally by boat - this is no longer a taxi service   • the denial of permanent visas to all persons who had previously arrived  illegally in Australia by boat, under the previous government   • quarantining protection visas provided to people who apply offshore in  camps and other similar places to ensure their places cannot be taken  by those who arrive illegally on boats.  

 The boats have not yet stopped but they are stopping. The right policies are now in  the right hands, and they are getting the right results on our borders, as we  promised. 

 In the coming months the government will continue to apply itself across the full  spectrum of measures that we know are necessary to stop the boats. This will  include making further improvements to our offshore processing facilities, particularly  to ensure appropriate accommodation and health facilities for families on Nauru  where new funding has been put in place, as well as reorganising our contractual  arrangements for service providers across both offshore processing locations to  ensure a more integrated operation. 

 Maritime deterrence operations will continue as we also look to implement our  expanded regional cooperation in Malaysia and to restore joint operations with  Indonesia as soon as possible. 

 I wish to commend all of our officers, crew, officials and service providers for their  service over our first 100 days and extend a special thank you to those who will be  working at sea, throughout the region, at our offshore facilities at Nauru and Manus  Island and at Christmas Island over the difficult summer months ahead. 

 

