---
title: "40,000 illegal boat arrivals on Labor's watch and 20,000 in 2012/13"
date: "2013-05-06"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435736
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719444%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling 40,000 ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS ON  LABOR’S WATCH & 20,000 IN 2012/13 May 06, 2013

 Julia  Gillard  and  Labor  have  set  another  shameful  record  of  failure  on  our  borders  with  more  than  40,000  people  having   arrived  in  Australia  on  illegal  boats  on  their  watch,  including  more  than  20,000  this  financial  year,  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice,  Customs  and  Border  Protection,  Michael   Keenan said today.

 “The latest three illegal boats, with a total of almost 250 people on board, have produced another record under Julia Gillard  and  Labor’s  border  protection  failures,  with  40,000  illegal  boat  arrivals  since  Labor  abolished  the  Howard  Government’s   strong border protection regime that had stopped the boats,” Mr Morrison said.

 “The arrival of almost 900 people in just the first four days of May highlights once again the impotence of Labor’s Malaysia  people swap which has a cap of only 800 people.

 “More than half of the 40,000 arrivals under Labor have come just this financial year which will lead to a massive new blow  out to be worn by taxpayers.

 “With the budget blow out on border protection already running at over $5 billion since the last election alone, Australia just  cannot afford three more years of Labor’s failure on our borders.

 “40,000  arrivals  is  greater  than  the  population  of  cities  like  Kalgoorlie-Boulder  (30,900),  Wodonga  (31,600),  Gladstone   (32,100), Queanbeyan (35,900) and Tamworth (36,200).

 “40,000  arrivals  is  greater  than  the  seating  capacity  of  the  Adelaide  Oval  and  Visy  Park  in  Melbourne.  It  is  95%  of  the   capacity of The Gabba in Brisbane and almost 90% of the capacity of the Sydney Football Stadium.

 “In the last budget Labor forecast it would spend almost $1.2 billion on their border failure and based this on just 450 illegal  arrivals a month. Arrivals are currently running at a rate of more than seven times that amount, leaving Australians with yet  another bill to pay for Julia Gillard’s border failures,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “These three latest illegal boats carrying a total of 244 people has pushed the number of boat arrivals for  this financial year to over 20,000 people and the number of arrivals since Labor dismantled our policies in August 2008 to  over 40,000 people.

 “Already more than 3,000 additional people on illegal boats have arrived in this financial year than the whole of calendar year  2012, which saw a total of 17,270 people arrive on 274 boats.

 “Today Customs released the non-confidential findings of their report into the arrival of the unauthorised vessel in Geraldton  on 9 April 2013 - the report stated there wasn’t much more Customs could do to prevent this from occurring.

 “Customs simply do not have the resources and assets available to cover the unprecedented flood of arrivals which we are  now witnessing, they are not able to stop these boats from reaching the mainland,” Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 40,000 ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS ON LABOR’S WATCH & 20,000 IN 2012/13...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

