---
title: "Opposition runs away from "stop the boats" promise"
date: "2013-03-14"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391961
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2307536%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Thursday, 14 March 2013   

 

 OPPOSITION RUNS AWAY FROM “STOP THE BOATS” PROMISE 

 We’ve always known the experts don’t believe the Opposition’s policy on asylum seekers will  work. 

 Now we know the Opposition doesn’t believe it will work either. 

 Tony Abbott and his Immigration Spokesperson are running away from their promise to “stop  the boats”, refusing to say when - or if - a Coalition Government would be able to fulfil their  commitment. 

 Mr Abbott has previously said he would stop the boats within months. Today he is scuttling  away from that commitment, saying he would only be able to “make a difference from the first  few weeks”, refusing to say when he would stop the boats. 

 Last night, the Member for Cook admitted the “stop the boats” promise was something the  Opposition would only be “attempting” to do if they make it to government - and he couldn’t  say when. 

 Speaking to Andrew Bolt on 2GB on Wednesday, the Member for Cook would not confirm the  length of time a Coalition Government would take to “stop the boats”.  

 In fact, he said a Coalition Government wouldn’t “stop the boats” but rather be “aiming” for the  same levels as under Howard. 

 When repeatedly asked when a Coalition Government could reduce the number of boats to  Howard-era levels in their first term, he responded with: 

 “I’m not making such forecasts” 

 “I don’t put timeframes on it” 

 2GB 13 March 2013 

 The Opposition is finally admitting what the Government has always known, that Tony Abbot’s  “stop the boats” promise is not an achievable election commitment but a dog whistle. 

 The Gillard Government knows that a three word slogan will not stop the global problem of  people using desperate measures to seek asylum. 

 There is no quick fix to stop asylum seekers traveling to Australia by boat. 

 We need a regional approach involving countries of origin, transit and destination under the  auspices of the Bali Process. 

 The Gillard Government is determined to break the people smugglers’ business model and stop  them taking people’s life savings and all too often their lives. 

 We are committed to implementing all the recommendations of the Expert Panel into Asylum  Seekers.  

 It’s time the Opposition and the Greens Party listened to the experts and support the  recommendations in full. 

 

 Media Adviser: Maria Hawthorne 0407 015 986 

 

 Link to 2GB interview: http://www.2gb.com/article/steve-price-and-andrew-bolt-13th-march 

 

 

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

