---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Shangri-La Hotel, Sydney: 3 July 2013: reform of Customs and Border Protection Service; asylum seekers; education; defence white paper; ALP leadership"
date: "2013-07-03"
creators:
  - "Clare, Jason"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "reform of Customs and Border Protection Service"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "education"
  - "defence white paper"
  - "ALP leadership"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396661
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2567491%22
---

 

 THE HON. JASON CLARE MP   MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE   

 TRANSCRIPT       

 PRESS CONFERENCE   

 Shangri-La Hotel  Sydney   03 July 2013   

 

 Topics: Reform of Customs and Border Protection Service; asylum seekers;  education; defence white paper; ALP leadership   

 JASON CLARE:       Today I announced the reform of Customs and Border  Protection. You will remember that just before Christmas, I  announced that four people had been arrested, including one  Customs officer for seeking to import illegal drugs into the  country. I said then that Customs required major and  comprehensive reform, and this is it. This is it and it's broader  than just reforms to tackle corruption and integrity issues.   

 Customs faces some very big challenges. Over the course of  the next five years, the amount of cargo moving in and out of  Australia is going to increase dramatically. The amount of air  cargo will triple in the next five years. The number of passengers  coming into and out of Australia will increase by eight million and  this creates big challenges for an old organisation, an  organisation that was one of the first established after  federation, to be ready for the new century, to be ready for the  Asian century.   

 It's going to require new structures, new training, new  recruitment processes, new promotion systems, and new  equipment. The blueprint that I'm releasing today includes the  establishment of a new strategic border command, the  establishment of a new border force, a new national border  targeting centre. It also includes the secondment of a  commander in the Australian Federal Police to help with the 

 running of criminal investigations and a new strategic  relationship between the Federal Police and Customs in the  investigation and management of serious offences. It also  includes the consideration of establishing a Customs training  college.   

 In the area of passengers at our airports, it also involves big  reforms to the way in which passengers come into Australia and  leave Australia. If you've been to the airport recently, you would  have seen those SmartGates. If you've got a chip in your  passport and you're over 16, then you can use one of those  gates to scan your passport, rather than line up and wait in a  queue and have your passport stamped. The next step is  expanding the use of that technology to more than just  Australian citizens and New Zealand citizens, but expanding it to  American citizens, UK citizens, and Chinese citizens as well.   

 Beyond that, the next step is making the same technology  available for Australians when they depart Australia, not just  when they come home. And the next step is looking at the next  transformation in technology. The next generation of e-gates.               

 In the area of integrity and corruption reform, you would have  seen last year I drove legislation through the parliament to  establish integrity testing, drug and alcohol testing, and  mandatory reporting. A couple of weeks ago, I announced the  next tranche of reforms. That includes banning the use of  personal mobile phones in Customs controlled areas at  international airports. It also includes tighter controls over  existing rosters and tighter controls over access to control  rooms.   

 This report is the next step and it includes the introduction of  time limits to certain to working in certain locations. Just like the  New South Wales Royal Commission into the Police Force  identified problems when people work in the one place for too  long, and Kings Cross is the best example of that, we've seen  evidence of that as well, so we're going to limit the time people  can spend in a certain area to certain periods of time. We're also  going to tighten up on secondary employment rules, tighten up  on recruitment rules, to create higher standards there.                                       

 Now, all of this is a blueprint. It's the big brush strokes. We now  need to fill in the detail, and that will involve very closely with our  staff, more than 5000 worth, as well as unions, importers,  exporters, traders, customs brokers, our airports, and our ports.  I'll ask Mike to make the point, if you can, about just how  important staff have been in developing this blueprint already. A  lot of the great ideas that are imbedded in this blueprint are the  ideas of our staff who've emailed us and said these are the 

 things that we think we need to make our organisation better  and strong. That's what this is ultimately all about. It's about  people.   

 Back in December, when I announced those arrests, I got a  phone call to my office from a Customs officer, a 20 year  veteran, who said that he goes to the same coffee shop every  day in his uniform and that day he went to that coffee shop  wearing a jacket over his uniform he was that ashamed, that  disgusted, that disappointed in what his fellow officers who'd  sworn an oath had done. These reforms are about people like  him. People who tell me that they bleed blue, who love their  organisation, want Customs to be the best that it possibly can  be, knows we've got big challenges, and these reforms are  about helping to make sure that we meet those challenges.                                       

 So we're both very happy to take your questions.   

 QUESTION:              Why has it taken so long to get to this point? It was back in  2005 that we first discovered that baggage handlers were  involved in drug smuggling through Sydney Airport. It's eight  years later and this is the first time we're seeing any reform.  Why has it taken so long? 

 

 JASON CLARE:       It's not true to say this is the first time we've seen reform. This is  18 months in the making. I was briefed on this in my first week in  the job back 18 months ago. I knew from my experience working  in the New South Wales Government some of the things that  needed to be done straight away. So just like James Wood had  recommended drug and alcohol testing and integrity testing,  summary dismissal powers, and mandatory reporting, I picked  up those ideas and implemented them straight away last year. 

 

 I couldn't tell people why I was doing that at the time, but it was  because of the investigation that ACLEI and the AFP were  doing. The next step, the reforms that we announced only a  fortnight ago were based on work that the Federal Police and  ACLEI have done working with some of those officers that have  been arrested, that have agreed to share with us, that have  rolled over and provided us with information on how they  defeated the system. The work that we've done there will help  us to plug those vulnerability gaps.   

 These reforms that I'm announcing are based on the advice of  Mike Pezzullo, the new chief executive of Customs, his team, all  5000 worth, their good ideas, but importantly also the advice of  the Customs Reform Board. I didn't mention it earlier, but in  December I established a Customs Reform Board to provide us  with independent oversight of this work. It's headed up by three  people; Ken Moroney, the former police commissioner in New 

 South Wales; James Wood, the former royal commissioner here  in New South Wales; and David Mortimer, the former CEO of  TNT. Three men with very important skills.   

 James Wood. No better corruption hunter in the country than  James Wood. Ken Moroney, with all of the experience  necessary to make sure that we get the right systems and  structures in place for a border force, for a force that wears a  uniform that has special powers. David Mortimer, with all of  those skills and experience in making sure we've got an  organisation that can facilitate and assist trade as well as the  movement of passengers.The advice of those three men,  embedded in their report today, has helped to provide us with  the next set of reforms.   

 QUESTION:              Minister, how corrupt was Customs?   

 JASON CLARE:       The overwhelming majority, John - the overwhelming majority of  Customs officers are good, honest, hard working people. They  bleed blue, they love their organisation, and they go to work  every day to make Australia a safer place, and there was no one  that was more let down by what they saw last year than our  Customs officers. In December, I went to the airport and I met  with some Customs officers and they said to me ‘go get them’.  That was their simple message - ‘go get them’. They want to  make sure that if people are acting corruptly, then we get them  out of the system and get them out of the organisation and set  up a system to make sure that they don't come back. 

 

 So this is serious. Wherever there's people that are abusing a  position of power to import drugs that can end up on the street  killing people, it is serious. We've had 20 people arrested,  including four Customs officers and a DAFF officer, and I make  this point as well that there is the potential for more arrests.  When you get information like this, you treat it seriously, and I've  treated it seriously since my first week in the job.               

 These are big reforms, and I'm determined not just to announce  them, but to see them fully implemented.   

 

 QUESTION:              Just on secondary employment. What kind of second jobs do  your Customs officers have at the moment and what will you  ban? 

 

 JASON CLARE:       I might ask Mike Pezzullo just to go into a bit of detail there.   

 MIKE PEZZULLO:   Thanks, Minister.  As in all organisations, there's a process for achieving approval  for secondary employment. Some of that employment can be 

 somewhat related to your work. Just as you have in the police  force, you have people working, for instance, in the security  industry. That's of concern to me. I've asked for that to be  specifically looked at and targeted.    

 I'm not in any way suggesting that every member of the security  industry - the private security industry - is questionable, but it is  an area that needs to be looked at. Other people have  completely disconnected work. They run businesses within their  family, which involve the sort of artisan type work that you find in  many small businesses.   

 There's two rules that apply here. It's approved, there's no  conflict of interest,a and if there's a high level of risk, that  authorisation to have that secondary employment will be  withdrawn.   

 QUESTION:              What about the restrictions on tenure, how long you stay in a  particular position? What will [indistinct] and how long would  envisage this being? 

 

 MIKE PEZZULLO:   The blueprint says that in the vast majority of jobs that are  operational in nature, so what you might shorthandedly call our  blue collar work, out in the ports, in the wharves, on tarmacs in  the airport, we're looking at a fixed tenure period of  approximately three years, which is in keeping with the sort of  posting cycle that you would find in military services, police  services, and other disciplined services. 

 

 Obviously, though, just as in defence or the police or the  intelligence services, you're going to have some occupations  where very, very deep subject matter knowledge, technical  knowledge, might not really start to mature until the second,  third, or, indeed, fourth year. So we'll go through each of our  employment categories and look at where, by exception, longer  periods in the job make sense, but generally speaking, in what  you would describe as general duties, border patrol or border  protection work, it'll be around three years.   

 QUESTION:              Why? Because of the risk of corruption? Is that…   

 MIKE PEZZULLO:   No. Principally - in part for that reason, but principally, it's  actually a healthy workforce model. You sharpen up your skills.  You keep your motivation up. We can actually then capture the  value of the all three years and say we'd now like to challenge  you and stretch you in terms of leadership. We'd like to step you  up to the next level of leadership. Or we'd like to take that three  years worth of employment value and put you into a lateral  position where you might accrue another speciality. 

 

 So you might have been a border protection officer on the  waterfront, but then we say you're actually a pretty good analyst.  How would you like to try your hand at being an intelligence  analyst for three years. So it's really about managing someone's  career in partnership with them. But yes, as you move people  around, what you do in relation to the problems that were  discovered, for instance, in the New South Wales police force by  Justice Wood, is you break up those little cliques where the local  corrupt leaders indoctrinate the new people who come in and  then they manage their careers, if you like, as part of their  criminal enterprise. And, as in New South Wales and as in our  service, we need to break up those cliques.   

 JASON CLARE:       Just adding to that, sorry, John. One of the things we've found is  that a lot of people have felt that they were stuck. Stuck in  working in airports and there's only ever one job. You work in  the airport or stuck at the ports and you only work at the ports.  Part of the logic behind creating a border force, a national  border force, is that we're going to skill up these officers so that  they could work in all of the different areas. One day, they could  be at the airport, a couple of years later, they could be working  at the ports or in the maritime space, giving them all of the  different skills to work in all of those different areas, that also  helps to tackle the risk of people acting corruptly because you  don't feel stuck in a rut where there's no chance for  advancement. You get all the skills to continually move into all of  the different areas that Customs works in. 

 

 

 QUESTION:              The Minister said the corruption was serious. In your view,  having had [indistinct], how deep was it? And since you got the  powers to terminate people, have you? 

 

 MIKE PEZZULLO:   In terms of the first part of your question, I'm briefed as a  consequence of being the chief executive on all of the targets  that both the Federal Police and the Integrity Commissioner are  after. I can say advisedly, without getting into the numbers, that  the vast majority of our workers, of our staff, are hard working,  decent, honest Australians who just want to do the right thing by  their country and protect our borders.   

 In some cases, Some of them have done the wrong thing and  have actually organised criminal enterprises. They're being dealt  with. A number of officers have been charged. One's already  gone to jail. More will follow under the processes of law. There  are other targets that we're looking at [audio skip] jointly with the  Police and the Integrity Commissioner. They will soon feel the  full force of the law. They will be dealt with under law.   

 Being briefed, as I am though, on all the operations and all the  targets, I am very, very comfortable in assuring the public  through this press conference, that the vast majority of our  people do the right thing, want to do the right thing, and indeed  in some cases when given the opportunity to do the wrong thing,  don't take that opportunity.   

 QUESTION:              What guarantees can you give the Australian public that the  corruption has been cleaned up since those arrests?   

 MICHAEL PEZZULLO:   I'm not in any way contending that the corruption's been cleaned  up.       I've just said that there are some active operations on  foot. Some people will soon feel the full force of those  operations. They'll feel the sting of justice. And I can't even say,  after that wave occurs, that we're completely clean. Can any  police commissioner in this country, hand on heart say, that  there's not a small group, a clique, or a coupe of people hiding in  the shadows exploiting their position. You can never have a  perfect system. You can't have it in the media. You can't have it  in politics. You can't have it in any sphere of society. So when  you say clean up, I hope the intention is not that we have  absolute zero outcomes, we're going to have zero tolerance. 

 

 JASON CLARE:       Can I just add to that as well - a couple of things. One, we're  working off advice from the best corruption hunter in the  business, James Wood. The work that we've done in closing  those vulnerability gaps has been done by the Federal Police  and ACLEI with the assistance of advice from some of these  officers who have rolled over. The key here is not just filling  those gaps now but continuing to pressure test those  vulnerabilities, year after year as people try and find new ways  to break the system. We can't be naÃ¯ve. There will always be  weak people. There will always be people that have the potential  to try and do the wrong thing to make a quick buck. That will  always be the case.   

 But the message here that we're sending out, loud and strong, is  that this is not acceptable in any police force in the country, and  it's not acceptable in Customs, and we're going to implement all  of the reforms necessary to weed it out and make sure it doesn't  come back.   

 QUESTION:              Minister, you would have seen reports today about gun running  from overseas and the bikie gangs in Victoria. How concerned  are you about this issue of direct [indistinct]. How concerned are  you about the…[indistinct]? 

 

 JASON CLARE:       Ian, concerned enough that last year I established a firearms  intelligence targeting team. With Mike Pezzullo and Michael 

 Carmody, early last year we established a firearms intelligence  targeting team made up of Customs officers to target people that  are trying to import guns into the country. One of those officers  is embedded inside the New South Wales Police Force.   

 My expectation is in the future we need to embed Customs  officers in the organised crime squads of Police right across the  country. The work that team has done is already delivering  results. It has helped, working with the New South Wales Police,  the Federal Police as well as the DEA and the FBI, to crack  open a gun running syndicate in Nashville late last year. So it's  doing good work.               

 To put this in perspective, there's around about a quarter of a  million illegal guns on the streets of Australia right now, and  most of those weapons are guns that weren't handed in after the  Port Arthur Massacre or are stolen from legitimate owners.  There are a lot of firearms out there if criminals want to get their  hands on them. But it is right that they do try to import, and you  need intelligence, criminal intelligence, to target those people  and stop them from importing them.               

 Eighty-five per cent of the guns that we seize and the drugs we  seize at the border are from criminal intelligence we get from  Police or from other sources before they even get shipped to  Australia. So the more Intel you've got the more guns, the more  drugs that you seize, and that's why we're establishing a  national border targeting centre. It's going to be critical in  harvesting all the information from organisations like the Federal  Police, Customs, ASIO, DFAT, DAFF, other organisations that  collect intelligence, fuse it all together to target the right  criminals and target the drugs and stop them getting into the  country.   

 QUESTION:              Can you just explain the thinking behind expanding SmartGate,  because doesn't that put people under less scrutiny than seeing  an actual Customs officer? 

 

 JASON CLARE:       I'll ask Mike to expand on that, but this is technology that makes  the journey for the passenger off the plane and into their car  quicker and easier. It means that you don't have to line up for as  long, or wait for your passport to be stamped. There are other  steps in the process that Customs use to pre-screen people,  sometimes a couple of days before they get on the plane. So all  of that work is done before somebody even arrives in Australia. 

 

 SmartGate is a technology which is used in New Zealand and  other countries as well. We think expanding it is a good idea. It's  going to help to speed that process up, but we're also wise to  the fact that it won't be long before it's old technology. At the 

 moment you stop at a kiosk and then your face gets scanned  and you walk through. The technology of the future might be a  one stop process. Beyond that the technology might involve  actually having all of that done as you walk from the plane to get  your bag. Sort of scanning people on the move. Now that's  technology that we'll see in the coming decades. But I might ask  Mike to just expand.   

 MICHAEL PEZZULLO:         I think there's a mythology that sometimes is perpetuated by the  representation of border clearance in both popular media and in  movies and sometimes even on TV shows. If I had to rely on  real time assessments made in a very few seconds of  interaction between the arriving passenger and the officer who's  got to both make some judgements as well as keep that queue  moving, Australia would have very thin defences.   

 Particularly with the rise of intelligence-led capability, and I must  here pay very, very strong homage to the former ambassador in  Brussels, Brendan Nelson, who negotiated a landmark treaty, as  our ambassador, for access to what's know as passenger name  record information, which is a huge data store of passenger  name records, basically your ticketing information. We secure it.  Your privacy is respected. There are strong data protection  protocols around it. With PNR as it's called, to use the technical  jargon, our aim ultimately is to triage and risk assess every flight  before it even takes off.   

 I want to be able to know the three or four or five people I want  off that plane before they even board at the other side. What I  then want to do, either through an expansion of SmartGate or  ultimately moving down the path of facial biometric recognition  people move through from the airline door opening through  those areas where the duty free shops are and all the rest of it,  right down to baggage, I want to monitor behaviour. I want to do  it in a lawful way. I want to do it in a way that protects civil  liberties, and the best real time assessments I'm going to get  from passengers moving through that process is not someone  standing at a line, and if they're ready to do the wrong thing,  being prepared to spoof or deflect the officer, but I want to get  them in their moments of vulnerability. I want to get the criminals  when they're least expecting it. And that's what things like PNR  data, facial recognition, CCTV and pre-crime intelligence does  for you.   

 QUESTION:              Can you give a clearer picture of the actual number of people  who are currently being investigated for corrupt activity within  the Customs [audio skip], and how many of those people have  gone on to be arrested and/or charged? 

 

 MICHAEL PEZZULLO:       No, I can't give the numbers, either of the operations or  the number of targets in each operation, other than to say  that the vast majority of our people do the right thing, are  not under scrutiny and in some cases have actually, at  some personal risk to themselves, alerted us to  malpractice or misconduct. 

 

 QUESTION:                          In terms of corruption that you say still does exist within  the Customs workforce, how extensive do you think that  is? 

 

 MICHAEL PEZZULLO:       I'm briefed in all the operations. We have a number of  special inquires underway. Some led by the Integrity  Commissioner, some led internally, but with reference  back to the Integrity Commissioner. Knowing both the  number of operations, the number of targets, the number  of targets both within our agency and their criminal  associates outside, we've got a workforce of 5000. I can  say to the vast majority of our people are doing the right  thing and are in fact helping us to harden the service.  That's all I'm prepared to say. 

 

 QUESTION:                          How disappointed are you at being dumped from the  Rudd Cabinet and were you offered another portfolio?   

 JASON CLARE:                   No. Let me be really clear about this. I asked for this  portfolio. I asked the Prime Minister to stay in Home  Affairs and Justice, and this is the reason I did it. I've  been working on this for 18 months. I've been working on  this for over a year and we've now developed these  reforms, and I not only want to see them developed and  announced, I want to see them implemented. I want to  see them fully implemented. So I asked the Prime  Minister for permission to stay in this portfolio and he  agreed, and I'm very grateful for that. 

 

 QUESTION:                          Why have there been no charges laid over the drugs in  sport scandal and do you…[indistinct]?   

 JASON CLARE:                   First correction is I never said that. Another person said  that. I never said that. I said this was serious that it  involved a number of sports and multiple individuals. I  made the point on a number of occasions. I'll repeat it  here now, that this investigation is going to take time.  We've given ASADA extra resources and extra funding to  do this work. Their work will take time but he change in  behaviour that's happened since that announcement has  been significant, and it's been immediate. 

 

 One of the anti-aging clinics that we've been very  concerned about has now closed, and hasn't reopened.  The NRL has established an integrity unit. The AFL has  stopped or banned the injection of players. We've had  players come forward providing us with extra information,  and there's no sportsperson in the country now who  doesn't second guess the information they're given about  supplements or peptides or things to enhance their  performance.   

 Remember this, this is not just about winning or losing at  sport. It's about the safety of young men and women.  One of the drugs that a person, or a couple of people  were banned for two years for using in Queensland  recently, contributed to the death of a marathon runner in  the London Marathon last year. So this is something that  we're very concerned about. The Australian Crime  Commissioner said it earlier this year - I'd rather justify  releasing this report with all the bad news it has in it than  explain to a coroner why I didn't. I think that says it all.   

 QUESTION:                          Are you disappointed that you're out of Cabinet?   

 JASON CLARE:                   No. I think I've answered that question. I wanted to be  Home Affairs Minister, and this is the reason why. These  are big reforms that need to be fully implemented. This  week the national anti-gang task force, that I've  established, starts work. We've got an intelligence team  set up in Canberra, but in addition to that we've got  people set up in Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane to kick  off the work of setting up those strike teams that will start  in January. 

 

 I've expanded Taskforce Polaris, which has been so  successful in our ports, to Melbourne and to Brisbane.  Taskforce Jericho - the Queensland version of that starts  this Monday. Next week I'll officially open the new Anti-Dumping Commission, The Australian Anti-Dumping  Commission, that I've driven through the Australian  Parliament over the course of the last few months. It  starts work and that work is really, really important.   

 In two weeks time I will head to the United States for the  first meeting of the Five-Eyes Homeland Security Group.  This is something I've established with Janet Napolitano,  the Homeland Security Secretary in the United States.  We met last year and I said, look, we really need  Homeland Security ministers from the US, the UK,  Canada, New Zealand and Australia to meet on an  annual basis. It hadn't happened before. I said, look, we 

 need to get this done. What's happened in Boston and in  London over the last few months reminds us how  important a group like this is. I want to make sure that  that delivers results, and there's a lot on the agenda at  that meeting as well.   

 I've also got a bit more unfinished business, and that's  national unexplained wealth laws. Ask any law  enforcement officer, and they'll say the key to driving  down crime is seizing the cash and the assets from  criminals. I've been fighting for this now for over a year.  Every police commissioner in the country wants this. The  police unions want it. It's the politicians that are standing  in the way and I'm determined to drive the implementation  of national unexplained wealth laws.   

 So there's a lot going on. A lot of unfinished business,  and I want to get that done, and I'm very grateful to the  Prime Minister for allowing me to continue in that job.   

 QUESTION:                          Just on the new measures announced today, where's  the money - has the money for that been announced  already? Is that in the forward estimates or is there extra  money going towards… 

 

 JASON CLARE:                   Good question. Some of these reforms don't cost  money. Others do. We've allocated about $120 million  over the forward estimates for this reform program. That  includes the $30 million for the national border targeting  centre, as well as around about $90 million from the  capital budget re-allocated to fund some of these projects  in the forward estimates. 

 

 Now, beyond that, if there's a need for more funding,  what I've asked Customs to do is to develop a two pass  business case to present to government as part of the 14-15 budget process.   

 QUESTION:                          [indistinct]… what, if any changes to our current  [indistinct] protection policies can we expect in this first  meeting between the PM and Indonesia? 

 

 JASON CLARE:                   As much as you encourage me, I'm not going to pre-empt what the Prime Minister will discuss with his  counterpart in Indonesia, other than to say it's a very  important meeting, not just for the issues that you've  raised about border protection and asylum seekers, but  more broadly for our relationship with Indonesia. It has to  be, by any account, one of Australia's most important  relationships. Indonesia is our next-door neighbour, a 

 population of 250 million people. Our 12th largest trading  partner and it has to be, and it is, one of Australia's most  important relationships, and that's why I'm so glad that  the Prime Minister is visiting Indonesia as part of his first  week back in the job.   

 QUESTION:                          And do you think the Government is backing away from  its education reforms?   

 JASON CLARE:                   No, I don't. No, I don't, and if there's one reform, and it's  very hard just to name one, that's more important than  any other that this government is doing, it's the work we  do in education. Providing opportunities for kids like me  that grew in Cabramatta in a working class community to  get one day to go to university and become the first  person in my family to finish school. First person in my  family to go to university. 

 

 I got that chance because of our education system. The  jobs of the future that are going to be created, most of  those jobs are going to be jobs that are going to require  people to have finished school, gone to university, or  gone to TAFE. So we need to increase the number of  young people who finish school, make sure they've got  the resources to get a great education, and encourage  more people to go to TAFE and university. That's what  these reforms are all about and that's why they're so very,  very important.   

 QUESTION:                          Minister, do you agree with your former boss, Bob Carr,  that all refugees coming on boats these days are 100 per  cent economic refugees? 

 

 JASON CLARE:                   Ian, I think Bob was talking about Iran, just to clarify that  point there. I'd make the more general point that we've  seen in Sri Lanka a lot of people coming to Australia  seeking a better life, but not seeking asylum from  persecution. A lot of Sinhalese come to Australia looking  for a job and what we've done is fly those people home.  More than 1000 people were flown home. 

 

 I've made the same point Bob has in the parliament that a  lot of people coming to Australia are economic refugees.  The difference between Sri Lanka and Iran is if someone  comes here from Iran looking for a job and they're not  entitled to asylum from persecution, then you can't just fly  them back to Iran because Iran refuses to take people  who don't want to go. That's why I've made the point that  if you can't fly them back to Iran, fly them halfway back to  Malaysia. 

 

 The fear of death has not stopped people getting on to  leaky boats. The fear of going to Nauru or to Manus  Island has not stopped people getting onto boats. But I  tell you what has, the fear of being flown home in a week.  That's what works. It's dramatically reduced the number  of people coming to Australia from Sri Lanka. So we fly  people back to Sri Lanka who are coming here as  economic refugees. We need to fly other economic  refugees back as well. If we can't fly them all the way  back to Iran, we should fly them halfway back to  Malaysia, and we're being stopped from doing that by the  Liberal Party and the Greens who refuse to pass those  laws through the Australian parliament.   

 QUESTION:                          Isn't it the case that Bob Carr can't really back up that  claim because [indistinct] thousand people are yet to be  processed? The processing system is in stress. So how  can you back up those claims when the processing  system's been halted? 

 

 JASON CLARE:                   Ninety per cent of people that seek asylum in Australia  at the moment, once they go through the refugee review  tribunal system, are found to be refugees. If you compare  that to the rate of successful applications in any other  comparable country, you'll see it's much lower. That tells  me, that tells the Government, that there is at least a  need to review the way that that process works. That's  what Bob is talking about, that's what the Government is  doing, and that's what needs to be done in my view. 

 

 QUESTION:                          Being an MP from Western Sydney, do you think that  Labor stocks have risen out there since Rudd came to the  leadership? 

 

 JASON CLARE:                   That's the feedback I got at Yagoona Railway Station on  Friday morning. It's the feedback I got at the shops at the  weekend. A lot of positive feedback from people. People  will say look, we've been disappointed in the past, but we  don't want Tony Abbott. We're afraid of what an Abbott  Government would mean. In my neck of the woods, the  cuts to education would have a bigger effect than almost  anywhere else in the country. The sorts of things Tony  Abbott is talking about doing would hurt the people of my  electorate. 

 

 So they want a competition. The polls tightening mean  that there is a competition. I said to former Prime Minister  Gillard, in my conversation with her last week, that I  feared that we were headed for a flogging in the polls and 

 we owed it to the people of Australia to make sure that  there was a competition. People want a choice, they want  a competition, and I think that we now have one.   

 COMPERE:                           Last question. 

 

 QUESTION:                          What's the Government planning to do about monitoring  the coast line for asylum seeker boats [indistinct]?   

 JASON CLARE:                   I'll point you to the Defence white paper that was  released earlier this year by my colleague, Stephen  Smith. In that white paper, as well as in the previous  white paper, there were references to not only replacing  our existing P3 Orions with P8s, but also unmanned  aircraft and that is in that document. It doesn't identify  what specific type of unmanned aircraft we might use, but  that due diligence is being done by Defence and that will  involved working with Customs and Border Protection. 

 

 QUESTION:                          [Inaudible question] 

 

 JASON CLARE:                   I wouldn't and I don't think anyone is selecting one  particular type of UAV. That's something that needs to go  through the sort of first pass and second pass business  analysis that I talked about Customs doing. Defence will  need to do that work, too, in concert with Customs and  present that to Government in due course. 

 

 Okay. Thanks very much. 

 

