---
title: "More boats as O'Connor covers up Labor's immigration security scandal"
date: "2013-05-31"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395190
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719380%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling MORE BOATS AS O’CONNOR COVERS UP  LABOR’S IMMIGRATION SECURITY  SCANDAL May 31, 2013

 Three  illegal  boat  arrivals  over  the  last  48  hours,  with  a  total  of  more  than  110  people  on  board,  came  as  Immigration Minister Brendan O’Connor today elected to cover up his government’s national security failings on allowing a convicted  Egyptian jihadist terrorist who arrived  by boat into low security family accommodation, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Minister O’Connor’s decision to cover up this national security scandal by refusing an independent review is just another example of this Minister’s denial and indifference to Australia’s national security interests with respect to immigration,” Mr  Morrison said.

 “Minister  O’Connor  is  clearly  acting  in  accordance  with  the  light  touch  philosophy  of  the  Labor  Party  when  it  comes  to immigration and national security.

 “For once it would be nice if Labor would clean up one of their own messes rather than covering up this scandal.

 “Minister O’Connor refuses to respond to questions, initiate inquiries, and is hiding under his desk hoping it all goes away. He may treat national security issues lightly like his Prime Minister but the Coalition never will.

 “If Minister O’Connor is trying to cover up this scandal, what else is he hiding? What else doesn’t he want Australians to  know about his government’s failed border protection policies and failure to act on matters critical to our national security?

 “This Government tried to cover up the Captain Emad scandal until they were busted by ABC Four Corners, and now they are trying to do the same thing with their mishandling of a convicted jihadist terrorist. 

 “This national security scandal demonstrates just how low this government has set the bar on national security issues and the protection of our community, when it comes to the consequences of their chronic border failures.

 “The Coalition restates our request to Minister O’Connor to initiate an independent inquiry. If he continues to elect not to take this issue seriously the Coalition will not stand idly by. We will seek to force this issue at Parliament when it returns next week,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “Another three boats, carrying 116 people, have arrived amidst a grave breach of national security that has seen a convicted terrorist slip through our borders undetected.

 “When you have nearly 700 boats and over 42,000 people crossing our borders illegally by boat it is an impossible task for our  national  security  agencies  to  vet  who  is  actually  coming  to  our  country  - made  worse  by  the  fact  that  Labor  has   continually slashed funding and personnel from all our frontline border protection agencies.

 “It is a grave moment when you have a convicted terrorist in low security detention, surrounded by the equivalent of a pool fence, for the best part of a year.

 Page 1 of 2 MORE BOATS AS O’CONNOR COVERS UP LABOR’S IMMIGRATION SECUR...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

 “The gross negligence of this Government warrants an independent inquiry into the mishandling of this convicted jihadist terrorist, yet once again this Government has refused to take responsibility for their failings,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 2 of 2 MORE BOATS AS O’CONNOR COVERS UP LABOR’S IMMIGRATION SECUR...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

