---
title: "Oakeshott & Windsor up to their necks in mining tax black hole"
date: "2013-02-13"
creators:
  - "Truss, Warren"
source: "Office of TRUSS, WARREN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390463
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2226658%22
---

 13 February 2013  

 

 Oakeshott & Windsor up to their necks in mining tax black  hole   

 “ROB Oakeshott and Tony Windsor are now saying the mining tax is a dud deal. Why then did they  vote for it? Didn’t they understand the legislation they created with Julia Gillard?” Nationals leader  Warren Truss asked today.   

 “Mr Oakshott’s protest that he feels ‘duped’ are typical of a bloke trying to worm his way out of the  mess he was instrumental in creating. Mr Windsor is seeking further advice, but it is a bit late after  the mining tax has flopped.   

 “It beggars belief that Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor refuse to accept any responsibility for backing  the deceitful and failed policies of Julia Gillard and now want to pretend none of it is their fault.   

 “Australia is suffering from a lose-lose retrograde mining tax that discourages investment and jobs  on one hand, while collecting just $126 million of the $2 billion Australians were promised on the  other.   

 “When you deduct the cost of administrating the mining tax and the loss of company tax revenue, it  has cleared less than $40 million. Yet Labor has promised $13 billion in expenditure based on money  from this tax.   

 “Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor voted with Labor and The Greens to make it law.   

 “The mining tax, like the carbon tax, is another Gillard government disaster and Rob Oakeshott and  Tony Windsor are up to their necks in it.   

 “Julia Gillard promised to fix three major policy failures of the Rudd era when she knifed the PM in  2010 - the mining tax, asylum seekers and climate change. All three areas are now bigger problems  than when she started. Only the Coalition will stop the boats and scrap the carbon and mining taxes  to restore confidence, certainty, investment and jobs - especially in regional Australia.” 

 

 [ENDS]   

 Media Contact:            Brett Heffernan on (02) 6277 4482 or 0467 650 020 or brett.heffernan@aph.gov.au   

