---
title: "Rudd-carpet ride for another illegal boat"
date: "2013-07-02"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396618
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719320%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling RUDD-CARPET RIDE FOR ANOTHER  ILLEGAL BOAT  July 02, 2013

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat, with 71 people on board, is the 745th to arrive since Kevin Rudd rolled out the Rudd-carpet to people smugglers by abolishing the Howard Government’s proven border protection policies, Shadow Minister  for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Kevin Rudd rolled out the Rudd-carpet for illegal boat arrivals and just like three years ago, people smugglers are taking full advantage,” Mr Morrison said.

 “The consequences of the Prime Minister’s Rudd-carpet are record boats and unprecedented cost, chaos and tragedy on our borders.

 “Prime Minister Rudd together with Immigration Minister Tony Burke is the exact same team that went to the 2007 election saying they wanted to abolish the measures of the Howard Government.

 “This is a team that can’t be trusted to stop the boats and leaves Australians with a very clear choice at this year’s election  - the Coalition that believes you can stop the boats and has the proven measures and resolve to do it or Kevin Rudd and Tony  Burke  who  started  the  boats,  rolled  out  the  Rudd-carpet  and  will  only  deliver  more  chaos  on  our  borders,”  Mr  Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “The first day of the new financial year is greeted by another illegal boat arrival, as the previous financial year saw 401 boats, carrying 25,541 people, arrive in Australia courtesy of people smugglers.

 “This  was  the  biggest  financial  year  ever  on  record  - with  the  equivalent  of  Australia’s  entire  humanitarian  visa  places   taken up by people arriving illegally by boat.

 “Coalition policies like turning the boats back around when it’s safe to do so, sends the strongest possible message to the  people smugglers that Australia’s borders are no longer open for business - this is a policy that both Immigration Minister,  Tony Burke, and Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, supported in the lead up to the 2007 election.

 “As a result of six years of an inconsistent Labor Government we have ended up with our immigration system being run by people smugglers, a non-existent border protection regime and billions of dollars of wasted tax payer money - we cannot  afford another three years of Labor,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 RUDD-CARPET RIDE FOR ANOTHER ILLEGAL BOAT > Michael Keenan MP

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

