---
title: "Stopping the boats or just keeping the public in the dark?"
date: "2013-09-23"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211442343
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2744359%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Monday, 23 September 2013   

 Stopping the boats or just keeping the public in the  dark?    

 The Australian Greens have today slammed the Abbott Government for hiding the facts from the  Australian people and keeping the media in the dark.   

 "The Coalition government has shown contempt and pure arrogance today in denying public scrutiny  of how they plan to manage refugees," Greens immigration spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 "It seems their policy is more about ‘stopping the press releases’ than ‘stopping the boats’.   

 "Not releasing information even when boats are turned back and keeping the media locked out of  the detention centres seems more like Mr Abbott's plan is akin to the Emperor’s New Clothes.     

 "The Coalition's desperation to dump children and families on Nauru and Manus Island as fast as  possible is extremely dangerous and will lead to human suffering.     

 "The Greens will move to ban the removal of children to Manus and Nauru when Parliament returns  next month.    

 "It is irresponsible to deport vulnerable people to island prison camps without assessing their health  needs.     

 "How much money is this all costing the Australian taxpayer? When will Tony Abbott be upfront  about how much his new cruel and secret regime is costing?"    

 

 Media Contact: Amy Moran 0427 604 760   

 

 AMY MORAN  MEDIA OFFICER   

 OFFICE OF SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA 

 

 Level 7 / 147 Pirie St, Adelaide, SA 5000  TEL  +61 8 8227 0425   |   MOB  +61 416 403 811   |   FAX  +61 8 8227 0426     

 

 

 

