---
title: "Transcript of joint doorstop inteview: Brisbane: 8 August 2013: 50,000 illegal boat arrivals since Kevin Rudd abolished the proven measures of the Howard government; Labor cuts $122 million from Humanitarian Settlement Services; Kevin Rudd's PNG election fix; Coalition's 13,750 Refugee and Humanitarian programme intake; Labor's bridging visa community dumping policy for illegal boat arrivals; Labor's show business approach to politics"
date: "2013-08-08"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "50,000 illegal boat arrivals since Kevin Rudd abolished the proven measures of the Howard government"
  - "Labor cuts $122 million from Humanitarian Settlement Services"
  - "Kevin Rudd's PNG election fix"
  - "Coalition's 13,750 Refugee and Humanitarian programme intake"
  - "Labor's bridging visa community dumping policy for illegal boat arrivals"
  - "Labor's show business approach to politics"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398468
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2651920%22
---

 

 

 TRANSCRIPT  

 BRISBANE JOINT DOORSTOP   SCOTT MORRISON & TERESA GAMBARO  8 AUGUST 2013    

 E&OE……………………….………………………………………………………………… …………………………………………    

 Subjects: 50,000 illegal boat arrivals since Kevin Rudd abolished the proven measures of the  Howard government, Labor cuts $122 million from Humanitarian Settlement Services, Kevin  Rudd’s PNG election fix, Coalition’s 13,750 Refugee and Humanitarian programme intake,  Labor’s bridging visa community dumping policy for illegal boat arrivals, Labor’s show  business approach to politics    

 MORRISON:    

 I’m very pleased to be here today with my good friend and colleague Teresa Gambaro, not  only a great member for Brisbane but who does an astounding job as the Parliamentary  Secretary for Settlement Services, working within the Immigration portfolio for the  Coalition.  We’re here today at the scene of one of Labor’s crimes effectively in terms of  their community dumping policy with the bridging visa arrangement they introduced some  years ago where people are just dumped into the community because they can’t keep them in  detention centres anymore because they’re full.  Now I’ll ask Teresa to speak about that  because she exposed what was going on right behind us here some time ago and we’ve seen  this repeated around the country as Labor continues to just dump people out in the  community with very little forethought, without any real process, without consulting and  liaising with local police and local health services or any of the other forms of support that  are necessary to support people in the community and ensure the good nature of how our  communities are run.  But before I do that I just wanted to make a couple of other comments  about things that have been occurring in the last 24 hours.  I note yesterday that the Minister  for Immigration felt the need to go out there and start talking about confidential intelligence.   This was quite an extraordinary decision for the Minister to make.  Minister Bowen and I  may not have agreed a lot when it came to border protection but one of the protocols Minister  Bowen always used to observe when it came to these matters is he would never confirm or  otherwise address matters of intelligence and I think it is a fairly desperate act for Minister  Burke to be going out there verballing intelligence as a way to try and prop up his political  argument.  He knows full well that the Australian people are in no position to know if what  he’s telling them is true one way or the other and I think it’s important the Minister refrain  from using intelligence for political purposes in the middle of an election campaign.  So I’d  ask the Minister to reflect on that. I’m happy to debate him on the policies, in fact I was 

 happy to debate him here in Brisbane this morning on 4BC with Greg Cary but unfortunately  he wasn’t prepared to show up for the debate.    

 Now also on the issue of border protection we saw this morning that Dame Carol Kidu who  was one of the doyens of Papua New Guinea politics now retired from roles in government  and she said very plainly that rushed actions lead to terrible situations.  What she was  referring to was the PNG arrangement and her real, deep concerns about the implementation  of that policy and what it meant for social cohesion in Papua New Guinea.  This is something  we’ve always known was going to be a very real problem and Labor might want to make all  sorts of claims in terms of announcement effects of their big bluff but what really matters is  what happens three months from now, what happens six months from now and the Prime  Minister can only make assertions about these things but what we’re learning from those who  know Papua New Guinea and know it well is what the Prime Minister announced some  weeks ago has very real, serious implications for Papua New Guinea and how those issues  will play out there on the ground and that in turn can very much frustrate in a very serious  way the implementation of those policies.      

 Now on the issues we’re here today.  Last Friday it was announced that there was a $122  million cut to the Settlement Services budget.  That is a 25 percent cut to that very important  programme.  This decision was made in the context of the changes that were announced for  the border protection arrangements.  The reason for those cuts is because the Offshore  Humanitarian programme and the Refugee Programme, when people are settled in Australia,  the people who are now getting those visas are people who have come on boats and because  they’ve been on bridging visas, the government will no longer be extending the same suite of  settlement services to those people to integrate into our community.  So the $122 million cut  on settlement services is an admission by the government that those who will be getting the  permanent visas under the government’s programme are people who arrived in Australia  illegally by boat.      

 The government makes much of their commitment to increase the Refugee and Humanitarian  programme to 20,000 people but it’s frankly a con.  It’s a con playing on the good nature of  Australians who support an expanded programme.  There is a key difference between the  Coalition’s policies and the government’s policies when it comes to our Offshore  Humanitarian programme and it’s this.  Our programme completely quarantines the places  for those who come under that programme for those who come the right way.  Not one of the  13,750 Refugee and Humanitarian visas that a Coalition will provide will go to someone who  has arrived by boat.  The government cannot make the same claim.  The 20,000 places they  have could all be potentially taken up by people who have come by boat crowding out those  who have sought to come to Australia the right way and to flee some of the most horrendous  conditions you could possibly imagine.      

 It has always been the Coalition’s view that we want to extend that hand of compassion and  support to those that we are able to choose to come and to release them from terrible  situations in camps around the world.  The government’s policy is to give their visas to  people who come by boat and this humanitarian services funding cut shows exactly that.   They are able to say they are going to be able to cut the funding because the people they’re  going to give permanent visas too have already arrived here illegally by boat and have  already been living in the community in places like this behind us.  So the 20,000 figure from  the government is a con.  It’s not a 20,000 number of visas that will be going to people in  offshore camps.  There were 25,000 people who arrived illegally by boat last year and all of 

 those who are found to be refugees will be accessing their visas out of that pool.  Not one of  them will get a visa out of that pool from a Coalition Government.  We will make sure those  visas go to those who have come the right way and are in desperate need of our protection  and support.  Teresa.    

 GAMBARO:    

 Thank you, Scott.  It’s great to have you here in Milton.  It is absolutely devastating news that  was presented in the Economic Statement that $122 million will be cut from the  Humanitarian Settlement Services.  This is a programme that Australia has run well and that  we have been proud of and a programme that during the Howard years saw 155,000 refugees  come from offshore and it was a programme with integrity.  This just shows this current  government’s dump and forget policies and we saw a perfect example of this only a few  months ago behind us when 26 Afghani men were put into an office building with no cooking  facilities, no showering facilities.  What this cut will mean is that this government is setting  people up to fail, not to succeed.  It will mean cuts in English language, it will mean cuts in  employment services, and again this is a government that is in disarray, that is setting up  people to fail not to succeed.  And we have had some of the best settlement policies in the  world that are now falling away.  So, we are absolutely devastated that this has happened and  I, as someone who has worked in this area, both in the Howard Government and in both  governments in opposition am absolutely disgusted that this government has just a dump and  forget policy.    

 QUESTION:   

 Scott Morrison, there’s a report that Indonesian asylum seekers are asking now for their  money back so surely it’s a sign that the PNG solution is actually working?    

 MORRISON:    

 Well that’s what the Minister is saying.      

 QUESTION:   

 And are you saying it’s wrong?    

 MORRISON:   

 No, I’m saying the Minster is making that claim.  The Minister is citing intelligence which he  hasn’t defined.  What the real test of this measure will be is what happens three months from  now, what happens six months from now.  We’ve heard all this before, I remember after the  Malaysian people swap, Chris Bowen made all the same claims, at least he didn’t go around  verballing intelligence agencies, and what we saw is that whole scheme fell apart and the  problem went from bad to worse.  I’m not surprised that Minister Burke will make all sorts of  claims, he’ll read into the tea leaves of every single arrival but at the end of the day the thing  that Australians, I think, need to weigh up is on the other side of the election, what do you  think will happen if Kevin Rudd is returned when it comes to border protection policy?   Because their form is, we’ve been around this so many times, the big claim is made, the big  promises are given, but at the end of the day, more boats keep coming on the other side of  these failed measures.  50,000 people have now turned up since Kevin Rudd made the 

 decision to abolish the policies that worked.  If you want to know what the next term would  look like if Kevin Rudd was returned, look at his form.      

 QUESTION:   

 Teresa Gambaro, how relieved are you that Peter Beattie isn’t running against you in the  marginal seat of Brisbane where he used to be the state member?    

 GAMBARO:   

 Well, Peter Beattie is actually one of my constituents so it’s going to be very interesting to  see how he represents an electorate more than 50km’s away and I must say it’s going to be a  very interesting time too and I’m sure our candidate and our Member out there Bert Van  Manen will do a great job and he’s working hard for his constituents there.    

 MORRISON:   

 I think what we’re seeing here is more of the celebrity politics of the Labor Party.  Bert Van  Manen is a grassroots, solid, hard-working member who ran a business in that electorate with  his family.  And Labor’s campaign is all about showbiz and if the Prime Minister wants to  parachute people in in places like this to keep the celebrity wheels turning well that may be  his campaign strategy.  We’ve got a strong team of people on the ground, whether it’s Teresa  here or Bert Van Manen down on the coast, these are the people who make a real difference  for their communities and celebrities come and go in politics.    

 QUESTION:   

 But surely Scott Morrison, John Fahey was a former Premier of New South Wales, he was  also parachuted into a seat, are you saying John Fahey wasn’t a celebrity?    

 MORRISON:   

 That’s actually not true at all.    

 QUESTION:   

 Well John Fahey -     

 MORRISON:   

 He was from that community, he was representing the community he was the state member  for.   

 

 QUESTION:   

 But Peter Beattie won four elections, how can he be a celebrity if he’s won elections in his  own right?    

 MORRISON: 

 

 He spends a lot of time in the media and I think a lot of people know who he is and it’s the  Labor Party’s approach to parachute celebrities into places and that’s fine, that’s their  decision.  If they want to run a show business campaign, well they can do that.  We’re  running a campaign which is based on offering hope, reward and opportunity to Australians  with good, on the ground members.  What we see from the government’s show business  approach is it’s all lights, camera, action, that’s what we’ve seen from the PNG arrangement  when the government thinks the long term solution to their border protection mess that they  created, is to have a signing ceremony with lots of flags and cameras and leather satchels.   You need more than that, Prime Minister.  You need well thought-through policies, not rash  policies, not things done on the run, which all unravel on the other side of the election after  any initial announcement effect long passes.    

 QUESTION:   

 So being a former Premier makes you a celebrity now?    

 MORRISON:   

 I’ve already made my comment on that.      

 QUESTION:   

 So are you insulting the people of Queensland saying they voted in a celebrity four times?      

 MORRISON:  No, I’m not saying that. I’m not saying that at all.    

 QUESTION:   

 Well you were saying Peter Beattie was a celebrity, you just said it five minutes ago.    

 MORRISON:   

 I’m saying that the government has a show business approach to politics and I think that  bears this out.  Any other questions?    

 QUESTION:   

 Teresa Gambaro, how many other examples like the one here are you aware of in your  electorate?    

 GAMBARO:    

 Well I get local examples every day.  I was with a refugee migrant centre recently where a   member of the Hazara community came up to speak to me about his concern and his  community’s concern about the new bridging visa arrangements where people are being  dumped into the community as Scott was talking about and how the community are gathering  food parcels and clothing for them.  There are some genuine problems out there and you just  can’t put people in the community, dump them there, don’t give them the services.  What I’m 

 concerned about as someone who looks after settlement services and I mentioned to both of  the governments now as a Shadow Parl Sec is that we are setting up people, not in the right  way, the wrong way.  What these people should be getting if they have been accepted is that  they should be getting help with English lessons, they should be getting settlement services  that will help them contribute to the wonderful Australia that we have and will help them to  be successful in their settlement should they be accepted as residents.      

 QUESTION:   

 You say you get examples every day -      

 GAMBARO:   

 I get examples all the time.  We have settled -     

 QUESTION:    

 How many more examples like this are there?      

 MORRISON:   

 Well I can give you one from Parramatta - [inaudible]    

 GAMBARO:   

 Well the Red Cross for example, and they do a wonderful job.  The Red Cross told me that  sometimes they get a couple of days’ notice or a day’s notice to settle people.  Look, and the  stress and the strain - you’ve got settlement providers out there who have been turned into  real estate agents and they’re not there to be real estate agents, they’re there to provide  settlement services, English services and life skills services so you’ve got a crisis at the  moment.  You’ve got unaccompanied minors reaching up to the levels of about a thousand.   These are young boys that are put in shared housing.   And I’ve raised these before in the  media many, many times.  That concerns me, as a parent, when you have young men living in  a house having to look after themselves, they’re still going to school and in many cases the  management of them, the case management is very patchy in the least.      

 QUESTION:   

 Do you have a list of the -     

 QUESTION:   

 Can I just ask, sorry, just ask a question.  It’s a very tight Brisbane margin of 1.1 what sort of  fight does Teresa have on her hands [inaudible]?    

 MORRISON:   

 Teresa can speak for herself on this issue but the fighting qualities of Teresa Gambaro are  well known to the people of Brisbane and her family.  More generally,  her track record  precedes her.  That’s what this election is all about.  It’s about the form: the form of the 

 candidates, it’s about the form of the members, it’s about the form of the government.  I  mean, the government will say a lot of things between now and the election.  Kevin Rudd  could talk under water but what we know is their form.  50,000 people have turned up  illegally by boat since Kevin Rudd made that fateful decision.  That’s his decision, this is his  mess we’re now confronted with it.  The form of our candidates, the form of our members,  the form of Teresa Gambaro, the form of Bert Van Manen speaks for itself and I think people  can look at our form and know with some certainty what they would get on the other side of  an election if Team Abbott were elected.   Look at the alternative, you’ve got the one man  band of Kevin Rudd and you just spin the wheel to see what position he’s going to take on  issues on the other side of the election.  He’s had every point on the compass when it comes  to border protection in this country, that’s why he can’t be trusted to follow through on the  other side of an election.    

 QUESTION:   

 How high on the list of priorities do you think issues like this and border protection are for  the people in your electorate?    

 GAMBARO:   

 I think it’s an issue for all of us, I don’t think it’s -     

 QUESTION:   

 But how high on the list?    

 GAMBARO:   

 When I talk to people and I speak to people on a regular basis about border protection issues,  it’s a great concern.  But what keeps coming up time and time again is about the care of  people that are in our community.  It is of great concern, it’s a concern for all of us.  People  need to be set up to succeed not to fail.  And I make that point all the time, we need to  support people.  But we also have a great concern for the number of offshore places that have  not been accepted and that comes up.  It came up at a forum I had last night, someone got up  and asked me about - he was a refugee advocate - and asked me about our offshore intake.   And that is something that has been severely eroded and we are not able to, this government  has not been taking the numbers of offshore refugees.  I’ve been to those camps, I’ve been to  the Thai-Burma border and I’m sure you have too, Scott.  And I have seen those people  waiting patiently to come to Australia, putting in an application to the UNHCR and they  would make fantastic, fantastic residents of Australia.    

 MORRISON:   

 Excuse me, just before you finish asking these questions, just to follow that up.  43,000  people applied in 2011-12 for a visa in Australia, a protection visa under our Refugee and  Offshore Humanitarian programme.  Under this government, we’ve gone from 5,000 offshore  humanitarian visas granted each year down to just over 700.  That is the displacement effect  of the government’s failed border protection policies.  I mean, the reason we have such a  strong view about having a strong border protection policy is it saves lives and it ensures that  those who are waiting in camps around the world actually get the places.  I mean, if people 

 want to put the compassion metre on the success or otherwise of policies then what they need  to look at is 50,000 people turning up under Kevin Rudd’s decision apparently motivated by  compassion.  Over 1100 people dead, over 15,000 people or there abouts whose visas they  were hoping to get from places around the world denied because their visa went to someone  who came on a boat.  And you need to look behind us in places like this where people are  being dumped in the community with no care and no responsibility, and now the government  has started to do it with families as well.  That, on the compassion metre for Labor, on the  implication and impact of their policies, it is a big fail.      

 QUESTION:   

 Teresa Gambaro, three quarters of people in your very marginal seat cosmopolitan seat  support gay marriage.  Why won’t you declare a position in favour of gay marriage in line  with your constituents?      

 GAMBARO:   

 Well firstly when I was elected I said I would do a survey, which I did, and I have to correct  you on that, one per cent of my constituents replied to that survey and out of that one per cent  which was, you know a thousand or so people, 70 per cent supported gay marriage, so we’re  talking about one per cent.  Look, I will continue to engage with my community, I know that  it is a very heartfelt and a sincere issue for many of the members in my community that are in  same sex relationships but we went to an election with our policy, it is well known.  We are  going to election with this policy.  I have spoken to Tony Abbott about what happens in the  next parliament and what happens in the next parliament, should we go to a conscience vote,  will be a matter for the party room.    

 QUESTION:   

 But surely, Wyatt Roy in a more conservative seat is supporting gay marriage is [inaudible]  why can’t you show some guts on this issue?    

 GAMBARO:   

 Look can I just say to you, I represent a very diverse seat.  I have a large number of families,  I have suburban areas and I am taking soundings from all of my constituents.  It’s just not  made up of the inner city and can I tell you there are differing views, and I will continue to  take soundings.      

 QUESTION:   

 How scared are you -    

 QUESTION:   

 Can I just ask you, will the return of Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister be a help or a hindrance  to Teresa being elected?    

 MORRISON: 

 

 In the seat of Brisbane it’s about form.  It’s about record.  And Teresa’s always known it’s  always a tough contest in this seat and her fighting spirit has prevailed before and I’m very  confident it will prevail again.  Because of the form, because of her record, because people  know -     

 QUESTION:   

 Is that a yes or a no?    

 MORRISON:   

 Well I think the Kevin Rudd factor and the celebrity politics that he engages in I think pales  in comparison to the form of Teresa Gambaro.  People know Teresa, they know her form,  they know her record, they know her commitment, they know her honesty.  And we value  that as a colleague as well, she’s a tremendous member of Team Abbott because we are a  team, we are not a one man band.  You know what you will get with the Coalition because  you know our form.  On the other side of an election with Kevin Rudd at the helm, who  knows what you will get.  It’s an absolute lucky dip.      

 Thanks for your time.    

 ENDS    

 Media contact:           Julian Leembruggen 0419 494 667    

 

 

 

 Authorised and printed by Brian Loughnane, Cnr Blackall and Macquarie Sts BARTON ACT 2600 

 

 

