---
title: "Swearing-in of the new Coalition Government"
date: "2013-09-18"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211440708
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2734797%22
---

 1 

 www.pm.gov.au 

 

 

 

 

 

 PRIME MINISTER   

 

 

 SWEARING-IN OF THE NEW COALITION GOVERNMENT   

 Today, the Governor-General has sworn in the new Government.   

 Whilst it has also been a day of ceremony, today is a day of action.    

 It is the day where the Government begins the implementation of our policies and our plan to build a  stronger Australia.    

 To this end, and consistent with our election promises, I have today instructed the Department of Prime  Minister and Cabinet to ready the carbon tax repeal legislation which will be introduced into the parliament  on day one of the first parliamentary sitting week.    

 The Coalition could not be clearer: the carbon tax will be gone under a Coalition Government and it will be  our very first order of business, meaning Australian families will be better off by more than $550 a year in  2014-15, rising to around $900 a year in 2019-20.   

 The Treasurer, the Hon Joe Hockey MP, today reconfirmed the intention of the Coalition to close down the  Clean Energy Finance Corporation (CEFC).    

 He has instructed the Department of the Treasury to prepare the enabling legislation, and has written to the  chair of the CEFC to request the cooperation of its Board in suspending all further investments by the CEFC  from this point forward.   

 Today I have taken a series of steps to stop the boats and restore the integrity of Australia’s borders.   

 I have written to the Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, directing  him immediately to commence Operation Sovereign Borders and appointing him as the lead Minister  responsible for its implementation.    

 I also convened the National Security Committee of Cabinet for the first time, which approved the  appointment of Major General Angus Campbell, DSC AM, on promotion to Lieutenant General, as  commander of Operation Sovereign Borders. I asked the Australian Ambassador to Indonesia, HE Mr Greg  Moriarty, to return from Jakarta to brief NSC, underlining the Government’s commitment to work closely  with Indonesia to resolve this challenge.  

 From today, the Immigration Department will immediately cease granting Permanent Protection Visas to  illegal boat arrivals and will start the process of reintroducing Temporary Protection Visas, which will deny  permanent residency to those who have already arrived illegally by boat prior to the Papua New Guinea  resettlement arrangement. 

 2 

 www.pm.gov.au 

 

 Together these initial actions will send a strong message to people smugglers that their business model is  coming to an end.   

 I am determined to lead a calm, measured, steady and purposeful government that says what it means and  does what it says.    

 A government of no surprises and no excuses.   

 And a government that accepts that it will be judged more by its deeds than by its mere words.   

 My team will scrap the carbon tax, end the waste, stop the boats, get the budget under control, build the  roads of the 21st century and deliver the strong and dynamic economy that our country needs.    

 The incoming Coalition Government will restore strong, stable and accountable government to build a  stronger, more prosperous Australia.   

 

 18 September 2013    

