---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Parliament House, Canberra: 9 July 2013: asylum seeker policies; increased Indonesia-Australia co-operation on people smugglers and corruption; the latest Newspoll"
date: "2013-07-09"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "asylum seeker policies"
  - "increased Indonesia-Australia co-operation on people smugglers and corruption"
  - "the latest Newspoll"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396865
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2579135%22
---

 

 The Hon Tony Burke 

 Minister for Immigration 

 PRESS CONFERENCE  TUESDAY, 9 JULY 2013   

 

 TONY BURKE:                        Last night, on the 7:30 Report, once again  Tony  Abbott  decided  that  slogans  were  all   he  would  need  to  be  able  to  deal  with   what  is  a  very  significant  issue  across  our   region.  

 The stop the boats slogan, I think we had it  half  a  dozen  times  during  the  course  of   that  interview.  And  I  just  want  to  bring  a   few  moments  of  reality  back  to  this   because while Tony Abbott was wanting to  claim  that all  he  wanted  was  the  Howard   Government settings. 

 I think  we need to acknowledge that even   John Howard didn't keep the 2001 settings  in place by the time he got to 2007. In the  final  term  of  the  Howard  Government,  all   but  two  of  the  people  on  Nauru  were   brought  to  Australia,  even  though  John  

 Howard  had  previously  said  none  of  them   would ever step foot on Australian soil.  

                                                In  the  final  term  of  the  Howard  

 Government, 80 per cent of the people on  temporary  protection  visas  were  given   permanent visas even though John Howard  had  said  these  individuals  will  never  get   permanent  visas  in  Australia.  In  the  final   term of the Howard Government, granted,  yes,  many  fewer  boats  were  coming,  but   there  was no  attempt  to  turn  a single one  of  them  around.  And  the  reason  for  this   was  quite  simple,  the  international   situation had changed. People smugglers in  their  operations  had  changed,  and,  as  I've   always  said,  you  need  to  make  sure  that   Australia's immigration policy is tailored to  the needs of the nation.  

 If  anybody  actually  thinks  you  can  

 photocopy  the  rules  of  2001  and  more   than  a  decade  later  people  smugglers   haven't  found  a  way  around  them,  then   they are kidding themselves. But the reality  is,  Tony  Abbott  knows,  knows  that  it  doesn't  work  but  thinks  if  he  just  keeps   repeating  a  slogan  he'll  get  away  without   having to go to any level of detail.  

 The  game  changer  in  the  way  people   smugglers operate was really simple. Once  they worked out that Australia was not the 

 sort of country that would turn around and  leave  people  drowning  in  the  ocean,  they   knew  that  they  could  turn  any  

 circumstance into a safety at sea operation  and  we  in  turn  would  make  sure  that   people  didn't  drown.  From  that  moment,   the  Howard  Government  stopped  turning  boats  back.  From  that  moment,  turning   boats  back  was  a  policy  that  would  not   work  because  the  people  smugglers  had   found  a  way  around  it.  Now  that  doesn't   mean that we should ever have a situation  where  people  smugglers  get  to  choose   who is entitled to a visa and who is not in   Australia,  and  that's  why  we've  been   putting  people  on  planes,  wherever  we've   got  agreements  with  countries,  to  put   people  who  are  not  entitled  to  be  in   Australia on planes and get them out.  

                                                 This is a major issue throughout our region. 

 It is an issue throughout the world that has  grown  significantly,  in  particular  since  we   had  the  changed circumstances  in  2009  of  people  moving  away  from  Sri  Lanka,  from   Iraq and from Afghanistan. We need to be  willing  to  have  a  sensible  debate  of  a  real   policy issue. I've noticed the pitch and the  number  of  words  per  second  from  Scott   Morrison  increasing  at  a  rate  of  knots  in   the  last  couple  of  days.  What  I  think  we   need  to  do  is  to  be  able  to  have  a  calm  debate based on the facts.  

                                                There is no denying mistakes were made by 

 Labor in 2009 in not acting quickly enough.  Almost  identical  mistakes  were  made  by   the  Coalition  a  couple  of  years  later  when   they  refused  to  allow  the  implementation   of  the  Malaysia  Agreement.  Those  two   situations combined means we now have a  much  worse  challenge  than  we  would   otherwise  face.  We  need  to  acknowledge   those  facts  and  deal  with  them  sensibly   knowing that people smuggling operations  of  2013  are  not  a  photocopy  of  people   smuggling operations in 2001.  

 QUESTION:                            Minister,  acknowledging  that  need  for  

 flexibility  in  the  face  of  changed  global   circumstances,  are  there  any  situations   under  which  a  Labor  Government  would   look at turning boats back?  

 TONY  BURKE:                        I  have  not  found  a  single  one  where  the  

 safety  at  sea  issue  would  not  provide  a   complete  way  of  circumventing  it,  not   found  one.  And  let's  just  follow  through   the logic of the turn back policy. In the first  instance,  while  Tony  Abbott  used  to  say   they  were  going  to  tow  the  boats  back  to   Indonesia,  where  that  means  you  would   physically  get  them  there.  Because  of   Indonesia  saying  they  won't  allow  people   going  into  their  territory  and  the  Liberal   Party  now  acknowledging  they  wouldn't   tow them to Indonesia, they'd tow them to  the  edge  of  Indonesia's  territory.  What  

 does  that  mean?  It  means  that  instead  of   there  being,  if  you're  able  to  stop  there   from  being  a  safety  at  sea  issue,  and  by  that  I  mean  people  sabotaging  the  vessel   to bring it down. If you're able to stop that  happening  at  the  point  of  interception,  all   that  it  means  is  it  instead  happens  at  the   edge of Indonesia's territory.  

                                                 So you avoid it on day one, a day and a half 

 later,  you  say  okay,  this  is  where  you  are   now,  go  back  off  in  that  direction,  they   sabotage  the  vessel.  The  Liberal  Party   acknowledge we're not the sort of country  that  will  leave  people  drowning  in  the   ocean  and  people  then  board  the  

 Australian  vessel.  And  all  you  have  done,   all  that  has  been  achieved  is  we've  

 effectively  towed  people  around  in  circles   around the Indian Ocean. That is not a way  of  dealing  with  the  challenge.  Whereas,  if   you  have  people  who  you  able  to  have  an  agreement  to  fly  them  back  to  their   country  of  origin,  or  back  to  a  different   country,  then  you  have  a  circumstance   where  the  people  smugglers  are  not  in   charge,  where  you  have  a  circumstance   where  the  people  smugglers  are  not   actually  making  decisions  about  who  will   be eligible for Australia's different parts of  our immigration program.  

 QUESTION:                            Are you ruling it out as a never-ever?  

 TONY  BURKE:                        I  rule  out  anything  that  won't  work.  From   the  day  people  smugglers  discovered  that   if  you  turn  it  into  a  safety  at  sea  situation   then  you  could  effectively  find  a  loophole   in Australia's operations. From that day the  Howard  Government  stopped  doing  it.   From  that  day,  by  the  time  we  came  to   Government,  we  recognised  it  wasn't  able   to  be  done.  The  only  way  Tony  Abbott's   policy  would  work  is  if  people  smugglers   forget  everything  that  they've  known  for   the  last  10  years.  That's  what  he's  relying   on, or he's relying on the fact he'll be able  to do what he did last night and simply use  a slogan half a dozen times and hope that   that gets him off the hook.  

 QUESTION:                            Scott  Morrison  says  that  the  US  Coast  

 Guard  can  turn  boats  around.  Why  can't   the Australian navy? 

 TONY  BURKE:                        There  are  a  number  - and  I  am  getting  a  

 number  of  details  here,  I  won't  be  able  to   give  them  to  you  today,  but  there  are   some  significant  differences  with  what   we're  talking  about  with  that  Coast  Guard   operation.  I'm  waiting  for  some  verified  information,  I  don't  think  we  should  be   rushing  off  with  things  at  a  rate  of  knots   here  and  so  I  want  to  get  some  verified   information which I should have within the  next  couple  of  days.  At  that  point,  you   won't hold me back from making available  to you. 

 QUESTION:                            [Indistinct]  ...the  Malaysian  solution  being  

 introduced and maybe a refined version of  the Malaysian solution, would you consider  reintroducing  a  bill  if  Parliament  were  to   return  looking  again  at  some  form  of  the   Malaysian  solution  and  how  would  you   refine it?  

 TONY BURKE:                        The thing that you need to make sure of is  that - and  I  think  Bob  Carr's  article  on  the   weekend  defined  this  very  clearly  - you  need  to  make  sure  that  the  selection  of   who  is eligible  for  our  humanitarian   program  is  able  to  be  made  appropriately   by  Australian  authorities  in  conjunction   with the UNHCR using the proper methods  that  we  have.  That's  the  way  it  should   happen,  not  by  virtue  of  who  has  paid   money  to  a  people  smuggler.  Now  there   are - that has always, whenever you've had  a  large  number  of  international  

 movements,  been  something  that's  been   done  through  a  range  of  offshore  

 processes  as  part  of  that  entire  equation.   We  haven't  been  able  to  implement  the   whole  of  our  offshore  policy  because  we   were blocked with the Malaysia part of it.  

                                                 The  Howard  Government  was  able  to  

 implement the whole of its offshore policy  because  they  had  the  cooperation  of  the   Labor  Party  at  the  time. Back  after  people   were fleeing Vietnam, once again then you  had  an  offshore  processing  policy  which  

 was  able  to  do  it  and  make  sure  that   people  arrived  at  their  eventual  point  of   destination  safely,  and  it  was  able  to  be   done  in  an  orderly  manner.  Because the  Liberal Party and the National Party joined  with  the  Greens  in  this  Parliament,  we   have  a  situation  that  Australia  hasn't  had   to  deal  with  before  where  that  offshore   option  which  has  worked  during  these   peak  periods  before  was  not  made  

 available to the Government of Australia. I  think that's deeply irresponsible and I think  that both Tony Abbott  and Scott Morrison   should  reflect  very  deeply  on  the  

 consequences for Australia and for human  life  of  the  decisions  that  they  took  back   then.  

                                                 As  a  result,  we  have  a  bigger  challenge  

 now.  The  original  Malaysia  Agreement  is   the  sort  of  thing  that  would  need  to  be   part  of  a  response  but  it  would  now  need   to  be  more  comprehensive.  The  nature  of   what  that  agreement  turns  out  to  be  will   determine  whether  or  not  legislative   change  is  required.  But,  there  is  no  point   right  now  simply  putting  forward  a  

 proposal for 800 places.  

 QUESTION:                            But  will  you  address  the  problem  of  - the 

 main  sticking  point  between  the  Liberal   Party,  Greens  and  yourself  about  Malaysia  enshrining  into  law  human  rights  

 protections in this agreement? I mean, this  what the Houston panel called for as well.  

 TONY  BURKE:                        Can  I  say  with  this  in  terms  of  the  Liberal 

 Party's  position,  they  say  that  we  can't   send  people  to  Malaysia  because  they're   not signatories to the Refugee Convention,  but  they  then  say  you  can  take  a  boat  to   Indonesia  which  is  not  a  signatory  to  the   Refugee  Convention,  or  you  can  take  a   boat  to  Sri  Lanka  which  is  not  a  signatory   to  the  Refugee  Convention.  So,  I  don't   accept  for  a  moment  that  the  Liberal   Party's  position  is  anything  other  than   lowest  common  denominator  politics  on  a   genuinely  serious  issue.  They  were  not   willing  to  show  the  courage  that,  for   example,  Kim  Beazley  offered  to  John   Howard during a similar situation.  

                                                 Now,  you  know,  they  can  deal  with  that  

 with  their  own  consciences.  I'm  getting   briefings  on  the  different  ways  in  which  we've  advanced  some  of  those  

 recommendations  of  the  Houston  Report   with  respect  to  Malaysia.  But,  let's  face  it,   as  long  as  we  have  a  circumstance  where   the Liberal Party and the National Party are  willing to join up with the Greens to play a  political game, it's all relatively academic as  to  what  we're  able  to  negotiate  further   with  Malaysia  because  we  don't  have  the   permission under Australian law.  

 QUESTION:                            AM today  reported  on  the  case  of  an  11-

 year-old  boy  in  Pontville  Detention  Centre   in  Tasmania.  Do  you  know  how  long  he's   been in detention and if and when he'll be  released?  

 TONY BURKE:                        I have actually met with this boy during my  visit  to  Pontville  last  week.  The  situation   here  is  one  where,  in  the  ordinary  course   someone who is 11 years old, regardless of  how  long  he's  been  in  detention,  I  would   have  put  him  right  to  the  front  of  

 availability  for  community  places  and  that   was my first instinct. The challenge here is  he's  with  two  cousins  and  to  find 

 community  detention  for  three  people   takes longer than to find it for one, and I'm  reluctant to break up that family group.  

                                                 They're  at  the  moment  - I  had  a  look  at  

 where  they're  staying  in  Pontville,  they're  separate  to  everybody  else,  they've  got  a   little  setting  where  it's  bedrooms  for  the   three  of  them  and  I'm  not  pretending  it's   what  we  would  want  as  permanent   accommodation  but  right  now  I  want  to   wait until we can get a community place so  that  we  can  move  all  three  people  

 together.  I  think  that's  a  better  outcome   than  separating  the  11-year-old  from  the   only relatives that he currently has.  

 QUESTION:                            How old are his cousins?  

 TONY  BURKE:                        They're  older,  both  teenage,  but  they're   minors.  Everyone  in  Pontville  is  an  

 unaccompanied  minor,  not  accompanied   by adults. And in those circumstances - you  know,  I'm  dealing  with  two  situations,   neither  of  which  I  like.  And  the  judgment   call  that  I've  made  is  it  is  better  right  now  just  to  keep  them  together  as  a  family   group,  try  to  get  a  community  place  as   quickly  as  we  can  for  all  three  and  then   move them together. 

 QUESTION:                            Is he the youngest person in detention and  how long has he been detained for? 

 TONY BURKE:                        He is certainly the youngest in Pontville. He  hasn't  been  there  for  - I  don't  carry  the   dates  in  my  head.  We  could  get  them  for   you though. He has been there for a much  briefer  period  of  time  than  many  who  are   there.  Duration  of  time  is  not  the  only   issue there though. Because he's so young  I'm  very  keen  to  get  him  out  quickly  but  I   want  to  be  able  to  move  the  family  group   together. 

 QUESTION:                            Mr  Burke,  Jim  Molan  is  a  former  senior  

 military  officer  who  had  several  years  in   Jakarta.  He  is  very  firmly  of  the  view  that   you  could  put  a  lot  of  pressure  on  the   Indonesian Government to use its own law  enforcement facilities to actually deal with  people  smuggling  and  corruption  in  

 Indonesia, he believes that would slow the  whole process down quite radically. Do you  agree  with  that?  What  can  you  do  about   it? 

 TONY  BURKE:                        In  the  first  instance  there,  there  is,  from  

 my first week and a bit in the job, I've been  impressed by the level of cooperation that  we do have from Indonesia at the moment.  I'm  particularly  impressed  by  the  initiative   of  the  summit  called  by  President  

 Yudhyono.  They  are  dealing  with  a  

 challenge throughout the region as well. As  you'd  appreciate,  I'm  not  in  a  position  to   start listing everything that is happening in  a  cooperative  way  with  Indonesia.  

 Certainly,  increasing  and  building  on  that   cooperation  is  a  good  thing  to  do  and  I   agree  with  that  part  of  what  you  just   referred  to  but  I  think  there  may  be  an   underestimate  of  the  level  of  cooperation   we currently have. 

 QUESTION:                            Minister,  [indistinct]  Tony  Abbott's  

 promising  to  stop  the  boats,  so  Labor's   promising  to  do  what?  Is  it  promising  to   stall the boats? 

 TONY  BURKE:                        I'm  not  going  to  respond  to  a  criticism  of  

 an  obsession  with  slogans  by  offering  one   of my own, so what… 

 QUESTION:                            [Indistinct]  quite  surely  they  want  to  see  

 fewer boats. Can you promise that? 

 TONY BURKE:                        What I want to do is deal very specifically 

 with  what  is  a  massive  regional  issue,  and   the scale of it needs to be understood and  we  need  to  have  policies  that  deal  with   how  people  smugglers  now  operate.  If  it   was  the  case,  for  example,  that  the  

 Coalition  were  going  to  say  they  were   going to take the boats, they were going to  board  them,  prevent  them  from  being   sabotaged  and  take  them  all  the  way  to   Indonesia,  some  of  the  arguments  I  have   will  not  hold.  There'd  be  a  different   argument  about  the  relationship  with   Indonesia,  but  I  just  think  there  needs  to   be room in this for an honest conversation  about  the  scale  of  the  problem.  Yes,  be  in   no  doubt  I,  probably  more  than  many   people  in  this  building,  have  a  direct  and   personal  understanding  of  just  how bad  the current situation is.  

                                                 I  am  one  of  the  few  Members  of  

 Parliament who has to sit in my electorate  office  with  the  family  members  of  people   who have taken phone calls from relatives  about to board a boat and have then never  heard from them again, and have had to sit  with  them  and  let  them  know  that  the   Australian Government has no information  about whatever happened to that vessel. I  understand  the  importance  of  it.  I  am  

 dealing  with  the  policy  situation  in  a  very   serious  manner  and  part  of  that  has  been   the flybacks that I've already ordered. But I  am not going to reduce this to slogans and  I would encourage you all to not allow the  Opposition to do that either. 

 QUESTION:                            One of  the  tactics  the  people  smugglers  

 are  using  is  obviously  the  threat  of  self   harm. We saw that last week. What advice  do you have on possible prosecutions that  the Government can undertake on that? 

 TONY BURKE:                        In the first instance I've asked for advice on  the full range of issues I'm allowed to take  into account on an eventual visa decision. I  have  always  had  a  very  strong  view  and   I've  had  to  deal  with  this  in  a  number  of   portfolios,  but  I've  had  a  very  strong  view   that  self  harm  should  not  be  something   that  is  used  in  a  way  to  gain  people  

 political  traction  and  it  should  not  change   an  outcome.  Now,  it  is  also  the  case  that   you  get  some  people  where  instances  of   self  harm  have  nothing  to  do  with  a  

 strategic  gaining  of  the  system.  You  have   some  people  who  are  genuine  victims  of   torture and trauma, where self harm is in a  very,  very  different  context.  But  I  have   strong views about self harm being tried to  be used as an effective weapon.  

                                                I haven't  received  advice  from  the  

 department  on  the  full  range  of  ways  I'm   allowed  to  take  that  into  account,  but   nobody  should  be  in  any  doubt  about  the   convictions I hold on that. 

 QUESTION:                            Are  you  going  to  refer  the  matter  of  

 Sichem  Hawk  to  the  police?  And  also  on   the  flybacks  that  you  mentioned,  what   could  Australia  bring  to  the  negotiating   table  to  try  and  get  an  agreement  with   Iran,  who  won't  accept  their  nationals   unless they return voluntarily? 

 TONY  BURKE:                        On  the  second  issue.  The  problem  that  

 you've  described  I  agree  with  absolutely.   The  exact  process  on  that  particular  issue   is  something  that  I  haven't  got  to  at  this   point,  the  specific  flybacks  with  Iran.  My   priorities  in  the  first  week  have  been   getting  flybacks  going  where  I  can  and   making  sure  we're  locking  down  the   community  places  to  deal  with  some  child   welfare  issues,  so  in  my  first  week  they   have  been  the  major  issues.  The  specific   Iran  question  I'm  more  limited  on  at  the   moment. 

                                                The first half of that, Lauren? 

 QUESTION:                            Sichem  Hawk  - are  you  going  to  refer  the  

 instance to the police? 

 TONY  BURKE:                        My  understanding  is  the  police  have  

 already had conversations with the master  of  the  vessel.  They  would  be  unable  to   make  decision  about  charges  without  the   cooperation  of  the  master  of  the  vessel   and  following  those  conversations  they're   in  a  position  where  - the  advice  that  I've   received,  and  Jason  Clare will  be  better   able  to  report  on  this,  I  expect,  than  me.   But  at  this  point  it  looks  unlikely  that   charges will be able to be brought. And you  always  reliant  on  things  that  happens  on   the  high  seas  on  the  willingness  of  

 witnesses  to  come  forward.  

 Notwithstanding  that,  I'm  still  seeking  my   advice  from  my  department  as  to  the   extent to  which I'm allowed to  take  issues   of that type into account. 

 QUESTION:                            [Inaudible question] 

 TONY BURKE:                        That's correct. That's correct, but I suspect  the same issue of evidence would apply to  them. 

 QUESTION:                            [Inaudible question] 

 TONY  BURKE:                        Look,  the  clinical  nature  of  what  you  

 described  I  don't  argue  with.  I  think  there   is  no  doubt  there  is  an  expectation  from   the  Australian  people  that  we  are  putting   forward  a  leader  of  the  Labor  Party,  a   Prime Minister who, if elected, will serve a 

 full  term  and  that's  a  legitimate  

 expectation  from  the  Australian  people.   The reforms that were put forward will put  people  in  absolutely  no  doubt  that  if  we   are  successful  at  the  next  election  then   Kevin  Rudd  will  take  us  to  the  election   after that as well. 

 QUESTION:                            Won't it just entrench a popularity contest  within Labor? 

 TONY  BURKE:                        The  Australian  people  have  made  very  

 clear,  I  think,  that  instability  is  something,   and  leadership  change  is  something  that   they  don't  want  to  see  and  I've  got  to  say   from  my  perspective,  you've  had  media   conferences with me before where I've had  something  I  thought  was  tremendously   important and I've struggled to be able to -  at  least  I  get  my  opening  statement,  but   often in terms of questioning you don't get  further  than  that  because  there's  some   story  or  another  from  some  anonymous   identity  or  other  who's  spoken  to  one  of   the papers or one of the networks and out  of  that  there  is  a  leadership  story  that   you're all on, and I respect that. You make  your media judgment calls.  

                                                What this means is that that will no longer 

 be the case. Now, I think that makes a real  difference  not  only  for  making  sure  that   the  Australian  people  get  the  person  they  

 voted for, it also makes a real difference in  the  quality  of  the  conversation  we  have  with  each  other.  You  all  know  how  many   conversations  have  been  dominated  by   leadership  over  the  last  three  and  a  bit   years.  You  know,  I  would  have  loved  to   have  been  able  to  tell  you  so  much  more   about Murray Darling and different things I  was in charge of. This guarantees not only  the leadership issue being resolved, it also  guarantees  the  policy  conversation  with   the  Australian  people  is  one  we  get  to   have. 

 QUESTION:                            Just  on  policy  and  back  to  Malaysia  for  a  

 second,  and  your  wish  for  an  honest   discussion about the real dimension of the  problem.  If  800  is  no  longer  sufficient,   what  is?  Double  that?  Treble  that?  And   when  you  talked  about  Malaysia-plus,  are   there  discussions  going  on  with  other   countries  to  be  party  to  that  original  agreement to broaden the agreement? 

 TONY  BURKE:                        I  don't  have  a  magic  number  in  my  mind  

 right now. I certainly know the significance  is  you  need  to  make  sure  you  have  a   number that is proportionate to the size of  the  number  of  people  coming  in,  because   you  don't  want  to  have  a  situation  where   the  people  smugglers  see  a  total  figure   that they can game, fill it up and then they  know  to  everyone  from  then  on  they  can   get them in. So that's the principle behind 

 the number, but it needs to be tailored to   the  international  situation  at  any  time.  In   terms  of  the  discussions  internationally,   that's  what  the  summit's  about  - that’s  what  it’s  about.  Indonesia  have  taken  the   lead in saying we need to deal with this on  a regional basis all the way back to source  countries, and so as nations get involved in  that  summit  and  that  initiative  from   President  Yudhyono,  I  think  that  

 guarantees  that  it's  not  simply  us  on  a   bilateral  basis  talking  to  one  or  two   countries, we actually have all the different  countries  relevant  to  this  at  the  table   saying let's sort it out. 

 QUESTION:                            Minister Burke, on the subject of the level 

 of  cooperation  we're  getting  from  

 Indonesia,  after  the  Bali  bombings  the   Indonesians  with  some  help  from  our   Federal  Police  and  others,  clamped  down   on  terrorism  and  they  were  remarkably   successful.  It's  a  point  Jim  Molan  makes   [indistinct] the point he is making is if they  applied the same rigour to rounding up the  people smuggling operations, which clearly  involve  members  of  their  police  and   possibly their armed forces - they would be  people  they  have  access  to  - that  much   more  could  be  done  to  actually  solve  the   problem from their end at source. 

 TONY  BURKE:                        Well,  I  think  there's  no  doubt  that 

 Indonesia  agrees  that  more  needs  to  be  

 done. They're the nation that has taken the  lead  on  organising  this  summit.  On  the   specifics  of  Indonesian  cooperation  and   the  different  issues,  what  you've  asked   covers a number of different portfolios and  a number of different agencies and I'm not  going  to  be  able  to  take  it  further  than   what I've given you in the previous answer. 

 QUESTION:                            [Indistinct]  that  you're  seeking  to  give  

 more clarity on the no-advantage principle. 

 TONY BURKE:                        That's right. 

 QUESTION:                            Does  this  signify  a  softening  of  the  

 principle [indistinct]…? 

 TONY BURKE:                        I haven't retreated from the principle itself,  but  I've  seen  the  commentary  from  a   number  of  people  where  they've  said  can   you  get  down  in  a  very  simple  way  to   explaining  how  this  will  work?  Some   people have wanted to get that down to a  set  number  of  years,  other  people  have   wanted  it  to  get  down  to  what's  the   method  as  to  how  it's  done.  The  principle   itself  is  pretty  solid.  The  principle  is  to   make  sure  that  if  you  were  to  arrive  by   people  smuggler,  the  truth  is  you  will  get   settled no sooner than if you had waited in  a  camp.  And  as  a  principle,  that's  a  solid   one.  

                                                How  we  will  implement  and  how  we  will  

 operate  that  is  something  where  there's   some  material  that  has  come  back  to  me,   some  I've  sent  back  to  had  department.  I   don't  think  the  explanation  yet  is  tight   enough  but  it's  not  a  hardening or 

 softening  of  the  principle,  it  is  simply  to   provide a higher level of charity on it. 

 QUESTION:                            Minister Bourke, why has it taken nearly a 

 year  to  actually  define  the  policy  of  no   advantage? 

 TONY BURKE:                        Well, given that the processing only of the  people  who  are  affected  by  it  only  began   on Monday, I'm not particularly concerned  by  the  intervening  delay  and  the  

 commencement of that processing doesn't  mean that processing doesn't mean that it  will  be  a  fast process  before  it's  conclude   or  before  we  get  to  the  final  part  of  it   when  visas  are  issued.  Right  at  the  

 moment,  can  I  say,  in  what  is  a  portfolio   that understandably there's a high level of  interest on, having been in it for just more  than a week, I'm making sure as much as I  can that I can get across your questions as  to  what's  happening  now  and  what  needs   to be done now. In terms of the corporate  history  of  the  reasons  for  things  in  years   gone past.  

                                                 I'll get  to  it,  but  the  precise  issues  around  

 that  delay  - some  answers  on  that  have   been  given  to  Senate  Estimates  by  the   secretary  of  the  department  where  he's   referred  to  the  organisation  of  various   systems  but  I  think  there  was  a  bit  of  a   view  that  further explanation  of  the  no-advantage principle wasn't required. I have  a different view. I think further explanation  is required and that's why I'm driving it. 

 TONY  BURKE:                        Hasn't  the  delay  in  processing  created  a  

 gigantic  backlog  for  the department  that   will potentially take years to get through? 

 TONY  BURKE:                        Well,  let's  not  forget  there's  a  limited  

 number  of  places  available  each  year   anyway, and those places have been being  filled.  So  in  terms  of  how  long  it  takes  for  people  to  ultimately  get  visas,  the  delay   has  made,  from  what  I  can  tell,  no  

 difference  to  that  at  all  in  terms  of  the   actual  visa  processing  because  that's   organised  year  on  year.  So  given  that  that   was  the  situation,  to  make  sure  that   systems  were  put  in  place  to  deal  with  it   and  for  some  organisation  to  be  done   throughout  the  department  on  allocation   of  resources  and  to  start  it  in  an  orderly   fashion  is  something  that  make  no  

 difference  to  the  time  lines  on  the  issuing   of visas and appears to me to have been a  sensible administrative decision. 

 QUESTION:                            What  do  you  make  of  the  50-50  Newspoll 

 out today? 

 TONY BURKE:                        When Newspolls have been very, very bad  for us, I continued to tell you I was going to  talk  about  the  policy  and  not  about  the   polls. I think it's a bit rich for me to change  that view today. 

 QUESTION:                            You  mentioned  before  that  Labor  has  

 made some mistakes in immigration policy.  What are those mistakes? 

 TONY  BURKE:                        Effectively,  the  big  one  was  2009.  People   have  consistently  - and  some  people  have   written  that  we  suddenly  softened  

 immigration  policy  in  2007.  That's  wrong.   The  Howard  Government  started  that   before  we  came  to  office  and  we  

 continued  it.  2009  was  when  the  

 international situation changed because of  Sri Lanka, Iraq and Afghanistan, with larger  numbers  of  people  moving  around  the   world.  At  that  point  we  needed  to  reset   our policy and we did it. Eventually we did,  with the Malaysia Agreement.  

                                                 At  this  point,  the  Coalition  decided  that  it  

 would be politically clever to team up with  the  Greens  and  make  sure  that  the  boats   kept  coming.  That's  different  to  how   Oppositions  have  behaved  in  the  past.  I   think it has come at a significant cost. 

 QUESTION:                            Are  you  proposing  to  relaunch  your  

 immigration  policy  at  some  stage  before   the election, or are you just going to keep  fine-tuning it as you go? 

 TONY BURKE:                        I am not into big launches, I've got to say. 

 We're dealing with a serious problem and I  want to deal with it issue by issue.  

                                                Thank you.  

 

 

