---
title: "Transcript of doorstop: Sydney: 6 January 2013: Tasmanian bushfires; IVF; adverse security assessments; Royal Commission"
date: "2013-01-06"
creators:
  - "Roxon, Nicola"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
  - "Tasmanian bushfires"
  - "IVF"
  - "adverse security assessments"
  - "Royal Commission"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211387653
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2149787%22
---

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 THE HON NICOLA ROXON MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management 

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - SYDNEY - 6 JANUARY 2013 

 TOPICS: TASMANIAN BUSHFIRES, IVF, ADVERSE SECURITY  ASSESSMENTS, ROYAL COMMISSION  

 E&OE ONLY 

 NICOLA ROXON:    Thank you for coming this morning. My name's Nicola  Roxon and I'm the Attorney-General and the Minister for Emergency  Management. I wanted to make a few comments about the devastating fires that  have occurred in Tasmania over the last couple of days and to announce that we  have activated disaster recovery payments for those affected by the fires in  Tasmania.               

 What that means is that people living in the local government areas affected will  be able to claim up to $1000 per adult and $400 per child, and of course also  other emergency assistance will be made available for people who need money  for food, for temporary accommodation, and of course that comes on top of the  funding that Tasmania and the Commonwealth together will invest to rebuild  these communities in the recovery phase.               

 We do still have a number of risks across the country, and we know that in  Victoria, New South Wales, South Australia and Tasmania we're expecting hot  days to continue over the next week. Whilst we acknowledge the pain and  suffering of those affected in Tasmania, it is a very important reminder and a  sobering reminder to others across the country to make careful plans for this hot  weather.               

 Please plan carefully. Look at the forecasts if you are travelling. Talk with your  family and neighbours. Make sure you activate your bushfire plan now. We do  want to make sure that people are kept as safe as possible.   

 Can I also please put on record the Government's ongoing thanks to our  emergency services teams and particularly to our fire men and women across  the country. They're working in difficult circumstances, many of them are  volunteers. We can make their job just that little bit easier if we make sure that  we are properly prepared with our own plans and don't put ourselves at risk.               

 Of course also it is important, particularly for the elderly, to make sure that they  remain well hydrated during this hot weather. We do have people not affected  always by bushfires, but affected by the heat, and again this is something that  you can do - make sure if you have elderly family members that live on their own,  or neighbours that might be affected, that you contact them over this hot period  to make sure that they are in good health and well supported.               

 I'm happy to answer any questions that people might have.   

 QUESTION:  The emergency relief for those that have suffered in the Tasmanian  bushfires, is that means tested at all and how quickly can that become available?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Yes, look, the emergency relief that's provided, the  Government's activated today the disaster relief payments - $1000 per adult,  $400 per child - they are available from 12 noon today.               

 People can lodge an application online. They can talk to Centrelink personnel.  There is not a means testing of that funding but there is an eligibility requirement  - which is being affected by the fires, living in a particular local government area,  and, unfortunately, I think it's likely that there will be more areas affected, who  will become eligible as time goes on and those assessments are made.   

 QUESTION: How are they going to access it with, you know, no - I mean their  computers are gone for many people with - powerlines are down?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Look, there are arrangements to do this in person in Hobart  and Sorell directly with Centrelink and Human Services staff. There are  emergency relief facilities where people will be able to make claims. Any ordinary  Centrelink office will be able to assist, and of course many people go and stay  with family and friends and it can be done online or by telephone.               

 All of the details will be widely distributed but Centrelink and the Department of  Human Services are of course the first port of call for that.   

 QUESTION:  What about people who don't have permission…   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Just - I'll go over here first, then I'll come to you. Yep?   

 QUESTION:  How many people do you estimate will be eligible for payments  [indistinct]?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Look, we're not trying to estimate numbers at this stage. At  this stage the activation is for three local government areas. There probably are  two more that have been affected and assessments have been made and are  being made very quickly.               

 It's important for people to know that they've got that support if they need it. Of  course, we're very conscious that our emergency relief organisations do swing  into action very quickly here. We, I think, are lucky in Australia that our  government organisations and our not-for-profit organisations work very well  together with the emergency service personnel to provide support.               

 But this financial assistance is obviously something that people often need to be  able to cope with immediate problems. I wouldn't like to make any predictions  about how many people might be affected in the future; we're right in the middle  of summer and unfortunately we have some conditions, both with the predicted  temperatures with also in New South Wales some serious winds expected on  Tuesday - a day that's likely to bring some risk - that we've got a long way to go  in this summer and I'm not going to make any predictions about the numbers of  people that might be affected.   

 QUESTION:  A thousand dollars per adult wouldn't go very far though in terms of  providing accommodation, and, you know, covering emergency-type situations,  would it?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    So there's two different types of payment. We have an  arrangement with the States and Territories and emergency relief is provided  through the State government, and funding for up to eight weeks of  accommodation is provided. We jointly fund that - in this instance with Tasmania  - but it's administered by them, and I think it's just short of $9000, but this is an  immediate payment which can be made directly to individuals.               

 It can be used for any particular needs that they might have, and these two  things work hand in hand with investments that are also made to help rebuild the  community, whether it's a local school or the RSL club and others that are  affected.   

 So there's quite a mix of different supports available but today's announcement  is to let people know that that activation has been made, that they can go to  Centrelink for assistance, the Department of Human Services, and of course the  Tasmanian teams on the ground will be able to help people work through all of  those issues and particularly in Hobart and Sorell that information will be readily  available.   

 QUESTION:  What about for people who've lost their homes who may not have  had any insurance, what's the future hold for them? Does the government  provide assistance in those circumstances?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Well look I think when we still have fires not all contained,  we're getting ahead of ourselves a little bit. The first priority is to make sure that  people are safe, that they are provided with accommodation, that families are  able to be supported. 

 

 There are a range of different provisions that apply to help people get back on  their feet, and of course those who are insured - I've noticed the Insurance  Council put out already, yesterday, information about disaster support and how  quickly people can contact insurers and what they need to do, but I do stress, as  the Insurance Council themselves has, people should not go back into areas in  order to take photos or make claims, if they have not been told by the fire service  personnel that it's safe.               

 We must make sure people are not taking unnecessary risk and then the  Insurance Council has undertaken that all of its members will act very quickly to  then be able to support those who are insured. For those who aren't, there's  obviously a range of other complex issues, but I think we're getting a little ahead  of ourselves. In the coming days we'll obviously have lots of those issues to deal  with.               

 QUESTION:  How great do you think the damage might be to Tasmania's  economy? I mean, some of the areas affected are tourism hot spots, will the  Federal Government help Tasmania to rebuild?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Look, we'll work closely with the Tasmanian Government.  Assessments are being made about the impact. The Tasmanian Premier - acting  Premier - and Prime Minister have been talking.               

 I think it's important for us to make sure that we prioritise the controlling of the  fires and the support for individuals. There will be a lot of work that then needs to  be done to identify what recovery is needed, any damage to the economy.               

 We now, sadly, because of the history of the range of disasters we have  experienced over the last four or five years, do have a lot of experience in how to  work with state governments. It's an area where our government and the state  governments work very cooperatively, and we know that it's in the interests of the  community to do so.               

 QUESTION:  Just, will the Prime Minister be visiting Tasmania?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Look, you'll have to ask the Prime Minister, I haven't spoken  to her about her travel plans yet.   

 QUESTION:  I wanted to know what you think of claims published by Tony  Abbott today that he's not anti-abortion and he'd never - he - sorry, he never  opposed IVF or contraception. Do you believe him?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Well I think we've got Mr Abbott's public record to go on  here. We know what he said for many years as the health minister. We know he 

 is on record with his views of abortion, his views of RU-486, his views of older  women accessing IVF.               

 They're the sorts of comments that people will judge Mr Abbott on. If he's  changed his view, well then that's obviously a matter for him to prosecute and  see if he can convince the public that he has, but Mr Abbott's not a new figure on  the public field; he has many years of record to stand by, and those are the  things that people rightly will judge him on; and I think it's clear from these sorts  of stories that the Liberal Party research must be showing that Mr Abbott does  have a problem with women and that he's trying to do something about it.   

 QUESTION:  And what do you make of him putting Peta Credlin up? Do you  think it's a fairly cynical attempt to sway the female vote?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Well look I think that's a matter for the individuals  concerned. People in difficult circumstances and telling their personal stories, I  think, is a matter for them.   

 QUESTION:  Can I just ask you about another issue? There are protests today in  three states concerning this woman named Ranjini, who apparently is about to  give birth in detention. She was I understand given permanent residency and  then whisked away by ASIO and given an adverse security assessment - ASIO  assessment - I think on the basis that her form… late husband was a Tamil.               

 There are petitions today calling on you to change the law so that ASIO has to  give reasons for any such adverse assessments and give people the right of  appeal, would you consider that?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Well we've made significant changes to the oversight for  ASIO's work in providing an adverse security assessment. It's very serious if  ASIO does provide an adverse security assessment and we don't comment on  any individual cases, but it means that an assessment by our security  intelligence organisation has identified that a person may be of risk, and we need  to take seriously that it's our job to make sure that the community is safe.               

 We understand however that people feel - especially if someone given an  adverse security assessment is also entitled to protections under the Refugee  Convention - that people are not comfortable that there isn't some sort of  oversight provided.               

 We announced an independent review system, which has been introduced,  which is now up and running. Margaret Stone, a retired Federal Court judge, is  the independent reviewer; she now has matters being referred to her where she  will assess the information that ASIO is acting upon and provide advice back to  the government and to ASIO if there are any concerns.               

 It's a very difficult situation - I understand why people are agitated about it - but it  is important for people to remember that we do have an obligation as a  government to keep the country as safe as we can. Where these fairly rare  security assessments are made, it's very difficult for us to do anything other than  to act upon them.   

 QUESTION:  Is that a permanent solution, having an independent reviewer,  rather than changing the law so that people are told at least why they have had  an adverse assessment made?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Well it's a very important change. There hasn't been any  independent assessment provided previously. I think that this will give the  community a much higher level of confidence in the work that's being done that,  by its nature, is usually not provided to the public; security work is obviously  something that we can't have extensive public and detailed debate on.               

 But we responded to the concerns that were raised by establishing this new  review process, and I'm very confident that Margaret Stone, having written to all  of the people who are in this situation, provided the details, will now work her  way through any of those cases where people are asking for a review, and I  expect that a number of people will do that.   

 QUESTION:  Do you know how many cases she's looking at, at the moment?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    No, look, I'm not at liberty to discuss that. There's around  about 50 or 60 people in this category, some will ask for reviews, others won't. I  would expect over the course of time that most people would like that review to  be undertaken.   

 QUESTION:  But you won't contemplate - just if I could finish, sorry - you won't  contemplate a change to the law?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Well I think that this is a very significant change. It hasn't yet  been bedded down. Margaret Stone has been in the job for less than two  months. I think she should be given an opportunity to do her work.               

 If there is some debate in the future about whether that now needs to then be  backed up by legislative change, that's something that we will consider in the  future; but this is a very important step, and I think that she should be given the  opportunity to do her work first.   

 QUESTION:  Do you expect the terms of reference for the royal commission to  be released any time soon, have you made progress on this?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Yes, I do. We'll be able to update you fairly shortly about  that. 

 

 QUESTION:  In coming weeks, or?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    We'll be able to update you fairly shortly. We've made a  commitment to prioritise this work. It's obviously very important that the terms of  reference are right and that the commissioners who are appointed are people  who can do this important work, and we'll be able to update you shortly.   

 QUESTION:  Has the search for commissioners begun?   

 NICOLA ROXON:    Yes, it has.               

 Okay, thanks very much.   

 

 Ends.   

 For all media inquiries please contact the Attorney-General’s office on 0409 945 476 

 

 

 

 

