---
title: "Statement from Rob Oakeshott: Thankyou and goodbye"
date: "2013-06-26"
creators:
  - "Oakeshott, Rob"
source: "Office of OAKESHOTT, ROB, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396297
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2548216%22
---

 

 

 STATEMENT 

 26 June 2013 

 THANK YOU AND GOODBYE 

 Today I confirm I will not re-nominate to represent the electorate of Lyne in the 44th  Parliament. 

 This decision follows 17 years in public life, six elections, five years in the federal parliament,  and a lot of work on a lot of issues throughout that time. (see attached list) 

 The demands on an Independent MP in a regional seat are very high.  It is for this reason  that I cannot bring myself to commit to the coming three years.   

 It is out of respect for my community, for the role of Members of Parliament, and the  commitment and time required to do the job, that I make today’s announcement. 

 I am looking forward to new challenges in life outside of the parliament, both in work and  with my young family. 

 Thank you to the many people on the Mid-North Coast who have supported me over the  past 17 years, and to those from the Mid-North Coast and further afield who provided words  of encouragement and support throughout the past three years. Your support has been  important and has helped build a region and a nation that will be stronger for our collective  efforts. 

 Sincere thanks also go to my staff, who have worked tremendously hard on behalf of our  local communities, our region and our nation. 

 As a local MP, I will continue to serve the community of Lyne to the dissolution of the 43rd  Parliament and confirm the Port Macquarie electorate office will remain open for business  until a handover to a new Member of Parliament post September 14. 

 Three years ago, a supply and confidence agreement was reached to allow the  commissioning of a Prime Minister and for a Parliament to start. 

 I am pleased we have reached the full three years, supply has been delivered, and  confidence in the Parliament has also been delivered.  The fact that we are now at the  second last sitting day of a full three-year term is proof of this. 

 I am pleased $10 billion has been invested in Regional Australia and $1.2 billion has been  invested in the Lyne electorate.  This investment is much more than ‘trinkets and baubles’  and I would welcome the chance to introduce critics to the real people whose lives have  improved because of this much-needed funding. 

 

 

 Finally, amongst the 585 pieces of legislation passed by this Parliament, 87 per cent of  which was bipartisan, there were four major items agreed at the formation of this  Parliament: 

 1. An Emissions Trading Scheme - delivered; 

 2. Deep Fibre Infrastructure for Australia via the National Broadband Network - being  delivered; 

 3. Equity in Education (secondary and tertiary) - Tertiary (Bradley) - delivered; 

 Secondary (Gonski) - being delivered;  

 4. Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Peoples Recognition in the Constitution - part   delivered.  Bipartisan legislation has passed to deal with this issue in the next two  years. 

 As well, eight Private Members Bills passed. The two I sponsored were:  

 1. The Auditor-General Amendment Bill 2011 (‘follow the money trail’ laws); and 

 2. Migration Legislation Amendment (The Bali Process) Bill 2012 (passed House of  Representatives and blocked in the Senate.) 

 I am obviously disappointed this Parliament could not resolve the politics of refugee policy  that continues to dress itself as border security, but I did what I could to try to resolve it. 

 On this, and many other issues, it is over to others. 

 

 ENDS       

 Media contact: Sharon Fuller - 0429 787320 

