---
title: "Abbott threatens regional cooperation"
date: "2013-04-23"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211393889
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2398325%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP    

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 TUESDAY, 23 APRIL 2013    

 ABBOTT THREATENS REGIONAL COOPERATION    

 Tony Abbott’s turnback policy on boats is not only unworkable, it is now threatening regional  cooperation on the global challenge of people smuggling. 

 Mr Abbott continues to claim a Liberal Government would turn back boats, no matter how  dangerous the conditions or whether our regional partners, including Indonesia, would accept the  turnbacks. 

 Last night, a senior member of Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono’s Government said  Mr Abbott’s comments were a threat to continuing regional cooperation. 

 Mahfudz Siddiq, the head of Indonesia's parliamentary commission for foreign affairs, told AAP that: 

 "This kind of opinion disrespects the talks we have already had which have been very productive.  With wrong perception, even Indonesia could pull out from these cooperative agreements regarding  people smuggling.” 

 Australia cannot tackle people smugglers alone. In cooperation with our neighbours, including  Indonesia, Sri Lanka and Malaysia, thousands of people have been stopped from making the  dangerous voyage to Australia. 

 It’s time the Liberals and the Greens Party realised that regional cooperation is key to tackling  people smuggling. 

 Instead of empty and unrealistic promises, both parties should commit to all the recommendations  of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers. 

 It’s time to listen to the experts, not the focus groups. 

 Media Adviser: Maria Hawthorne 0407 015 986 

 

