---
title: "Labor's water taxi service now stopping at Darwin"
date: "2013-05-20"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211394375
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719404%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LABOR’S WATER TAXI SERVICE NOW  STOPPING AT DARWIN May 20, 2013

 The 80 people on board the latest illegal boat will be transferred directly to Darwin as Labor’s taxpayer funded water taxi  service for illegal boats expands, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “With a record population on Christmas Island that is above even the level prior to the 2011 riots, Labor’s failed border  protection policies have overwhelmed the capacity of the detention centre. As a result more boats are being diverted to Darwin under Labor’s expanded water taxi service for people smugglers,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Passengers on at least six boats over the last two weeks have been taken directly to Darwin including a boat that made it all the way to the mainland before Labor had passed its excision bill. 

 “The  longer  Labor  remains  in  office  the  bigger  the  consequences  of  their  border  failure.  More  than  23,000  people  are currently  in  the  immigration  system  having  arrived  by  boat  including  in  detention  centres  across  the  country  which  are either at or near capacity.

 “As the border chaos grows under Julia Gillard, the cost grows with it, a cost that last week’s budget revealed had blown  out by more than $10 billion since Labor came to office and abolished the proven measures of the Howard Government that had stopped the boats.

 “Australia cannot afford another three years of Labor’s failure on our borders,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr  Keenan  said:  “The  latest  boat  arrival,  carrying  80  people,  has  been  intercepted  just  off  the  mainland  with  all passengers to be transferred directly to Darwin for processing.

 “Once  again  Labor  proves  that  they  do  not  have  the  resolve  to  implement  a  strong  offshore  processing  system  and instead continue to transfer people to the mainland because they cannot stem the flow of illegal boat arrivals.

 “Border Protection Command are tirelessly trying to keep up with the ever increasing rate of boat arrivals, despite being understaffed and under funded by the Gillard Government.

 “In order to shut down people smuggling you require a government that has the will and the policies to uphold a robust system of border protection - Labor has proved time and time again that they do not,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 LABOR’S WATER TAXI SERVICE NOW STOPPING AT DARWIN > Michael Ke...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

