---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Adelaide: 17 August 2013: car industry support; Coalition cuts; PNG; debates; Polls"
date: "2013-08-17"
creators:
  - "Carr, Kim"
source: "MINISTER FOR INNOVATION, INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESEARCH"
subjects:
  - "car industry support"
  - "Coalition cuts"
  - "PNG"
  - "debates"
  - "Polls"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399039
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2672230%22
---

 

 

 

 Campaign Transcript    

 TRANSCRIPT OF PRIME MINISTER  PRESS CONFERENCE  ADELAIDE  17 AUGUST 2013 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________ 

 

 Subjects: Car industry support; Coalition cuts; PNG; Debates; Polls.   _____________________________________________________________  

 

 PRIME MINISTER: As I said before, it's great to be back in South Australia and it's  always good to be here in Adelaide with the Premier and I acknowledge the strong  work he's doing here in South Australia to support the car industry. Also with South  Australia's favourite daughter, Senator Penny Wong… 

 

 WONG: I don't know about favourite.    

 PRIME MINISTER: Well, South Australia's significant daughter, Penny Wong,  Minister of Finance, a good friend and a huge, huge voice for South Australia in the  Australian Government.     

 Kim Carr is here as the Industry Minister, a man whose passion for manufacturing  and the auto industry is known and not challenged by anybody in the room, and our  friends from the union are here from various branches and I think Nick Champion's  around somewhere. There you go.    

 Anonymous: Up the back.    

 PRIME MINISTER: You're being non-prominent. There he is it up the back.     

 The Government that I lead is committed to building Australia's future.    

 Mr Abbott is committed to cutting things down. Cut, cut and cut to the bone. And it  doesn't matter what you look at.    

 Today we're here to talk about the car industry. I've laid our plans out for everyone to  see, in a very transparent way. This is what we'll do, this is why we're doing it and we  believe it's important to support 50,000 jobs in the car industry across Australia.  

 

 Mr Abbott's response is to cut, cut and cut. Let's be very blunt here. Mr Abbott's  position is this - he over the course of the period between now and 2020 would be  cutting, I think I'm right to say this, Kim, $1.2 billion. 

 

 CARR: That's right.    

 PRIME MINISTER: $1.2 billion over the course of the next 7 years from Australian  car industry workers. 50,000 families across Australia. I regard their jobs as  important. I regard their families as being important. And I don't think it's right for Mr  Abbott just to wave them away as if ordinary Australians don't matter. Ordinary  Australians do matter. Ordinary Australians are the heart and soul of the country and  community we've built these last several hundred years.  

 

 That's where we stand on the car industry.     

 I often hear the criticism from some about the car industry, by the way, well isn't this  protectionism? Well here's a couple of figures for you.  In the United States the  protection arrangements and the car subsidy arrangements and the support  arrangements for the motor vehicle industry there runs out at about $96 per head.  Federal Republic of Germany, the folks who manufacture BMW, Audi, all those sort  of cars, $90 a head. The Australian Government in Australia support per head for the  car industry of Australia, $18 per head - 96, 90, 18 - so to all members of the  Australian Anti-car Industry Flat Earth Society, can I just say read some numbers,  work it out. Every country in the world which supports a car industry - the 13  countries which was mentioned before who can design, construct and complete a  car from go to whoa - every one of those countries out there are supporting the car  industry in their countries. I believe in industry policy. I believe in manufacturing  policy.  And that's why I make no apology at all to anybody out there, any right-wing  economist, about what we're doing to support the future of Australian manufacturing  in general and the car industry in particular.    

 I can see no greater, frankly, contrast. We are building Australia's car industry for the  future. Mr Abbott is cutting it to pieces by pulling out $1.2 billion from the industry  and its workers and their jobs when they need it most.     

 Of course it's a broader story than that. When I look here in the great State of South  Australia, we in partnership with the South Australian Government have been  building the State up.  What I see from Mr Abbott is a recipe for cutting the State  down as part of his $70 billion worth of cuts to jobs, health and education.    

 Just a couple of examples, I've mentioned the fact there's over 5,000 auto workers  here in South Australia. We, the Australian Government, believe in building an  industry to support them for the future. Mr Abbott says no more support - goodbye to  5,000 auto workers in this State. Mr Abbott, in effect, is saying goodbye to the car  industry period across Australia and in this State. But it doesn't stop there.     

 We, the Australian Government, are building the schools of the future through the  Better Schools Plan. Mr Abbott is cutting what we would provide to those schools in  the future. Cutting effectively hundreds of millions of dollars from each and every  school in South Australia. So that schools in South Australia will be $610,000 a year  worse off under him than under what we would provide through the Better Schools  Plan.     

 If you're talking about families under pressure, the School Kids Bonus means  something. Mums and Dads here get the School Kids Bonus, I think they do. Primary 

 school kids - $410, secondary school kids - $820 a year. It helps with uniforms and  textbooks and all that sort of stuff. Well, 97,000 families in South Australia are  supported by the School Kids Bonus. What's Mr Abbott say to those 97,000 families?  I don't care, it's gone and it's gone tomorrow. Which means that each one of those  working families is $15,000 a year - $15,000 worse off over the course of those  payments through the kids' education. That's a big difference.  

 

 We're building up the National Broadband Network here in South Australia. There  are already around 96,000 homes and businesses in and around South Australia  where the NBN fibre network is already under construction or complete. What's Mr  Abbott's cut? He will cut the National Broadband Network, deny fibre to the home  and premises for those Australians in this part of our country who don't have it yet,  and on top of that charge you up to $3,000 to connect it privately to your home. And  what he's saying to you is - you only get to rely upon a clapped out copper system  rather than one which is fibre optic and purely 21st century.     

 So what we're seeing is us building up jobs; us building up our skills; us building up  our families through the School Kids Bonus; us building up the NBN that South  Australia needs for the future and each one of those areas from Mr Abbott you have  cut, cut, cut and cut.     

 Then we get to health and hospitals. You know in South Australia, I'm proud of the  fact that since we've been elected $6.34 billion invested by us in the health and  hospitals infrastructure of South Australia. Wherever I go I see stuff that we're  investing in - new centres to provide basic healthcare, including Medicare Locals  right across South Australia. What does Mr Abbott say for South Australia's health  and hospitals for the future? He says I'm going to cut Medicare Local containing  thousands of frontline workers across Australia. In South Australia what he's saying  is he will cut 5 Medicare Local centres and sack 300 frontline healthcare workers.  We are building the health and hospital system for South Australia's future. What  he's doing is just cutting it to shreds.     

 So friends, what I would say, whether it's across the State of South Australia or the  individual stories in Wakefield, in Hindmarsh, in Tony Zappia's electorate, right  across the State, elsewhere in the seat of Adelaide, the story's the same right down  to the local level.     

 The final point I'll just give you one example on is this. In the seat of Wakefield itself,  which is very close by to where we are here. How many families now depend on that  cheque each year for their kids through the School Kids Bonus? I'll tell you how  many. There are 13,200 families here in this area of Wakefield, represented by Nick  Champion, who are currently being supported by the School Kids Bonus. What's Mr  Abbott saying to all those families in Wakefield and a similar number in Hindmarsh  and a similar number in Tony Zappia's electorate and a similar number in Kate Ellis'  electorate and a similar number in other places here in Adelaide and beyond is he  doesn't give a damn, that's gone, that's the end. I think that's fundamental.     

 What I'm saying in conclusion is - we build up -  they cut, they cut, they cut down and  they cut it to pieces. Jobs for the auto industry, health and hospital services, on top  of that what we're doing in schools, the NBN and most critically in support for local  families under financial pressure. 

 

 I'm pleased to be back in South Australia. It's a fantastic State. Therese arrives this  afternoon. I think we're going to a game between Port and the Gold Coast Suns -  looking forward to that. And we're going to be here overnight and tomorrow as well  and she'll be tramping over some of the old haunts that she knows from when she  was a kid. Over to you folks.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Tony Abbott says he's not going to be running after the car  industry with a blank cheque, isn't that what you're doing?    

 PRIME MINISTER: I have been absolutely explicit about our support for the car  industry, its workers and the families who depend upon it and the amounts involved.   Isn't it high time Mr Abbott answered this question - how much of his $70 billion  worth of cuts come from cuts to the car industry and how many jobs is he willing to  throw on the fire as a result? 

 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott said your policy is undignified, humiliating and panicky  policy on the run, what would you say to that?    

 PRIME MINISTER: I believe in the dignity of each worker that I've met here today. I  believe in the dignity of each working family I've met here today. I believe in the  dignity of their work. I believe in the pride of people like Sean Matthews here across  generations about making stuff with your hands. I believe that that's what dignity is  about. And frankly those comments show how out of touch Mr Abbott is with what  working Australians feel about their future, want for their kids, and what we as  patriotic Australians want for the future of this industry. 

 

 JOURNALIST: What kind of certainty are you giving these workers here when this  money won't be spent until 2016 at the absolute earliest and it's outside any of the  Budget estimates and I wonder if the Premier might answer a question as well about  the FBT changes and what damage it has done in South Australia and whether this  makes up for it? 

 

 PRIME MINISTER: The bottom line is this - you ask a question about certainty for  the future and what practical benefit it is - well I'm sure the Industry Minister, when  he's been sitting down and talking to the company, the companies would say that  they think this is a pretty good co-investment for the future.  

 

 Let's be very blunt. What do car industries require across the world, whether they're  in Germany or whether in the United States? They require long-term investment  certainty. Investing in one of these car manufacturing plants is a massive investment.  I've seen them around the world. These are massive investments. What do they  want? A predictable, stable investment partner. So what they've had from us under  the New Car Plan which announced in 2008, operational between 2010 to 2020 is a  $5.4 billion co-investment. And what we've said is that for the last two years of that,  last three to four years of that, we'll add a further half a billion.  We've also said that  we’ll continue running it beyond 2020 as well at the level of $300 million per year.  These are all very, very important measures, together with others, to provide long-term certainty. So you ask what's essential, that's what's essential, long-term  certainty.    

 JOURNALIST: Given that the Budget isn't particularly stable…    

 PRIME MINISTER: You've just asked a question. I think I've answered exactly why  are we doing it this way.    

 JOURNALIST: You haven't answered how this will be paid for.    

 PRIME MINISTER: Well it lies beyond the forward estimates period.    

 JOURNALIST: Exactly.    

 PRIME MINISTER: So therefore you believe that no long-term commitments to a  plan which goes beyond the forward estimates period is important. The New Car  Plan was announced in 2008 extending to 2020. And furthermore as the Industry  Minister reminds me, legislation will cover it. So we are fair dinkum about this. We're 

 fair dinkum with the industry and we think it's the right way to go -     

 PREMIER WEATHERILL: The contribution that the workers made just this week, the  contribution that the SA Government has made and the contribution that the Federal  Government has announced today will in my view give us the best chance of  securing a future for Holdens.    

 We've been involved in detailed negotiations over a number of months. We know  exactly what is going to be necessary to secure a future for Holdens and I believe we  now have a package of measures today that will secure a future for Holdens in SA.  And look, there's only 2 places you can be today - you can be standing with car  workers or you can be standing against them. And we're standing here with car  workers.    

 JOURNALIST: You didn't like the FBT decision, did you, Jay?    

 PRIME MINISTER: Can I have this question, we'll come back to that one.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, what do you think of the Coalition's appointment of these  so-called 3 angels and about their costings? Also is it true the Labor Party has spent  money on advertising in Hong Kong and also polls out show that - polls are not very  pleasant at the moment for Labor, what's your response to the bad ones in Sydney? 

 

 PRIME MINISTER: Let’s just say this, on $70 billion worth of cuts to jobs, health and  education, Mr Abbott's spokesmen have already said that they have costed  everything. Therefore the appointment of a 3-person panel we all know here is a  smoke screen to provide him with a further opportunity to delay telling the Australian  people the absolute truth of where precisely the cuts will fall. Remember Mr Robb,  and I think Mr Hockey, have said the costings work is done. If the costings work is  done, does it not follow that it should be made public right now.  

 

 So my challenge to Mr Abbott today very explicitly is, if you have done your costings  as your spokesmen say you have done, give us one reason why you cannot release  it today and the budget bottom line. That's the core question.     

 You and I understand the reason why he's reluctant to, which is if he became plain  with the Australian people about where his cuts would fall, all $70 billion worth, then  people would be very, very worried about voting for him. So that's why this is a  hidden agenda.  

 

 On the other question you raise about billboards, I've got no idea where the National  Secretary of the Labor Party has put up billboards. Can I say that when it comes to  voters onshore and offshore and polling stations, whether they be in London, Hong  Kong or Ulan Bator, frankly these are all Australians, Australian citizens and our job  is to go out there and seek their support at every polling booth they attend. We've got  about a million Australians out of the country at any given time.    

 And as for the other part of your question, as I said before, Mr Abbott has - Mr  Abbott's written his victory speech. I think that's a little bit arrogant. I've been in many  a tough fight before and for this election I intend to fight very hard, I've come back  against the odds in the past, I intend to fight hard in this election to make sure that  we protect these good people from $70 billion worth of cuts which Mr Abbott keeps  the details on in his back pocket.    

 JOURNALIST: PM, the Papua New Guinea, your counterpart in Papua New Guinea  has expressed some concerns with the PNG plan. He is saying that he won't be  committed to 2 elements of it in an interview he's given this weekend. Have you rung  him to discuss his concerns and can you guarantee what you announced with him  will be implemented exactly as you announced it? 

 

 PRIME MINISTER: One, absolutely. Two, our policy which is that no-one sent by a  people smuggler to Australia on a boat without a visa will be settled in this country.  Three, that is supported by both the governments of Australia and Papua New  Guinea. Four, I draw your relevant attention to the provision of the regional  resettlement arrangement which says persons found to be refugees will be resettled  in PNG and other participating regional States including Pacific Island States. That's  what we agreed to; that's what we support now; that support continues to the present  and that has been confirmed as late as today. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on Mr O'Neill's comments, I think he's told the  Herald that it is possible that some of these people might come back to Australia,  that Australia would be asked to share its percentage of the burden, is that possible?    

 PRIME MINISTER: Our policy is clear cut. Nobody coming to Australia by boat  supported by people smugglers, without a visa, will be settled in this country.     

 Two, all other details are contained in the regional resettlement agreement on which  we spent more than a month negotiating the detail with the Government of Papua  New Guinea.     

 Three, the Government of Papua New Guinea has confirmed that again today.     

 Next question.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you concerned at specific polling that shows your Treasurer  Chris Bowen is in trouble in his own seat in McMahon?    

 PRIME MINISTER: You know something, we're in the fight of our lives and you know  something, we're from a proud movement which believes in defending our values,  defending our policies, defending our family's futures.  

 

 As I've said before, we've all faced challenges in the past.  I've faced quite a few. I've  come back against the odds in the past. I intend and I'm determined to do so again.     

 Let me add one more thing. I remember earlier Liberal leaders who thought they all  they had it in the bag. There's a bloke I think whose name was John Hewson. I just  draw your attention to that. Reflect on it.     

 When they have in Liberal campaign headquarters photographs of Mr Abbott on the  wall saying Australia's 28th prime minister, what I know is that the Australian people  have an instinctive reaction against arrogance. So we know we're in a fight.  We are  going to fight our absolute hardest. I believe that we will come back against the odds.  I believe we can and will prevail.    

 JOURNALIST: I understand you've had a change of heart with the Sky News people  forum. Can you explain if you will participate and -    

 PRIME MINISTER: As I've said consistently, we've had a challenge out with Mr  Abbott to debate on free-to-air television - 7, 9, 10, ABC. Do you know why?  Because that's what every Australian has universal access to.  

 

 The reservations about Sky is that it's cable TV and frankly that's a very, very narrow  group of Australians who it covers, with all due deference to our friends from Sky. I'm  all for people running their own TV networks, their own cable stations, but I’m talking  about universal access to all Australians.     

 I'm also aware that there has been a combined proposal by 9, 7 and 10 to the  Leader of the Opposition to engage in a debate with me whereby it will be broadcast  to all networks, which I'm further advised that Mr Abbott has declined.     

 So my attitude is, subject to the arrangements that Sky's management enters into,  that I will, of course, debate Mr Abbott whenever and wherever there is an  opportunity. I said that from day one.     

 And I'd remind our good friends from Sky that on day one of this election campaign,  your network asked me to debate Mr Abbott on television the following day - I  agreed.  He declined.     

 JOURNALIST: Part 2, Mr Rudd?    

 PRIME MINISTER: Alex, only if you're very, very good.    

 JOURNALIST: The level of investment, you mentioned the ratio in terms of  Germany and Australia, and the difference - what's the limit for you? Do you keep  giving industry money?    

 PRIME MINISTER: Let me just say one or two things and then I will ask Kim who will  be very undiplomatic in his response to your question. He's so passionate about the  car industry.     

 You know something, think for a moment just about Australia's unique  circumstances. Here we are 23 million people on this vast continent with a limited  domestic market and what we've managed to do here without access to the 

 European Union market directly, because it's such a long way away, or the North  American market, what we've managed to do over the last 65 years since Ben  Chifley stood there when the first Holden came off the assembly line is build an  Australian car industry. A limited domestic market, a very diverse domestic market.   Furthermore, one which is open to all competitors around the world. I think I read  Kim that we’ve got 65 different brands in this country, 360 different models. I mean  that is vast competition within the Australian domestic market. In fact the absolute  numbers there are greater than you can buy in the American domestic market.   Anyone who gives me this nonsense about protectionism they should actually look at  the numbers and have a close look at it. So for us there is always therefore a need  for us to get behind critical strategic industries when frankly the geography of our  nation, its small population yet our need to have critical strategic industries, becomes  the overwhelming argument. So we're going to stick there for the long term.  It’s the  right way to go. Kim, you have a word on that one.     

 KIM CARR: The level of support that we are providing to the automotive industry is  about the price of a footy ticket - about the price of a footy ticket.     

 We provide support to attract the new investment, the new technologies and the new  jobs for Australia. We do so in a market where about a million cars a year are sold  and where, as the PM has indicated, some 65 brands are operating. Now in the  United States they have a market of 17 million cars a year and have half the number  of brands operating. So we have a highly fragmented market. We’re a small  population, yet we're only able to do things only 13 countries in the world can do.  Only 13.  We are committed to ensure that we can continue to do that. We are  committed to ensure that we have the capabilities in this country and we have the  jobs in this country and we have the new technologies in this country.     

 Now this election is about a referendum - a referendum on whether or not we want  an automotive industry in this country.     

 We are clearly committed to support an automotive industry in this country. The  Liberal Party has turned their back on history because they no longer are. We used  to have a bipartisan approach to this issue in Australia. We no longer have that  approach. The Liberal Party are in the business of destroying the automotive  industry in Australia. Now we won't stand for that. 

 

 JOURNALIST: I just wanted one clarification on PNG if that's possible. Are you  saying that Peter O'Neill is wrong to say that people may end up in Australia?    

 PRIME MINISTER: I'm saying that Peter O'Neill has confirmed - as the PM of Papua  New Guinea, a good friend of mine, who negotiated the agreement which we signed  in Brisbane some weeks ago, the regional resettlement arrangement - he has  confirmed again today full 100% support for the agreement which we signed and  executed that day in Brisbane -no ifs, no buts, no maybes. That's the agreement and  folks, having said all that, we're all about to zip.  

 

 ENDS 

 

