---
title: "More illegal arrival as Rudd refuses to give commitment on stopping boats"
date: "2013-07-11"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397030
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719302%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling MORE ILLEGAL ARRIVALS AS RUDD  REFUSES TO GIVE COMMITMENT ON  STOPPING BOATS July 11, 2013

 Two more illegal arrivals, with a total of 168 people on board have come as Kevin Rudd today refused to give a  commitment to stop the boats, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “At the National Press Club today Kevin Rudd refused to commit to stopping the boats. The same Prime Minister who  started the boats is now refusing to stop them, leaving Australians a stark choice at the election between a Coalition that  believes in stopping them with the full proven policy measures and resolve to get it done or Kevin Rudd who just wants to  talk about the boats,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Kevin Rudd's only policy on border protection is to get on a plane to go to a conference that he's not organising, on a date that hasn't even been set. No wonder he will not give a commitment to stop boats.

 “Labor have even trashed their failed Malaysia people swap, joining the East Timor farce on the scrap heap of failed Labor  border protection policies.

 “At the current arrival rate of over 100 people every single day, more than 100,000 people will come to Australia on illegal  boats during a new Kevin Rudd term, more people than is needed to fill the MCG.

 “The time has come for the election solution. The Australian people should be given the choice about what they want to  see back on our borders and the policies that they believe should be in place to prevent illegal boat arrivals,” Mr Morrison  said.

 Mr Keenan said: “Another two boats have arrived, meaning 15 boats carrying 1283 people, have already arrived in the  first 10 days of July under the Rudd Government.

 “Kevin Rudd spent three years plotting to return to the Prime Ministership but apparently none of that time formulating  policy responses to the challenges facing Australia.

 “This includes one of the greatest challenges facing our country - our inability to control our borders - a policy failure that  Kevin Rudd is responsible for.

 “The new Rudd Government still has offered up no new policies to combat the crime of people smuggling.

 “The Prime Minister cannot escape his record when it comes to border protection - his decision to abolish the Pacific  Solution has led to 759 boats carrying almost 47,000 people to arrive illegally in Australia,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 MORE ILLEGAL ARRIVALS AS RUDD REFUSES TO GIVE COMMITMENT O...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

