---
title: "It's time to work on saving lives, deterrents aren't working despite the media blackout: Greens"
date: "2013-09-28"
creators:
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211444186
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2757773%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Saturday, 28 September 2013   

 It's time to work on saving lives, deterrents aren't  working despite the media blackout: Greens   

 The Australian Greens are deeply saddened by the tragic deaths of refugees including children off  the coast of Java after an asylum boat sank last night.   

 "It is heartbreaking to hear reports that refugee children and their families have drowned in search  of safety and protection from war and brutality,” Greens immigration spokesperson Senator Sarah  Hanson-Young said.   

 "The real tragedy is that these lives could have been saved if there was a safer and more orderly way  to reach Australia through better assessment in Indonesia helped by Australia and an increased  humanitarian intake.    

 "Where is the information from the Australian Government about this tragedy? Even in face of  children dying it seems the Coalition’s media blackout continues.   

 "Fragile human lives are not dictated by meeting dates and pre-set briefings. The Government’s  policy of secrecy, hiding the facts and hiding the refugees is incredibly disrespectful to the loss of  human life.    

 "The Greens will use the powers of the Senate to force the Government to release information  about boat turn arounds and incidents on the high seas as they occurs, so terrible tragedies like this  cannot be covered up.    

 "How many more lives will it cost for the Coalition to realise its cruel harsh policy, media blackouts  and disrespect to Indonesia is doing nothing to achieve what is really needed; a true regional  solution.   

 "The people smugglers' business model is clearly not coming to an end despite the cruel policies  introduced by Labor and upped by the Coalition. The only people who are suffering are the  vulnerable refugees caught in the middle.”   

 

 Media Contact: Amy Moran 0427 604 760   

