---
title: "Australia's fair-go under threat with PNG deal"
date: "2013-07-26"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397676
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2626090%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Friday, 26 July 2013   

 Australia’s fair-go under threat with PNG deal   

 The old parties’ race to the bottom on refugees is damaging Australia’s reputation as a fair and  caring country, the Australian Greens have said.   

 “Australia’s generous heart is under attack,” the Greens immigration spokesperson, Senator  Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “The very thing that we feel the most pride in, Australia’s willingness to give people a fair-go,  has been severely undermined by Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott.   

 “Locking families in Australia’s gulag on Manus Island is unthinkable, but this government has  even committed to sending unaccompanied children to the terrible conditions there.   

 “It’s no wonder that the UNHCR has slammed the disgraceful PNG deal Labor has entered into.   

 “No one believes the conditions on Manus Island are appropriate. The UNHCR doesn’t, Amnesty  International doesn’t and even the guards who work there don’t.   

 “The Minster is the only person who thinks the conditions there are acceptable, and no one else  believes him.   

 “This deal is a new low point in the history of Australia’s treatment of refugees and there will be  many long-time Labor supporters shaking their heads today.   

 “The rush to the election on the back of refugee cruelty is threatening Australia’s reputation as  an upstanding global citizen.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

