---
title: "The RET: Just more proof Labor couldn't organise a large drink in a brewery"
date: "2013-03-21"
creators:
  - "Boswell, Ron"
source: "Office of BOSWELL, SEN RON"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392315
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2314344%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 SENATOR RON BOSWELL  THE NATIONALS SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND   

                         www.ronboswell.com 

 

 

 The RET: Just more proof Labor couldn’t organise a large  drink in a brewery   

 Labor’s management of the Renewable Energy Target (RET) is a massive  failure, Queensland Senator Ron Boswell said today.   

 “Labor’s mis-management of the RET ranks right up there in terms of  massively expensive, wasteful, policy and administrative failures as the carbon  tax, the mining tax, debt management, illegal boat arrivals, pink batts, and  their so-called Building the Education Revolution program,” Senator Boswell  said.   

 “Climate Change Minister Greg Combet has announced that the government  will stick with the 41,000GWh target for large scale renewables by 2020 -  despite the fact that it will represent closer to 27% than 20% from renewables,  even as the target rapidly moves out of reach because of Labor’s serial  mismanagement of the policy. 

 

 “The government totally undermined the target when it promoted a huge  blow-out in roof top solar installations through ridiculously generous subsidies  that created vast numbers of effectively worthless Renewable Energy  Certificates,” Senator Boswell said.   

 “The companies that have to acquit the target simply bought tens of millions  of these phantom certificates, for next to nothing, and now have enough in  the bank to not need to go back to the market until, at the very least, the end  of next year.   

 “As a result, wind farm development has collapsed, and the target is  disappearing over the horizon.”   

 Senator Boswell said the spot prices for both large scale generation  certificates, and small scale technology certificates, were languishing at well  under $40 - with no sign they will go significantly higher for a very long time.   

 

 21/03/2013  B2013/10 

 

 M E D        

 I A   

 R E L E

 A S E 

 

 Media Contact - (07) 3001 8150 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 M E D        

 I A   

 R E L E

 A S E 

 “Wind energy, which is the government’s only hope of meeting the target,  needs a certificate price of much closer to $60. A certificate price at that level  could be years away.   

 “Meanwhile, the clock is ticking and, if the target is going to be met, there  will have to be an even greater injection of taxpayer cash than has been  wasted to date, so rent-seekers can get their turbines built and reap massive  profits in the future.   

 “If this government was re-elected in September, it would then be hurling  billions at the problem from the $10 billion clean energy fund that the likes of  the Greens and the Member for New England foisted on us. It’s just more 

 proof, if any were needed, that this mob could not organise a large drink in a  brewery.”   

 ENDS 

 

 Media Contact - (07) 3001 8150 

 

