---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Colombo, Sri Lanka: 3 May 2013: Minister's visit to Sri Lanka; people smuggling"
date: "2013-05-03"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Minister's visit to Sri Lanka"
  - "people smuggling"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435617
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2808874%22
---

 

 Minister's visit to Sri Lanka, people smuggling  Friday, 03 May 2013 

 Press Conference, Colombo, Sri Lanka 

 Brendan O'Connor: Thanks very much, and good morning everybody. Thank you  for coming. This has been a very important visit for me, and I'd like to thank firstly the  High Commissioner for arranging the very important meetings that were held  yesterday and some further meetings today. I obviously thank the secretary of  Department of Immigration Martin Bowles for coming with me on this important visit. 

 I've had a good chance to speak with agencies of the Sri Lankan Government, and  indeed the External Affairs Minister, yesterday. We had some very cooperative and  productive discussions about the common interests of Australia and Sri Lanka. We  are a friend of Sri Lanka. We have many things in common, not just cricket, and of  course we have a significant Sri Lankan Australian population in Australia. 

 So can I say to you that the discussions I had were frank and candid yesterday. We  made very clear that we were very appreciative of the efforts of the Sri Lankan  Government and its agencies to assist Australia in dealing with irregular maritime  arrivals. We thank them for the cooperation that has gone on over many years, but  most particularly in recent times, and we will continue to work with Sri Lanka to deal  with this very complex regional challenge of asylum seekers and irregular maritime  arrivals to Australia. All of those bilateral arrangements should be done and will be  done under the auspices of the Bali Process, a regional framework, in order to deal  with, as I say, a very complicated and complex challenge. 

 I also want to say that in my discussions yesterday I was able to say that we are a  supporter of Sri Lanka being the host of CHOGM later this year. Of course, we will  be in attendance, and I made clear we could provide and are very happy to provide  practical advice about the organising of such an important international meeting. We  believe that through our own experiences we may be able to share some insights  about the best way to do that, and indeed that's something we're probably likely to  provide in the near future. 

 In my discussions we made it also very clear that we support the recommendations  of the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission report, that we support the  government having benchmarks, their own benchmarks, and we certainly call upon  them to continue to work through those recommendations and have them realised.  We believe it's important for the prosperity and stability of Sri Lanka that the  benchmarks that the government has set itself should be fulfilled, and we made that  very, very clear. 

 We also, of course, have a role in the aid program here. We think that's a very  important element in dealing with the reconciliation post-conflict in Sri Lanka. 

 So Australia is a friend. We will always speak candidly to the Sri Lankan Government  about any concerns we have, and we want to engage fully to ensure that the future  of Sri Lanka is one of peace, is one of economic growth, and one of stability, and a  country where everybody is included in the future.  I'm very happy to take questions or indeed questions or either of the High  Commissioner or the Secretary of the Department. 

 Question: Despite Australia deporting most of the Sri Lankans that go there illegally,  there seems to be more and more trying to make Australia by boat mostly. Why are  the major [indistinct] propaganda or publicity of the program in Sri Lanka [indistinct].  Continuing why do you - how do you stop that? How [indistinct] do you have? 

 Brendan O'Connor: Well as I said earlier we work cooperatively with Sri Lanka and  the Sri Lankan Government and its agencies. Indeed there was a very significant  increase in irregular maritime arrivals last year from Sri Lanka, and as a result of the  good work between our two countries, we saw a very significant decline in such  arrivals. 

 We believe that it is too dangerous for people to be lured onto unseaworthy vessels  on perilous journeys which in some cases leads to tragic maritime disasters. And  that's why it's absolutely critical that we put in place deterrents to stop people  endangering their lives and we think we've been very successful to date. But it is a  challenge, and an ongoing challenge. 

 And one of the things I raised yesterday was the need for us to continue to combat  the trans-national crime of people smuggling. People smuggling and human  trafficking occur in our region. The Sri Lankan Government and the Australian  Government work with many other countries under the framework of the Bali  Process, and we do that because we believe we need to ensure that we have - yes  we settle refugees if we have to, yes we afford people protection when they seek our  asylum and they have rights to do so, but we must not allow people to endanger their  lives, and be told that it's okay to come to Australia in that manner when it is not. 

 So we fulfil our obligations, we'll work with the Sri Lankan Government to deter  people from putting themselves in danger, and will keep doing that as we look to  ensuring a more comprehensive regional approach to this very complex issue. 

 Question: [Inaudible question] 

 Brendan O'Connor: Well, we've made very clear we want to see progress on the  recommendations of the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission Report.  We've made very clear to the Sri Lankan Government that we think it's important that  they fulfil their own obligations they set themselves to make sure that there is true  reconciliation post-conflict. And the only way that can happen is if they respond and  ensure they fulfil those obligations arising out of that report.  We've made very clear too that for Sri Lanka's future, it's important - and for Sri  Lanka's prosperity, it's important there is stability, and everybody's included in Sri 

 Lanka's future. And we think the progress - we like to see of course, continue to  progress to that end as we head towards the time when CHOGM will be convened. 

 So, I think it's an important time between now and CHOGM for it to be very clear that  the Sri Lankan Government is serious about responding to those concerns, and  responding in a practical way to ensure people are indeed afforded rights in this  country. Now the report itself was very comprehensive, we made it clear that we  agreed with the report and we would want to see further progress. 

 Question: Minister [indistinct] very clear to the government on this benchmark and  [indistinct] obligations. This has been very clear to the government, how do you  [indistinct]? 

 Brendan O'Connor: By engaging with people yesterday and, of course, having a  very good and productive and constructive conversation with the External Affairs  Minister. 

 I raised these matters yesterday. The Foreign Minister, Senator Carr, from Australia  raised these matters when he visited in December. As I say we have a very good  and constructive relationship, and we make it very clear what we think is important.  And I think the Sri Lankan Government respects our view on that.  It is important that there is progress. What we want to see is peace, stability and  growth for this country, and reconciliation. And I think that is very important, and  that's why of course we've raised these matters. 

 Question: [Indistinct] …with the numbers continuing to rise in terms of people  smugglers, have you discussed new practical [indistinct] for the Sri Lankan  Government? 

 Brendan O'Connor: Well we'll continue to work with the government and agencies  about tackling the challenges in stopping people embarking on dangerous journeys.  Of course we'll continue to work with them, as we do with other countries in  combating this very difficult issue and this trans-national crime.  We don't like to see people profiting from other people's desperation, we don't want  people to be lured onto vessels because people have lied to them. We do not want  to see men, women and children die at sea. For those reasons we'll continue to work  with the government and agencies to reduce the chances of people getting on  vessels and dying at sea. 

 Question: Does that mean that any of the people who actually get through to  Christmas Island, are they going to be processed or will they be immediately sent  back? 

 Brendan O'Connor: Of course we will continue to return those who don't engage  our obligations. We are a signatory to the Refugee Convention, and so we ensure  that we fulfil our obligations under that Convention. But where people do not engage  those obligations, we will return them home. 

 That is sending the most powerful message we can send that people should not risk  their lives at sea in this manner. And that message, I think, has an impact, and I think 

 as a result we saw a very significant decline in arrivals throughout this year. But this  is a constant challenge for many countries. Countries of origin, transit and  destination, and we must work together. 

 This is a multi-lateral arrangement that's required under the framework of the Bali  Process, and we'll continue to work with Sri Lanka and all other countries that are  members of that process to ensure people do not risk their lives, do not seek to  come in a manner that is dangerous. And yes we'll keep looking at what we need to  do to make sure we reduce the chances of people dying at sea. 

 Question: It remains to be - arrivals from Sri Lanka to Australia may have come  down, but that's mostly because the detention - detections in Sri Lanka have gone  up. But attempts continue show [indistinct] more and more people trying to get  across. The other thing is, how many people have been prosecuted in Australia for  being responsible for this illegal transfer of people? 

 Brendan O'Connor: There's been a very significant number of people that have  been charged or convicted of offences because of their engagement and  involvement in irregular maritime arrivals. Not just from Sri Lanka. We have, of  course, crews that have been prosecuted in Australia as a result. We've had some  significant organisers that have been charged and prosecuted as a result. 

 The organiser of the vessel that foundered on the rocks on Christmas Island on 15  December 2010 was charged and convicted of offences because that organising of  that vessel of course led to 50 or more people perishing at sea. So, of course we  take these crimes seriously and wherever we can we will prosecute people who  break the law and we think that's absolutely important as a deterrent to stop people  getting involved in this crime. 

 Question: [Inaudible] 

 Brendan O'Connor: Well, look, as I say, we make it very clear it's very important for  the future of Sri Lanka. We could not make it any clearer that it's important. Our  conversations are candid and constructive and I'm certainly of a view and the  Australian Government's of the view that this is important, this is a very, very  important step for the future of Sri Lanka. 

 Those points have been made clear. We've made them before. We'll make them  again. We need to focus on this issue and of course CHOGM is a great opportunity  for Sri Lanka to host so many countries in the Commonwealth. And I think it's very  important, therefore, that leading up to that very important international meeting, the  host of that meeting attends to the benchmarks that they set themselves insofar as  the recommendations of the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission report. 

 Question: [Inaudible] 

 Brendan O'Connor: Well, as I say, they understand our position. They're aware of  the importance of the report. And I believe they've heard what we have to say,  understand that it's important to Australia. I think it's very important that of course  they hear what we have to say and respond in kind. 

 There are some really good opportunities incorporated within that report for this  country to progress and it's very important that they do not miss that opportunity. 

 Compere: One last question please? 

 Question: Minister, if there is no progress in the LLRC report implementation or in  the human rights, would Australia reconsider the level of participation in the  CHOGM? 

 Brendan O'Connor: That's obviously a hypothetical question. We believe that  CHOGM is a very important event for this country, provides a great opportunity for  the government and the people of Sri Lanka to host a very significant international  meeting. 

 I think the Australian Government fully understands that there are some genuine  issues that have been raised by the Australian Government and I'm confident that  they're aware of that importance. And it's also important too that, as the Minister for  Foreign Affairs has said already, that Australia will be attending CHOGM. There's no  doubt about that. And in the meantime, I'm sure the Sri Lankan Government will  respond to some of the issues we've raised. 

 I'm looking forward to further meetings today. I thank you for your attendance and I  appreciate the hospitality that I've been shown since I arrived in this beautiful  country. Thank you. 

 Compere: Thank you very much. 

 

 See: Index of Speeches 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/bo/2013/bo202739.htm  Last update: Monday, 06 May 2013 at 11:31 AEST 

 

