---
title: "Three illegal boats in two days as Labor stalls their pacific solution"
date: "2013-04-03"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392808
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2721520%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling THREE ILLEGAL BOATS IN TWO DAYS AS  LABOR STALLS THEIR PACIFIC SOLUTION April 03, 2013

 The  arrival  of  two  more  illegal  boats  yesterday  comes  as  Labor’s  half  hearted  implementation  of  offshore  processing   remains stalled, with just five per cent of people to have arrived on illegal boats since 14 August actually having been sent to either Nauru or Manus Island, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for

 Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “The arrival of two more illegal boats is keeping Labor on track for more records of failure on our borders and with only one  in  twenty  people  arriving  illegally  by  boat  having  been  sent  to  Nauru  and  Manus  Island  since  the  Government announced the restoration of offshore processing, it is clear Labor’s heart is just not in it,” Mr Morrison said.

 “This year more than 4,100 people have arrived by boat but only 20 have been sent to Nauru since the middle of January while none have been sent to Manus Island for almost two months, since the suspension of transfers was put in place.

 “With  the  surge  in  boats  filling  the  Christmas  Island  detention  centre  once  again,  Labor’s  asylum  air  line  will  be  in  full   swing with taxpayer funded charter planes dispatching asylum seekers across the Australian mainland en masse, with a fast track to community release. It is unlikely any of these planes will be heading for Nauru or Manus Island.

 “This is yet more evidence that Labor just doesn’t believe in offshore processing, a policy they had to be dragged kicking and  screaming  to  restore, having  abolished  it in February 2008 and they are now trashing  in their implementation. The only winners are the people smugglers, who know that they can keep selling tickets to Australia.

 “Everything Labor has touched on our borders has resulted in more illegal boats and more cost, chaos and failure,” Mr  Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “Despite the monsoon season, March was the second biggest month for people arriving by boat ever and it appears April will continue that trend with three vessels intercepted on the first two days of the new month.

 “270 boats, carrying over 16,000, people have now arrived on Australia’s shores illegally this financial year alone.

 “The Minister for Home Affairs, Jason Clare, should explain exactly why a number of the people aboard this latest vessel had to be transferred directly to Darwin for medical treatment.

 “The  Minister  needs  to  be  transparent  and  provide  information  about  the  circumstances  surrounding  this  troubling information.

 “Whilst the boats continue to arrive at such a rapid rate it places the lives of our Border Protection Command as well as the passengers aboard these boats, at risk,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 THREE ILLEGAL BOATS IN TWO DAYS AS LABOR STALLS THEIR PACIFIC ...

 12/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

