---
title: "Bullies on youth grant program's hitlist"
date: "2013-07-26"
creators:
  - "Ellis, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD, CHILDCARE AND YOUTH"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397653
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2618504%22
---

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 

 THE HON KATE ELLIS MP  Minister for Early Childhood, Childcare and Youth  Minister for Employment Participation     

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 26 July 2013                                                                                                                        

 

 

 BULLIES ON YOUTH GRANT PROGRAM’S HITLIST    

 School and cyber-bullying will be targeted in this year’s $500,000 Federal Government  youth grants program announced by Youth Minister Kate Ellis today.    

 Ms Ellis said the annual Youth Development and Support Program will offer grants of up  to $70,000 for projects that were aimed at developing leadership skills and encouraging  cyber-safety and anti-bullying behaviour in communities.    

 “School and cyber-bullying is a big issue affecting the confidence and wellbeing of  young Australians across the country and these grants will encourage smart solutions to  help tackle the problem head on at a local level,” Ms Ellis said.    

 “Mission Australia’s National Survey of Young Australians last year found that violence  and bullying are important issues for Australia’s young people, and with their energy  and ideas we can work together to tackle school and cyber bulling.”    

 “Australians aged 12 to 24 and non-government and not-for-profit organisations can  apply for grants of up to $70,000 to help young Australians help themselves and their  communities.    

 “This year’s theme - building a safe and supportive culture - reinforces our commitment  to protect young people from violence and bullying and foster safe and supportive  communities.” 

 

 “We have listened to this message and that’s why this year we are targeting investment  towards helping young Australians develop practical new ways to tackle violence and  bullying in their schools, communities and online.”  

 

 This worthwhile program has helped more than 100 youth organisations since 2009.    

 Since then, funded projects have included young people restoring bikes to give to  refugees and newly arrived migrants, and another that trained young people in how to  support other young people dealing with cancer.     

 Last year, the Youth Development and Support Program funded 15 inspiring projects to  help young people get ready for work or further study.     

 One of those programs supported by the Fund helped young people design, implement  and evaluate a showcase about best practices in sustainability, leading to an expo  where their achievements are displayed to local employers and training providers.    

 The program fosters diverse projects that run at the grass roots level and help develop  young people’s skills and confidence to move confidently into adulthood.    

 “I look forward to seeing the innovative projects that encourage leadership in young  people as a result of our support,” Ms Ellis said.    

 Applications are open until 23 August 2013. For information on the program and how to  apply, visit http://www.youth.gov.au/sites/youth/news/pages/ydsprogram_010410    

 

 Minister Ellis’ media contact: Joshua Cooney 0428 300 514    

 DEEWR Media: media@deewr.gov.au    

 

