---
title: "Government refuses to grant media access to offshore detention centres"
date: "2013-02-07"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390172
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2213654%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Thursday, 7 February 2013   

 Government refuses to grant media access to  offshore detention centres   

 After consistently ignoring independent reports of the unacceptable conditions in the Nauru and  Manus Island detention centres, the government today voted against a motion calling for full  media access to the island facilities.   

 “I think the Australian public deserve to know what the government is so desperate to keep  hidden and I will continue to fight for media access to the detention centres in the future,” the  Greens immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “Shocking reports of appalling conditions, mental distress and self-harm in the government’s  offshore detention facilities point to the fact that we are at a crisis point.   

 “It is not good enough to simply disregard the reports of independent bodies after they see how  disgusting the conditions are and it is clear that the media needs to be allowed to do its job.   

 “The media plays an essential role in our democracy and denying them access to the offshore  detention centres, which Australian tax payers are shelling out billions of dollars for, is a blatant  attempt to hide the situation from the public.   

 “I moved the motion today because I have seen with my own eyes just how bad conditions are  on Manus Island and I’m concerned that there is more for the media to uncover.   

 “There have now been highly critical reports from the UNHCR and serious first hand allegations  from a Nauru based nurse and the media needs to be able to shed some light on what is actually  happening there.   

 “Despite journalists agreeing not to identify people within the camps, access still hasn’t been  granted and it is obvious the government wants to avoid any close scrutiny of what they are  doing.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

 The following motion was voted down, with the coalition and the government opposing it;   

 I move that the Senate:    

 i. Calls on the Government to  

 i. Facilitate media access to the detention camps in Nauru and Manus Island  to provide for transparency and public accountability about the conditions  inside the camps; 

 ii. Lift the current ban on photographs and footage of the detention facilities;  and 

 iii. Allow consenting asylum seekers and refugees within the facilities to speak  freely to media agencies and journalists. 

 

 

 

