---
title: "Transcript of press conference with Rear Admiral David Johnston RAN: Customs House, Canberra: 25 March 2013: asylum seeker vessel"
date: "2013-03-25"
creators:
  - "Clare, Jason"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "asylum seeker vessel"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392469
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2326558%22
---

 

 THE HON. JASON CLARE MP  CABINET SECRETARY  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE    

 

 TRANSCRIPT 

 Press Conference with Rear Admiral David Johnston RAN  Customs House, Canberra   25  March 2013    

 Topics:  Asylum seeker vessel   

 

 JASON CLARE:                  I'm here with the Commander of Border Protection  Command, Admiral David Johnston, and we've just been  briefed by the team at the Border Protection Command  operation centre just across the road and I'm in a position  now to give you the latest information that we have. 

 

                                                 Let me place upon this the important caveat that the 

 information that we have is subject to change. This is the initial advice that I have  that I can pass on to you now.   

 At about four o'clock Australian Eastern Daylight Saving  Time yesterday, a Customs and Border Protection Dash  8 aircraft detected a vessel that was 76 nautical miles  north northwest of Christmas Island. At approximately  9.30 last night, AMSA, the Australian Maritime Safety  Authority's Rescue Coordination Centre received a call  from a person on a vessel believed to be requiring  assistance approximately 55 nautical miles north  northwest of Christmas Island.   

 At that time, the nature of the assistance required was  unknown. At 10.13pm last night, Ocean Protector was  tasked to head to that location and left Christmas Island.  At approximately 3am this morning - again, this is  Australian Eastern Daylight Saving Time - Ocean  Protector detected a vessel that was by then 33 nautical  miles north of Christmas Island and the advice that I've 

 been given this afternoon is that at that time that vessel  didn't appear to be in distress.   

 At approximately 11am Australian Eastern Daylight  Saving Time this morning, or 7am local time, Ocean  Protector approached the vessel that was by this stage  about 14 nautical miles north of Christmas Island. And  the initial advice I have that I can give you now is that  Ocean Protector's tender response vessels were  deployed and headed toward the vessel.   

 At this point the vessel stopped and two officers from  Customs and Border Protection Command boarded the  vessel. At about that time, two large waves hit the vessel.  The vessel rolled and a number of people entered the  water.   

 I can advise you now that the two Customs and Border  Protection officers were recovered and are safe and  uninjured. The men of - the men and the women of  Border Protection Command acted quickly to rescue the  people that had gone into the water.   

 Ninety five people in all have been recovered but I have  to advice you that that includes two people who are  deceased. One of those is a young male, approximately  four to five years of age, and a female in her 30s. Two  others are seriously injured. One of those is a young  male, approximately six to seven years of age, and the  other is a pregnant woman in her 20s.   

 A Dash 8 surveillance aircraft and HMAS Maitland remain  in the search and rescue area and continue the search  effort. The initial advice that has been given to me is that  Border Protection Command believe they have rescued  all of the people who were on that vessel. But it is  important to make sure that the search continues just in  case there is anybody else that are there.    

 Can I use this opportunity to thank the men and the  women of Border Protection Command for the work they  do. The dangerous and the difficult work that they do,  proven again today just how dangerous this work is and  also thank the people who work at AMSA and the Rescue  Coordination Centre for the work that they do.    

 Let me also make this point. The men and women of  Border Protection Command today have experienced  another tragic event and two of our men and women have  been onboard the vessel as it founded and as people 

 went into the water, and it's very important that we  provide them with all of the support services and the  counselling and assistance that is necessary when an  event like this happens. I am advised that counselling  services are being organised as we speak and those  counsellors will fly from WA and land at Christmas Island  tomorrow.    

                                                 Happy to take your questions.  

 

 QUESTION:                          Minister, the ship you said it rolled. Did it capsize?   

 JASON CLARE:                  I might ask Admiral Johnston to elaborate here. The  advice that I've been given, and this is only moments old,  is that the vessel stopped and that allowed the Border  Protection tenders to go up to the vessel. Two officers of  Border Protection Command embarked on vessel and at  that time two waves hit the boat that caused the boat to  roll over on its side and a number of individuals went into  the water. 

 

 I don't have information for you, I've pretty sure  Commander, we don't have confirmation whether  everyone went into the water or just a number of  individuals. We'll get more information in the hours  ahead.    

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           That advice is right. So to the best of our understanding  the vessel stopped at the point that the tender from the  Ocean Protector came along side it. While that vessel  was stopped a large wave hit it. That caused the vessel  to roll. I think people, probably at that point, moved to the  downside of it and a second wave appears to have hit the  vessel, which caused it to roll over further and take on  water. 

 

 QUESTION:                          What sort of vessel was it? How could you describe it?  Fishing boat or?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           A typical Indonesian fishing boat probably around 12 to  15 metres in length. Quite common to what we find in the waters around Christmas  Island.    

 QUESTION:                          So do you know how many people went into the water?  Rough estimate in total?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           We believe there were 95 people in total onboard. I'm  uncertain how many were in the vessel with water in it or  were outside of the vessel, but we are confident that we  have recovered all that we saw in the water. 

 

 QUESTION:                          Were they mainly men or adults or women and  children?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           A range. There are men and women and some juveniles  within the 95. The numbers are still being confirmed but I think around 17 juveniles  amongst the 95. 

 

 QUESTION:                          Do you know where they came from?  

 

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           Nationalities are still unclear. Of course at the moment  we're in the process of transferring people ashore,  particularly into medical care, but the initial indication  would suggest that from Afghanistan, potentially from  other Middle-Eastern countries as well.   

 QUESTION:                          Can you tell us about the condition of the two injured  people?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           The two people that were recovered from the water that  were injured? Both appear to have suffered some  breathing difficulties. We think that was from ingesting  water and potentially some diesel that was on the surface  of the water but both have been stabilised and are now in  medical care.   

 QUESTION:                          Can you explain just why there wasn't an attempt to try  and transfer people off the vessel earlier when it was first spotted and intercepted?  Why did we wait until [indistinct] comes in. 

 

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           The protocol in these circumstances are particularly  conducting boardings at night are dangerous. In the  absence of an immediate appearance of distress our  preference would be to conduct a day boarding. It's safer  for our people and often for those that are onboard. In  this case the boarding occurred not long after first light.  First light at Christmas Island was at about 6:30 local  time, 10:30 local Canberra time and the boarding  commenced about 40 minutes after first light.   

 QUESTION:                          When the Minister said 4 o'clock, that's 4:00am? You  said 4 o'clock, that's 4:00am in the morning.   

 JASON CLARE:                  That was 4:00pm yesterday. That was - so just to be  clear, the Dash 8 aircraft identified the vessel at 4:00pm  Australian Eastern Daylight Saving time yesterday, then  the phone call seeking assistance was 9:30 Australian  Eastern Daylight Saving time yesterday.    

 QUESTION:                          PM? 

 

 JASON CLARE:                  That's right. 9:30pm. Ocean Protector identified and  located the vessel at 3:00am Australian Eastern Daylight  Saving time this morning. It - the tenders arrived at the  vessel at 11:00am Australian Eastern Daylight Savings  time this morning and Nick, to your point - so that's  around about 7:00am or just after first light in the  morning.  I should make this point as well - the sea state,  I'm advised, is about sea state three, and as you would  appreciate when a vessel stops motoring along its  stability is significantly reduced, so when the vessel  stopped and the boarding party boarded the vessel and  was hit by two waves its stability was severely decreased  and as a result took on water and a number of people  entered the water.   

 QUESTION:                          How rough is sea state three for the laymen amongst  us?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           Sea state three, you might be looking around 15 knots  worth of wind and swell height that could be around about  a metre, but clearly the patterns of waves can be - you  can get larger waves in that general sea state condition,  and that is what appeared to have occurred in this  circumstance. 

 

 QUESTION:                          How big would the larger waves be? 

 

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           I don't have that information.   

 QUESTION:                          When they called for help at 9:30 last night, what did  they actually say on the phone?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           You'd need to get the details of that from RCC who were  the predominate response agency for that, but my understanding is that initially the  concern was that they were lost. 

 

 QUESTION:                          Minister, a lot of locals on the island are talking about -  they're saying there's a lot more boats that are due to  come into Christmas Island in the next couple hours or  days. There's been a huge number of vessels that have  arrived on Christmas Island in the last month. What's the  reason that we're seeing for the spike in [audio skip] in  the last couple of weeks.   

 JASON CLARE:                  We're entering the end of the monsoon season and the  weather conditions off the coast of Christmas Island have  improved dramatically over the course of, I'm advised, the  last nine to ten days, and as a result of that, you're seeing 

 an increase in the number of boats that are travelling to  Christmas Island.   

 I'd make this point, and it's an important one to make, that  the monsoon season doesn't end until traditionally the  end of April. Whilst a fortnight ago we saw some terrible  weather conditions, sea states four, five and above,  weather conditions in the last two weeks have been much  calmer, there is the potential for sea states to return and  get much more dangerous in the weeks ahead.   

 QUESTION:                          Does this show that your no advantage policy isn't  working? This surge that we're seeing?   

 JASON CLARE:                  Well, I'm going to resist the temptation, as I have in the  past, to get into the politics and the policy in this area. I  deliberately, when people have died, and people have  died today, resist the temptation to talk about the politics  of this. My position on this is well-known. The  Government's decision is well-known but today is not the  day to go into that.   

 QUESTION:                          Are the two injured passengers being treated on the  Australian mainland or in prison [indistinct] and secondly are the other prisoners  [indistinct] asylum as well?   

 JASON CLARE:                  The two individuals that are injured are still on Ocean  Protector where they're receiving medical care, and the  same rules that apply to everybody that arrives to  Australia by sea after 13 August of last year apply in this  case as well.   

 QUESTION:                          What is the nationality of those who are onboard?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           I think the Commander answered that. The initial advise,  again initial advice because this is hours old, is that the  people are Afghans as well as potentially from other  Middle-Eastern countries, potentially Iran.  

 

 QUESTION:                          Given the sea state was it safe for Customs to - was it  advisable for Customs to board that vessel?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           The sea conditions are certainly within our ability to  manage safely. So, yes, we're quite competent and able to board a vessel in that sea  condition.    

 QUESTION:                          Was it, sort of, a freak wave or? 

 

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           I don't know. That's possibly the case but we're not yet  certain. 

 

 QUESTION:                          And just on the - is there still an operation going on at  the moment to see if there's anymore bodies or anymore survivors and how long is  that likely to continue?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           That will be a matter for the rescue coordination centre  to determine but we certainly still have assets in the area searching.   

 QUESTION:                          Did the crew board the asylum-seeker boat because it  was daylight or because they were concerned about the conditions that potentially  could end as it has.   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           They boarded at that time because it was daylight, so it  was safer to do so, and we were following the NOW  protocols for vessels that entre the migration zone, were  inside the contiguous zone, in our terms, and going  through a migration act boarding.   

 QUESTION:                          Sorry, just to clarify, Minister, are you actually still  searching for people from this boat who you believe may be missing or do you think  you've got everybody?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           That again - that's a decision for the Rescue  Coordination Centre. We believe we have everybody but as a prudent act there was  an ongoing search to confirm that was the case.   

 QUESTION:                          Have any crew members been apprehended?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           We believe there were three Indonesians have been  identified, whether they're crew or not is still yet to be determined.   

 QUESTION:                          At 3 o'clock in the morning when you first detected the  vessel, you said at the time the vessel didn't appear to be  in distress. If it was dark how was that apparent? Was  there lights shone on it or something? 

 

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           We had some imagery or photographs of the vessel from  when the aircraft saw it the afternoon before. It remained  underway and we have some night vision capability to  determine that the vessel was moving and appeared sea  worthy.    

 QUESTION:                          It's been suggested that a number of other boats are  actually heading this way or heading toward Christmas Island. Do you have any idea  how many or how many people might be queued up to come?   

 JASON CLARE:                  I think the general point I’d make there is when a vessel  is detected, either through one of our aircraft or through  our vessels, that information is provided to me and  through my office a statement is issued once that vessel 

 is intercepted, and when that occurs I'll provide that  information to you. 

 

 QUESTION:                          We've hear that there are a number of boats on the sea  at the moment. Would that be right?    

 JASON CLARE:                  Well, it is very important here that the information that I  provide you with is correct, and as you know, I go out of  my way to make sure that I give you correct and accurate  information to the best of my ability. The best way to do  that is when a boat is intercepted and I collect the  relevant information from Customs and Border Protection  then I'm in a position to provide it to you.   

 QUESTION:                          Can I just ask, have you seen any vision or footage of  the state of the boat after it was [indistinct] by the waves. Did it smash in half or did it  just overturn?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           I have seen some footage or a photograph of it. The boat  appears to have just settled down in the water so we can  see the top of it and the shape of the hull through there,  so it appears to be largely upright but full of water.   

 QUESTION:                          Minister, you said that monsoon season hasn't ended.  There's - the people smugglers are obviously pushing a  lot of boats through at the moment. There's a lot of  people on these boats. Some of these boats - I think it  was 128 on a boat that arrived on Saturday. Is there  something that has changed that to your understanding at  the moment, in the way that the people smuggling -  cartels are operating in terms of the way they are pushing  people through at this time of the year and the size of the  boats?   

 JASON CLARE:                  Nothing that I've been particularly briefed on other than  that the weather has improved over the course of the last  fortnight that's provided an opportunity for the people who  peddle in this evil trade to put people on boats and send  them to Christmas Island.    

 QUESTION:                          Minister, will you be organising for the release of any of  this imagery?   

 JASON CLARE:                  Well, this is a decision that's not made by me. It's not  appropriate that it be made by me. That's a decision that will be made by Border  Protection Command. Okay, just one more question.   

 QUESTION:                          Is there anything - you know how you said part of the  reason that the boat tipped over was because it was  stationary, is that the usual - is there any sort of protocols 

 that you follow to keep the boat moving sometimes. You  know, was that a risk that could have been foreseen or  was it just a freak?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           Unknown. It's difficult for us, of course, to control a  vessel when we're not onboard it. So if it was stationary and in the process of our  officers boarding,   that's when it occurred, then we have little control over it in that  circumstance.   

 QUESTION:                          Could the arrival of the Customs boat cause the waves?   

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           No, I don't believe so. The main ship, the Ocean  Protector, was about 300 metres away, so it was a good distance off the vessel.   

 QUESTION:                          What about the other ones? 

 

 JASON CLARE:                  These are relatively small rigid boats. Smaller than the  vessel in question.    

 QUESTION:                          [inaudible question] 

 

 DAVID JOHNSTON:           The sea state - one to perhaps two and a half metres.  Enough that can be very localised in terms of the sea condition itself.   

 JASON CLARE:                  Alright. Thanks very much. Thanks everyone.   

 

 ENDS             

