---
title: "Another push for foreign food aid money to be replaced with food"
date: "2013-03-08"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
source: "Office of STONE, SHARMAN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391697
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2282394%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP  Federal Member for Murray   

 

 Friday 08 March 2013   

 Another push for foreign food aid money to be replaced with food   

 Federal Member for Murray Dr Sharman Stone is meeting Senator Bob Carr next week to talk about the  prospects for using foreign aid funds to manufacture Australian foods for sending as aid.   

 “A great win-win scenario is for growers to be paid for their top quality but excess produce to be then  processed and sent overseas to assist in food crises” Sharman Stone said.   

 “When cash only is sent to foreign governments in crisis or NGOs, there is great potential for funds to go  missing or much of it to be diverted. We also often lose the opportunity to label the donations as a gift  from Australia, making us invisible and unappreciated.   

 “The US is the largest food aid donor in the world. They have been sending food through their Food for  Peace Program since 1954. Whenever there is a call in the US for cash to be sent instead of food, US  farmers and agribusinesses oppose the abolishment of the Food for Peace Program.   

 “If Australia opted to send food abroad, Australian carriers would also benefit from transferring the  goods.   

 “It is time we re-think how we help starving refugee and other populations” Dr Stone said.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Media enquiries, Mary Coad: 0400 941 210. 

 M E D I A     R E L E A S E  

