---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 6 July 2013: illegal boat arrivals; Kevin Rudd's announcement in Indonesia; Labor's Rudd-carpet for illegal boat arrivals; Labor's policy free zone on illegal boat arrivals; Coalition border protection policy; Malcolm Fraser"
date: "2013-07-06"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "illegal boat arrivals"
  - "Kevin Rudd's announcement in Indonesia"
  - "Labor's Rudd-carpet for illegal boat arrivals"
  - "Labor's policy free zone on illegal boat arrivals"
  - "Coalition border protection policy"
  - "Malcolm Fraser"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396790
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2577091%22
---

 SHADOW IMMIGRATION MINISTER SCOTT MORRISON 

 Transcript - Doorstop interview 

 Saturday 6th July 2013 

 Subjects: Illegal boat arrivals, Kevin Rudd’s announcement in Indonesia,  Labor’s Rudd-carpet for illegal boat arrivals, Labor’s policy free zone on illegal  boat arrivals, Coalition border protection policy, Malcolm Fraser 

 E&OE 

  MORRISON: 

 Well once again this morning as we made our way here indeed, there has been the  announcement of yet another arrival of yet another boat under Kevin Rudd. We have  had now more people turn up under Kevin Rudd’s very brief Prime Ministership the  second time around than occurred in the last six years of the Howard Government  which I think just goes to demonstrate once again the scale of this problem that has  occurred when Kevin Rudd rolled out the Rudd carpet all those years ago to the  people smugglers that has led to the chaos, the cost and the tragedy that has  followed. 

 In relation to the events yesterday in Indonesia, the Coalition of course welcomes the  strong cooperation of Indonesia in dealing with the issue of people smuggling  throughout our region. That cooperation has been in place for a very long time and  indeed it was under John Howard with Alexander Downer when the Bali Process  was established with Indonesia to bring Indonesia and Australia together to focus on  deterrence measures within the region and so we welcome the fact that the  Indonesian Government has sought to bring the focus of that cooperation back from  the accommodation approach of Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard to a strong deterrence  focus that the Indonesian President was referring to yesterday. But regional  cooperation is one thing, but Australia will always have to take the decisions that it  needs to take on our side of the border in our own interests. That is what John  Howard meant when he said we will decide who comes to this country and the  circumstances in which they come and no one else. Australia is a sovereign nation  and we have to take decisions on our side of the border, decisions that we believe  are in our interests and address our need to protect our own borders and that is  certainly what a Coalition Government will always do. Our region on people  smuggling has a Kevin Rudd problem. That is the problem we have in our region.  The sugar is on the table in Australia for people smugglers because of the decision  that Kevin Rudd took. The only unilateral action that has put Indonesia in risk of and  in fact the only unilateral decision that has caused grief for Indonesia is that of Kevin 

 Rudd when he dismantled the strong measures of the Howard Government. He  weakened our borders and in effect weakened the region’s resistance to people  smuggling as well. That is what we don’t want to see any more of. The Coalition has  a strong set of policies that make our border strong and that make our region’s  borders strong as a result as well. These two things must go together. You need to  have strong regional cooperation but you also need to have strong policies on our  own borders. Having strong cooperation in our region is no excuse to hand over  decisions about Australia’s borders and what happens on our side of the Indonesian  border to anyone else. Australians don’t accept I believe boats coming illegally to  Australia from wherever they come. As a result we needed policies and actions on  our side of the line which ensures that we can put that to an end. 

 What we see from the government and from Kevin Rudd in particular I think is an  obfuscation of their responsibilities to protect our borders. This is a government that  wants to keep talking but not act. I think there is a very, very clear distinction now  becoming even clearer between Kevin Rudd who wants to talk and Tony Abbott who  wants to act from day one if we are elected. 

 Today we also had the admission from Minister Burke that they have now discarded  the Malaysian people swap. They have added it to the list of Labor failures. He said  this morning that 800 people would not be enough to address the challenges that  now face us in terms of people smuggling. That was always the case from day one.  It also exposed the ruse of their complaining over the last 12 to 18 months that this  measure had it been implemented would have solved the problem. We all knew that  was ridiculous and now Minister Burke has discarded the Malaysian people swap  and that leaves our country without any border protection policy at all as we now  speak other than just more talking. 

 What I think Minister Burke and Prime Minister Rudd are trying to do at this election  and why you can’t believe them is this - they don’t believe the boats can be stopped.  They don’t believe anyone can stop them. They don’t believe John Howard stopped  them and you can’t trust a Prime Minister and a Minister for Immigration that have  simply given up on border protection, given up on our right to make our decisions  about our borders and just given in. They want Australians to join in in giving up on  border protection so I make this pledge and plea to the Australian people on behalf  of the Coalition - don’t give up on stopping the boats because the Coalition never  will. The government has given up, we never will and we encourage you to not give  up and to stand with us, the Coalition, as we stand up to those boats coming to  Australia and the people smugglers. That is a commitment we have given in earnest  every day. We know how to do it, we have done it before, we have the conviction 

 and the belief to do it again and we ask the Australian people to stand with us as we  stand up for stronger protections on our borders, on our side of the line. 

 QUESTION: 

 Scott it is all well and good to talk about regional cooperation but what if the  Indonesian self-interest differs to our own? To what extent would Australia take  unilateral action under a Coalition Government? 

 MORRISON: 

 We will implement the border measures that we have announced. We will turn boats  back where it is safe to do so. We will restore temporary protection visas, we will  undertake genuine offshore processing, we will not give the benefit of the doubt to  people who throw their documents away trying to frustrate the investigations and  assessment of Australian officers. We will intercept these vessels as the US Coast  Guard have been doing on their borders since Ronald Regan was President. 

 QUESTION: 

 Isn’t the point though to prevent them from leaving Indonesian shores, once they get  into Australian shores they scuttle their boat and you have an obligation then to  rescue them? 

 MORRISON: 

 Well no… 

 QUESTION: 

 Are you convinced the Indonesians take this seriously? 

 MORRISON: 

 Well let me make two points. First of all it is true regional cooperation needs to focus  on issues that are occurring in Indonesia. That has always been our focus. One of  the mysteries of this government is why they have withdrawn Australian Federal  Police from Indonesia which is a critical function in disrupting people smuggling  activity in Indonesia. It is a mystery why the government still has not confirmed any  special operations funding for the AFP in Indonesia that is vital to disrupting people  smuggling. That is where attention needs to be focused in Indonesia but that alone is 

 not all that is required. As John Howard proved you have got to have unilateral  action on our side that works. It is not our policy to violate or compromise the  territorial sovereignty of Indonesia, never was, never will be. That is how it was done  last time. There was no discussion about this between the Indonesian President and  John Howard. There was no agreement. We took actions on our side of the line and  that is what has always been our policy to do. 

 QUESTION: 

 This talk of unilateral action has been interpreted as a swipe at the Coalition’s policy  though. Is that the case? 

 MORRISON: 

 Well I will leave others to interpret. What I know is the only unilateral action that has  been undertaken by an Australian Government to give Indonesians grief is the  decision taken by Kevin Rudd to roll out the Rudd carpet to people smugglers as he  did all those years ago. That is what we don’t want to see more of. We want to see  stronger borders in Australia with decisions and actions taken by a strong Australian  Government and I think that presents a very clear choice at this election. The strong  actions and resolve of Tony Abbott or more talk from Kevin Rudd. 

 QUESTION: 

 To what extent would you be willing to pull out the stick? How much foreign aid does  Australia give Indonesia given the fact that there seems to be ample evidence  suggesting there is a lot of complicity amongst Indonesian authorities in South Java  to allow people smugglers to take the journey to Australia, possibly even payments  from the smugglers to those authorities? Indonesia could do something about this… 

 MORRISON: 

 Well of course… 

 QUESTION: 

 But they are not. 

 MORRISON: 

 And I think all of the points you make are very, very valid and I think they are the  mattes that regional cooperation, particularly bilateral cooperation between Australia  and Indonesia needs to address. That’s what I have been advocating… 

 QUESTION: 

 But if they are not doing that… 

 MORRISON: 

 Well what I have seen in Indonesia and I was only there this time last weekend is a  big appetite from Indonesia to be involved in cooperation between the AFP and the  Indonesian national police. That is something that was very successful post the Bali  bombings as you would know and those two agencies wrote the book on cooperation  when it came to anti-terrorism in Indonesia. Now I think that provides a very, very  good parallel for how we should be tackling people smuggling in Indonesia. Now that  is what we would continue to encourage Indonesia to do. It needs to be backed up  with resources. It needs to be backed up with resolve and commitment and that is  not what we have seen from Labor. 

 QUESTION: 

 It is very easy to say you will turn back the boats but you do have the problem… 

 MORRISON: 

 It is not easy to do but you do need the strong resolve to do it. 

 QUESTION: 

 I just want to get it in crystal clarity form the Opposition is the main thrust of your  platform to prevent the people smugglers even taking off from Indonesia in the first  place and if so how do you get the Indonesians on board with that? 

 MORRISON: 

 Look it is all of the above. It is our policy to frustrate people smuggling at every single  point of the journey from origin to destination and our policies on our borders say this  to anyone - if you get through all of those other parts of your journey when it comes  to Australia’s sea border you won’t pass. That is our policy. That is our objective.  That is our goal. You must have that back stop policy on top of regional cooperation 

 and all the others things up the chain. As boats leave Indonesia that is the most  expensive and most difficult part of the process to intercept and provide your  deterrence. You have to do it further up in the region but if you leave the back door  open then people will walk through it and Kevin Rudd seems quite happy to leave  the back door open because he is not prepared to stand up for Australia’s right to  have Australian decisions about what happens on our borders. 

 QUESTION: 

 Do you think the Indonesian President’s offer of a forum is more tokenistic than  anything else given the problem is specifically on his backdoor with complicit  authorities in Java allowing this to happen? Surely that is where all attention should  go? 

 MORRISON: 

 Well I genuinely do welcome President Yudhoyono’s decision to bring a smaller  group together and to focus on border security issues. Now that is actually a big shift  from the last big heralded meeting which Kevin Rudd and Chris Bowen came back  from and said ‘we have this new regional processing framework, a breakthrough for  people smuggling’; they called it at the time and what that was involved in doing is  setting up processing hubs effectively within the region and processing people more  quickly and handing out more visas. Now we said at the time this was nothing more  than creating an asylum magnet in the region. So I do welcome the fact that  President Yudhoyono has effectively repudiated that approach and taken that  discussion off line for this other forum and said in the region we need to talk about  deterrence. 

 QUESTION: 

 So Kevin Rudd is making progress? 

 MORRISON: 

 No. I think President Yudhoyono is making progress. I think Kevin Rudd has been  dragged to this position of effectively rejecting the regional processing framework  that he wrote with Chris Bowen a few years ago. So I think that approach is welcome  but talk is one thing, action is another. What I know is the day after the election  whatever day Kevin Rudd decides to call it, Tony Abbott and I will be taking action to  stop boats which includes strong deterrence measures on our borders on our side of 

 the line. What I know Kevin Rudd will be doing if he is reelected with Tony Burke is  he will just talking like he always has. That is never going to stop the boats. 

 QUESTION: 

 Would a Coalition government consider pulling foreign aid form Indonesia if they are  not proactive enough in helping Australia’s national interest? 

 MORRISON: 

 Well look there are many scenarios that can present in the future in terms of a  cooperation arrangement you would have with any number of countries. Our  approach is to focus on the policies that we have announced and putting them in  place. We have had very positive meetings with the Indonesians. As I said I was only  there last weekend. Julie Bishop has been in constant dialogue with Indonesia over  years. Tony has had many meetings with the President so I am confident about our  ability to work together to particularly do things on the Indonesian side of the border  which involves police work, which involves intelligence gathering, which involves  stronger border controls at their airports, documentation, working up the pipeline.  That is what we can work together strongly on. 

 QUESTION: 

 Scott that wasn’t the question though. The question was specifically foreign aid. Can  you rule that out now that Australia… 

 MORRISON: 

 Well it is not for me to rule that in or rule that out. What it is for me to do is to say that  we are very committed to the relationship with Indonesia and the cooperation I  believe can be achieved. There is nothing that has been suggested to me on my  visits to Indonesia which suggest there would be a lack of willingness from Indonesia  to focus on the deterrence measures I have been talking about so that gives me  great confidence. I think that will occur and that is the objective we will pursue and  that is what we will focus on. 

 QUESTION: 

 Morally do you think it would be fair to pull foreign aid if you don’t think the  Indonesians… 

 MORRISON: 

 Well again you can put the question as many times as you like… 

 QUESTION: 

 Well if you keep on ducking it. 

 MORRISON: 

 Well I am not at all. I am telling you honestly what our view is and that is we believe  our cooperation with Indonesia will deliver the deterrence measures on the ground in  Indonesia that we think are critical and you have highlighted some of those in the  questions you have put to me today. I think we can tackle those issues with  Indonesia. They have never given me or Tony or Julie any indication that there is a  lack of willingness. Where there is a lack is in the resolve of our government, of  Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard before that and Chris Bowen before and Brendan  O’Connor and before Tony Burke and let’s not forget good old Senator Evans, four  ministers they have had for Immigration who have all failed on this issue. Their lack  of resolve in dealing with this issue up in Indonesia is I think one of the big problems.  The Coalition has been marking this out as a clear area for action for years. For  years. That is what we will do. 

 QUESTION: 

 Briefly on another issue Malcolm Fraser is supporting Greens Senator Sarah  Hanson-Young in Adelaide today. Is that a slap in the face for the Liberal Party for a  former Liberal Prime Minister to be supporting the Greens? 

 MORRISON: 

 No I think it just sort of demonstrates that the transformation of Malcolm Fraser is  complete in campaigning for the Greens. Malcolm Fraser was a great Liberal Prime  Minister. In fact I remember as a young fellow looking up to his great strength when  he took down the Whitlam Government. I think that was one of his most enduring  achievements and contributions to the country. He got rid, as one of the most  aggressive opposition leaders, what used to the worst government this country has  ever had. Now that has been surpassed by the Rudd/Gillard government and that is  our objective today. Mr Fraser in particular had some great achievements as Prime  Minister.  Let’s not forget it was him as Prime Minister who instituted offshore  processing. It was Malcolm Fraser that opened and worked with Indonesia to 

 establish the Galang offshore processing centre. So people I know change their  mind over time it would seem. It would seem Mr Fraser has on things like offshore  processing and others. That is his right. He will always remain one of Australia’s  Liberal Prime Ministers and at that time and for many years was the second longest  serving Prime Minister and I think we should always treat our leaders with respect. 

 QUESTION: 

 It is not just a change in mind it is 180 degrees. 

 MORRISON: 

 Well that is for him to explain. The good news is the Coalition won’t be changing its  mind on border protection. The Coalition will be living up to our policy philosophy  when it comes to immigration which John Howard put best - we will decide who  comes to this country and the circumstances in which they come and no one else. 

 QUESTION: 

 Does it damage the Liberal brand that a former Liberal Prime Minister is  campaigning for the antithesis of what you stand for? 

 MORRISON: 

 No I don’t think so because I honestly think that people can see the 180 degree turn  that Mr Fraser has embarked on. That is a matter for him. He is an Australian who is  entitled to his opinion and that is the nature of our democracy. Isn’t it great. 

 Completely unrelated, I have ditched the blue tie for the gold tie today and the  Wallabies and I wish all the boys well tonight. There is an army that has invaded this  city today in terms of the British Lions, they are everywhere here this morning. I hope  they have a great visit to Australia and I look forward to the boys absolutely  walloping them tonight out at the stadium. Thanks. 

 Ends 

 

 

 

 

