---
title: "Books of Hope for children in detention"
date: "2013-02-21"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390960
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2245645%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Thursday, 21 February 2013   

 Books of Hope for children in detention   

 The Australian Greens have launched a ‘Books of Hope’ drive today, calling for people all around the  country to donate children’s books for refugee families in Manus Island and other detention centres.   

 “These children are living in terrible conditions and we need to do anything we can to improve their  situation,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson, senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “When I was on Manus Island last month, one of the many sad and disappointing things I realised  was that the children there have no books to read and share with their families.   

 “The experts and Greens agree that no child should be locked up but the Labor Party continues to  compete with Tony Abbott’s Liberals in a race to the bottom.   

 “The simple gift of a book will mean so much to the children who are being detained in island  prisons.   

 “In December my office asked Australians to send ‘Messages of Hope’ to children in detention and,  when I was on Manus Island, many children told me they were thrilled when they received their  cards.   

 “Now we have launched the ‘Books of Hope’ campaign and I’m certain that the actions of  compassionate Australians will again have a strong positive effect on the lives of detained children.   

 “My office has already received a significant donation of books from a publisher to kick-off the  appeal and I hope many other Australians choose to support this cause.   

 “While Labor have lost their way and turned their back on vulnerable refugees, the Greens will  continue to be a strong alternative voice fighting for the rights of all in the Australian Parliament.”   

 You can either post a book to Sarah’s office or drop it off in person at your local Green MP’s office.   

 You can find out more about the book drive or register your involvement here.   

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

