---
title: "Statement on search and rescue currently underway and the Prime Minister's trip to PNG"
date: "2013-07-13"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397071
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2593129%22
---

 Senator Sarah Hanson-Young  13 July 2013   

 Statement on search and rescue currently underway and the Prime Minister’s trip to PNG   

 “Our thoughts are with all of the people caught up in this terrible tragedy,” the Greens’ immigration  spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “My heart goes out to the people who were on the boat and their families as well as the Australian  service people working on the rescue effort.   

 “The death of a young boy is absolutely heartbreaking.   

 “These terrible events show that creating safer pathways to protection for refugees in our region is  an absolute priority.   

 “What this really underscores is that cruel deterrence policies don’t work and aren’t saving lives at  sea.   

 “We need to be finding safer pathways and a new approach to looking after vulnerable refugees.   

 “With Kevin Rudd due to visit PNG tomorrow, it is crucial that he also visit the Manus Island  detention camp to see the appalling conditions for himself.   

 “A genuine regional approach does not involve the horrors of Manus Island.   

 “A sincere regional solution would start by taking the 3,800 refugees from Indonesia that the  Houston Panel recommended.   

 “An emergency intake from Indonesia would give refugees a much safer pathway to Australia than a  journey on a leaky boat.”   

