---
title: "Election madness continues with families to Nauru and 10,000 on Manus"
date: "2013-08-04"
creators:
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398161
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2643215%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Sunday, 4 August 2013    

 Election madness continues with families to  Nauru and 10,000 on Manus    

 It is unacceptable that families and unaccompanied children are going to be dumped on Nauru and it  is unfeasible to send 10,000 refugees to Manus Island, the Australian Greens have said.    

 “The old parties have succumbed to a cruelty fuelled election fever,” the Greens’ immigration  spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.    

 "Labor's approach is hardline, horrible and inhumane. It is also heartless and absurd.    

 “We know that the Manus Island detention centre couldn't house 200 people safely, so how does  the government think it can handle 10,000?    

 “Permanently dumping thousands of refugees on remote Pacific islands is not a solution, it is  election motivated madness.    

 “The latest announcements from this Labor government are a bottom of the barrel, election driven  ploy that is trashing Australia’s reputation and our generous heart.    

 “Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott are waging war on refugees and the Australian idea of a fair-go for all.    

 "Fair-minded Australians who have voted for Labor and Liberal in the past are dismayed at the race  to bottom from Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott. The Greens are offering an alternative to the cruelty of  the old parties.    

 "The Greens’ plan would help the UN assess claims in Indonesia and increase our humanitarian  intake to 30,000, offering a humane and practical approach that gives refugees safety and a fair- go.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

