---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Clifton Park Bowls Club, Aberfeldie: 21 September 2013: [endorsement of Bill Shorten] by former Victorian Premier Steve Bracks for the Labor Party leadership; discussed the Government's decision not to report asylum seeker boats as they come in and also the Labor Party leadership contest."
date: "2013-09-21"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "Office of SHORTEN, BILL, MP"
subjects:
  - "endorsement of Bill Shorten"
  - "endorsement of Bill Shorten"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211441945
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2742725%22
---

 

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 TRANSCRIPT 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MEMBERS FORUM AT CLIFTON PARK BOWLS CLUB, ABERFELDIE  SATURDAY 21 SEPTEMBER   

 SUBJECTS: Steve Bracks’ endorsement; Coalition’s politicised axing of  Bracks; Government’s stop the media releases policy; Labor leadership    

 

 STEVE BRACKS: I have enormous pleasure in introducing Bill Shorten. Bill, I’ve  known - believe it or not - for twenty five years. When Bill was working in  employment programs, when Bill was working in the trade union movement,  when Bill was developing policy in the Labor Party and advocating on behalf of  many, many Australians more broadly.   

 I am supporting Bill, because I believe Bill is the best chance of not only leading  the Labor Party effectively, but also winning the next election, and taking Labor to  what is needed - an historic victory. It has done before, only on several  occasions. And I believe it can be done again.    

 Bill Shorten has all the qualities to be one of the best Labor leaders we’ve ever  had.     

 He is excellent on policy. He is a great advocate. He is innovative.    

 He brings people with you, which I think is a great quality.    

 And I know that he’ll be in the model of Bob Hawke in running an effective  Cabinet, an effective team, and bringing people with him in the process.    

 I support Bill. I hope that many, many members of the Labor Party also support  Bill, because I think the benefits will be there for us as a Labor Party if Bill 

 Shorten becomes our next Leader. So, could I hand over to Bill - and I think he  will be a great Leader of the Labor Party.   

 BILL SHORTEN: Good afternoon, everyone. It’s great that people are here to  celebrate the Labor Party at the Clifton Park Bowls Club in the suburb of  Aberfeldie, in Melbourne’s northwest. It’s really great to get an endorsement from  Steve Bracks, a very successful Premier of Victoria. I, like most Australians, am  probably a bit shocked that Steve Bracks was removed as our representative, the  nation’s representative in New York, for political reasons. But the silver lining in  this cloud is I suppose it does let him come out and support me. So, New York’s  loss is my gain.   

 BRACKS: Absolutely!   

 BILL SHORTEN: Today is the sixteenth members’ forum that I’ve held. This is a  great process, giving party members the opportunity to see real politics. As you  can tell by the couple of hundred people here there is a real appetite out there for  people to have their say. Victoria’s a bit of a stronghold of mine, and there’s a lot  of support for me here. But the messages that the people in the Labor Party in  Victoria are saying are the same as the messages that I’m encountering  everywhere I travel in Australia. They want Labor to be positive, as well as  holding Abbott to account. They want to ensure they have ideas which reach out  to the mainstream and to the centre of Australian politics. That’s what I’ve  articulated that if elected leader, science, research and innovation would be one  of my key priorities on which to engage with the Australian community.   

 I’ve also indicated that one of my key policies, if elected leader, would be to  make violence against women not only a state issue; but a national issue, and a  men’s issue.    

 Also, I’ve indicated today that looking at the good work done by Labor in  government on dental care, I believe that dental care is one of those issues that  reaches out and affects the lives of many thousands of Australians, and I think  that is a policy area that Labor should be doing more work on, and we should  build on our accomplishments - because making sure that your teeth are okay is  as fundamental as any other part of your health. I look forward to the next  number of days in this election campaign. It’s been a clean fight. And I reiterate  again that the party needs to embrace this process, that if elected I will put party  reform, policies and people, and winning the trust of people, as the core agenda  of my leadership.   

 Happy to take questions.   

 JOURNALIST: What are your thoughts on the Government deciding not to make  public the number of asylum seeker boats?   

 BILL SHORTEN: What on earth are the Government thinking? I would have  thought that for an organisation who’ve been waiting so hungrily to sit in  government, they’d have had more to do than sack some public servants,  exclude women from the Cabinet of Australia, and now they want to pretend it’s  not a question of stop the boats, it’s a question of hide the boats. Imagine if  Labor had said we didn’t want to tell you what was happening with boats. The  then opposition would’ve gone bananas. Now they get into power, they’ve  decided - they’ve realised - that they can’t keep their promises, and instead,  what they’re going to do is pretend there’s no challenge there.    

 I’m very clear with Labor Party members. Refugees, and immigration generally,  are a good thing for Australia. We’ve got to make sure that we get our population  growth done in an orderly manner, that we can absorb new Australians into the  lifeblood of Australian society. But the very fact that the new government doesn’t  even want to refer to multiculturalism is alarming. Australia is an immigrant  nation. Unless you’re an Indigenous Australian, you came here by boat or by  plane. I strongly believe, and I’m sure this is a view held across the Caucus, that  refugees are part of our intake. We should ensure the humane treatment of our  refugees. We don’t support, in any Labor I lead, the demonisation of refugees.  We support immigration. The fact that the Abbott Government’s proposing to hide  information from the Australian people speaks volumes for their trust in the  Australian people.    

 JOURNALIST: You’re speaking of accountability - is this fact that they’re trying  to hide these numbers a concern for you?   

 BILL SHORTEN: We know that the challenge of people smugglers and asylum  seekers can’t be solved by three word slogans. And the Government, the new  Government, have been a bit caught out, I think. The fact that they want to hide  the boats, first they said stop the boats…they know they can’t do that. Then they  said they want to buy the boats. Remember, they’ve promised to buy second-hand fishing boats off Indonesian fishermen. Well, talk about come in spinner. I  don’t think there’d be a single Indonesian fisherman who wasn’t cheering for  Abbott to get elected. Now they want to move from buy the boats to hide the  boats. The real issue here is that if you want to have a proper immigration policy,  if you want to have proper treatment, human treatment of refugees, if you want to  be able to defeat criminal syndicates, work with the Opposition. Don’t demonise  the people coming here. Let’s make the high seas safe for all. But let’s not  pretend that a simple, three word slogan is going to do anything other than treat  Australians as mugs.   

 JOURNALIST: Why do you think the Government’s decided to do this?   

 BILL SHORTEN: The Abbott Government’s decided hide the statistics because  they’ve got no idea what to do. Remember, they cooked up this crazy idea of  having a three star Admiral at the end of a wharf in Darwin buying second hand 

 tinnies off Indonesian fishermen. All that is is a boon to the fishing industry, so  they can upgrade their boats. The then Opposition have been selling and  peddling fear. They’ve been telling us to be frightened and afraid of people  wanting to come to this country. It is not a crime to want to come and live in the  best country in the world. Now, what we’ve got to do, though, is defeat the people  smugglers - criminals who prey on vulnerable people and put them at risk of  drowning.    

 We’ve got Grand Finals coming up in the next couple of weeks throughout  Australia. If we knew that thousands of people going to those Grand Finals would  die on the journey there, you’d probably cancel the game. We’re not going to  cancel Australia, so we do need to take a strong line against people smugglers.  But one thing that Labor does not have to do - and, unfortunately, the Liberals  are all at sea over - is that we don’t have to demonise refugees. What we have  to do is make sure that we’ve got clear policies which put the people smugglers  out of business.    

 And I say to Tony Abbott: do what you never did in Opposition. Work with the  Opposition of the day rather than playing politics and demonising people. That’s  the best answer for the long term. Forget the politics and look after the people.  That, normally, will see you right.   

 JOURNALIST: So in terms of the Labor leadership, what do you think is the  difference between you and Anthony Albanese?   

 BILL SHORTEN: I’ve made it a point at the outset, and I’m not going to change  now - I will in no fashion publicly or privately disparage my rival. He’s welcome to  run, and if he wins, he’ll do a good job of it.    

 JOURNALIST: So -   

 BILL SHORTEN: So that’s the first point to make. Because it means that I may  get less column inches because I’m less inclined to attack.    

 The old Labor tradition of MPs attacking eachother - that ends. That ended at  the last election. It will certainly end on my watch if I get elected to be Leader.    

 But in terms of what I particularly bring to this job - Australia needs us to not only  hold the Abbott Government to account, we need to offer a positive agenda  about the future. I believe I’m best placed to talk about where Australia is going  and to think about the big ideas we need to do to make sure that Australians will  be doing as well in 2020 and 2030. I believe there is a generational change  required in Australian politics. We need to talk to the lives that people are living in  the suburbs and the regions of Australia. We need to recognise that people want  to smooth their prosperity over their life. We need to recognise that people want 

 to be healthy. That they know that they need a good education, and a lifelong  education, because they’ll have many jobs in their lifetime.    

 They know that they need to be resilient and need community infrastructure to  support them when disaster hits. They also know that they can’t just live to work,  and they’ve got to have a life outside of work. These are our challenges in the  future. I believe I’m well placed, with the sorts of ideas that I’m articulating, be it  tackling the scourge of domestic violence, be it the promotion of science,  research and innovation as a core Australian value, be it more work being done  to support the dental health of all Australians - these are the issues that matter,  and I’m using this leadership contest to stake some ground for Labor against the  conservatives in the upcoming years.   

 JOURNALIST: So, what are your strengths as a leader? Why do you think Labor  members should vote for you?   

 BILL SHORTEN: My strengths as a leader would be this: I’m a campaigner. I  learned this in the union movement when you’d stick up for people to get them  better wages. I learned it when I worked with companies to try and make sure  that business would survive with global competition and that they had productive  workplaces. I’m a campaigner, and I did that by working with and on behalf of  thousands of people with disabilities and their carers all round Australia, to create  and demand equal treatment in this country, which the National Disability  Insurance Scheme represents.    

 What Labor needs in the next three years, is it needs campaigning outside of  Parliament as well as firepower in the Parliament.    

 If we just try and play Tony Abbott at his game, of out-negativing Dr No, well,  that’s a very hard road.    

 What I understand is that there’s a million people who didn’t put a 1 next to us -  they’re the people we want to chase. And we will do so by being true to our  values and talking about the lives that people are leading. They don’t need Labor  to tell them what to do. They just need to be confident that when you vote Labor  you’ve got people who know the future and can navigate a path to the future with  Australians.    

 So, I’m a campaigner, and a builder, and that’s what I bring to the job if elected.   

 JOURNALIST: And why should Labor members vote for you?    

 BILL SHORTEN: Because I, like all of them, got involved in politics to make a  difference.    

 I can make a difference in the next three years by re-winning the trust of  mainstream Australia.    

 Thirty four in every hundred Australians did vote for Labor. But I am ambitious to  increase Labor’s vote.    

 I am ambitious to have even better dental care in Australia.    

 I am ambitious to make sure that women are not assaulted by men in the  numbers that they are now.    

 I am ambitious to make sure that Australia absolutely mines its greatest resource  - the talents of every Australian, by promoting a science, research and  innovation agenda.    

 That’s why I think people should support me.   

 And finally, people should support me because it will take far more than me to  win back the trust and confidence of Australians. We are a Labor movement and  a Labor Party. I have grown up in the political house of Labor. And I understand  that it takes a team to win. That there are no individual champions, but rather, a  champion team. And that’s what I want to help build.   

 Thanks everyone.   

 -ENDS-   

 MEDIA CONTACT: Andrew Porter 0419474392   

 

