---
title: "Another boat meets Labor's revolving door of failure"
date: "2013-02-02"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211388512
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2723295%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ANOTHER BOAT MEETS LABOR’S  REVOLVING DOOR OF FAILURE February 02, 2013

 The illegal arrival of another boat at Christmas Island, carrying 60 people, will remind Minister O'Connor that his failures as  Minister  for  Border  Protection  have  returned  to  haunt  him  in  his  new  immigration  portfolio,  Shadow  Minister  for Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice,  Customs  and  Border  Protection,  Michael

 Keenan said today.

 “The immigration portfolio is a revolving door of failure under Labor,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Minister O’Connor will not have big shoes to fill, but he will be saddled with a legacy of failure that Labor are simply not equipped to turn around, regardless of who they appoint as Minister.

 “At  the  election  there  will  be  a  clear  choice  between  the  proven  failure  of  Labor  on  our  borders  and  the  proven consistency, resolve and success of the Coalition. Labor just cannot be trusted to protect our borders,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr  Keenan  said:  “January  saw  double  the  amount  of  illegal  boats  arrive  than  the  same  time  last  year  - as  the  Prime   Minister announced yet another Cabinet reshuffle.

 “Last  election  the  Gillard  Government  promised  to  stop  the  boats  from  coming,  yet  since  then  over  400  boats  carrying more  than  25,000  people  have  arrived  illegally  on  Australia’s  shores  - making  this  yet  another  one  of  Labor’s  broken   promises.

 “The people  smugglers  now  have a possible  end  date  for  their closing  down  sale - September  14th  2013  - as  reports   suggest a mass influx of boat arrivals before the next election.

 “The people smugglers know that a Coalition Government is serious about stopping their insidious trade - we have done it  before and we will do it again,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 ANOTHER BOAT MEETS LABOR’S REVOLVING DOOR OF FAILURE > Micha...

 13/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

