---
title: "Coalition will cancel Labor's $58 million plan for Singleton Detention Centre"
date: "2013-08-16"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398964
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2666251%22
---

 1 

 

 

 

 JOINT PRESS RELEASE 

 THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MR. SCOTT MORRISON MHR,   SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP    

 

 COALITION WILL CANCEL LABOR’S $58 MILLION PLAN FOR SINGLETON  DETENTION CENTRE TO FUND OFFSHORE PROCESSING ON NAURU   

 The Coalition will cancel Labor’s plans to establish a detention centre for illegal boat arrivals at Singleton in  New South Wales, freeing up $58 million to deliver on the Coalition’s promise for additional offshore  processing capacity on Nauru.    

 If the Coalition is elected, processing will be done offshore on Nauru and Papua New Guinea, not in  Singleton.    

 While Kevin Rudd talks about sending arrivals to PNG, the Government's economic statement revealed his  secret plan to accommodate 1,000 plus people at the Defence base at Singleton at a cost of $58 million.   

 This is in addition to the 1,000 extra places Labor recently established for family detention facilities at  Blaydin, near Darwin, at a cost of $89.1 million and expanding other facilities around the country at a cost  of $71.43 million.    

 The Coalition will redirect this $58 million set aside by Labor for Singleton to create the capacity where it's  needed - offshore.    

 This will be in addition to the expansion of facilities at Nauru including accommodation for families at  RPC3 site, single adult males at RPC2 and the rebuilding of permanent facilities for single adult males after  the riot as well as permanent facilities for families.     

 The Coalition is committed to offshore processing on both Manus Island and Nauru.    

 In contrast, Kevin Rudd is making more room for people coming illegally on boats in Australia at places like  Singleton than he is offshore on Papua New Guinea, as his PNG arrangement continues to unravel.   

 

 16 August 2013 

 

 

