---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 23 May 2014: Operation Sovereign Borders, fixing Labor's legacy of border failure"
date: "2014-05-23"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Operation Sovereign Borders"
  - "fixing Labor's legacy of border failure"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408684
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3189982%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 Operation Sovereign Borders, fixing Labor's legacy of  border failure 

 Friday, 23 May 2014 

 Press Conference, Sydney 

 Minister Morrison: Well thank you for coming together at relatively short notice and  this will be a brief press conference because of some other commitments but we will  deal with the questions that we can. I just wanted to give a brief update today given  some of the comments made by the leader of the Opposition, he seems to be in  desperate need of an update on Operation Sovereign Borders because today on Jon  Faine he seemed to be completely incapable of acknowledging the significant  progress that has been made with Operation Sovereign Borders, avoiding questions,  unable to even acknowledge the fact that for more than five months now there has  not been a single successful people smuggling venture to Australia. 

 As you know each Friday we provide an update on these matters by way of a  statement and I will run through the figures in that statement today. Over the course  of the past week we have passed some very significant milestones. As I said before  more than five months since there has been a successful maritime people smuggling  venture to Australia and more than 150 days also in that record. Over the same  period of time under the previous government there was around 150 boat arrivals  over that period of time and 9500 people who were involved in those ventures. 

 I can also update you on the processing further decisions on Nauru. There has been  another 21 decisions handed down there, another 11 negative and ten positive which  means in total now there has been 18 negative and 23 positive on Nauru. As I said  yesterday in Manus Island there has been 15 negative and 11 positive. 

 I can also tell you today that the Christmas Island population of detainees has been  halved under the term of this government under Operation Sovereign Borders. There  are now 1251 people on Christmas Island, it was double that at the time we came to  government. 

 I can also note that 251 people have now voluntarily left our offshore processing  centres since Operation Sovereign Borders commenced on the 18th of September of  last year, more than doubling, more than doubling, well over doubling, what was  being achieved by the previous government who had operated those facilities for far  longer. 

 Now today as I said Bill Shorten was unable, unable to acknowledge the significant  progress that has been made on our borders under Operation Sovereign Borders.  He remains in denial of the problem that he left us, being part of a government that  presided over the cost, chaos and tragedy on our borders that we saw under Labor  and he now remains in denial on the solution that is being delivered to Labor's 

 problem. That is no different to what we are seeing on our budget. We are seeing an  opposition in complete denial of the problem they left behind with debt and deficit as  far as the eye can see under their administration and they remain in denial about the  real solutions and the hard choices that need to be made to put that back on track.  Now if the leader of the opposition is serious then what he will do is acknowledge the  reality and the reality is this, they left behind a mess and whether it is on our borders  or on our budget this government is setting about cleaning up that mess and is  making significant progress. 

 Question: Minister how far away is the deal with Cambodia? 

 Minister Morrison: It is still some time away. 

 Question: Minister with regards to the processing of pre-July 19 cases, onshore  detention cases, in February the department inadvertently released the names and  personal details of ten thousand people in immigration detention placing many of  them in danger if they are returned. The department has given assurances to those  affected that processes have been established to deal with the breach. What are  these processes and how is the breach going to take into account on dealing with  these claims? 

 Minister Morrison: Well I am happy to give you those responses, they are quite  detailed questions on a matter not relating to Operation Sovereign Borders but I am  happy to give you that response offline. 

 Question: Can you confirm this report today that you are looking to speed up the  processing of people on bridging visas? 

 Minister Morrison: Yes, this is consistent with the election commitments we gave  prior to September of last year. We had two big challenges when we came to  government, the first one has been to stop the boats and if Bill Shorten is in any  doubt when you haven't had a successful people smuggling venture for more than  five months that is what stopping the boats looks like. That's what it looks like. The  job is not yet done but that is certainly the sort of result that we talked about that we  have been able to achieve with the policies that we have had. The other part of the  challenge has been to address the significant legacy case load of almost 30 000  cases, 23 000 or thereabouts of those had not even been touched by the previous  government and had not been processed. Now in the Senate the Labor party and the  Greens have been denying the government its mandate on temporary protection  visas. We will await the outcome of decisions that are made in the new Senate  before setting our process for ensuring that we can start to move through that  backlog. But all that has happened over the last 8/9 months and all that the Labor  party and the Greens have achieved is to delay getting to a decision on these  individual's cases and where those who had been found to be refugees, if it weren't  for Labor and the Greens, they would already have work rights, they would already  have parity of benefits and they would be living in the community under those  arrangements. Their decisions to block this government's mandate on temporary  protection visas, denying permanent protection visas to those who have arrived  illegally by boat, is unnecessarily delaying us getting to those decisions. I think that is  putting further stress and strain on those individuals which is completely  unnecessary. 

 Question: What is going to happen to them after the five year resettlement period  [inaudible] 

 Minister Morrison: You are referring to onshore or offshore? 

 Question: Ah, onshore. 

 Minister Morrison: Onshore, well it has always been our view that when someone's  temporary protection visa runs its course then there is an opportunity to then  reassess their case. Now those visas can be up to three years but can be for as little  as a number of months and that is at the discretion of the officers who are handling  those cases. 

 Question: Minister is it appropriate for the Australian Government to be offering  repatriation to five Syrian asylum seekers detained on Manus given the UNHCR  says any displaced Syrian should be afforded some sort of protection? 

 Minister Morrison: Well every case has to be assessed on its merits. 

 Question: Just to go back on the processing and clearing the backlog, what would  you change about the process to make it quicker and clear the backlog? 

 Minister Morrison: Well there are a number of things we are going to be doing here.  The first is to triage the caseload overall. It is important to have a fair process but it is  also important to have a definitive process and not have a process which can be  endlessly gamed. It is also important to get those cases through the system which if  they are unsuccessful claims then we can begin the process of removal. I just  mentioned the significant success we have had on removals so far - all voluntary -  251 from our offshore processing centres and figures more than three times I think it  is on onshore removals that have been voluntary. So it is having a process that is  able to deal with the different types of claims. Those claims that require greater  interrogation, those which are more simple claims and being able to have processes  which provide fast channels in some respects and more detailed channels in other  respects and that relates to how appeals are dealt with, which officers they are dealt  with but it is quite a positive system which is designed to get to an outcome and not  allow this to drag on and on and on at taxpayers' expense but I think also to the  detriment of those who are subject to those cases. 

 Question: Will it result in more of the claims being rejected? 

 Minister Morrison: What happens with claims will be based on the merits of those  claims. That is what the process is designed to do. I am not going to prejudge the  outcome of the assessments because I won't be making them. 

 Question: But what I mean is will it be any different? Will it result in more claims  being approved, more rejected or the same but quicker? 

 Minister Morrison: We will see. 

 Question: Minister how can the process be fair when you cut legal aid to those who  arrive in Australia irregularly by boat? 

 Minister Morrison: If you are suggesting the taxpayer should have to pay for that  legal assistance then you have every right to put that forward and if you think that is  where taxpayers' money should be put and not towards the other objectives the  government has, particularly in a budget like this, you are free to make that case.  The other point is there has been no step taken by the government that would deny  any access to a person who has arrived illegally by boat to getting any legal support  and if there are people out there who wish to support that initiative and wish to fund  that initiative then by all means do it, by all means do it and that support and that  service will then be facilitated by my department. But what we have made a very  clear decision about is no longer will taxpayers be on the hook for that. We are just  not going to be on the hook for it. That is our decision. I know not everyone agrees  with it, you are welcome to disagree but I am not going to put taxpayers' funds into  that, particularly in a budget like this. In a budget like this if you are arguing we  should be spending more money on taxpayers' assistance for legal claims and  immigration advice/ support for people who arrived illegally by boat then you can go  and make that argument and I will strongly oppose you. Thanks for your time. 

 

 

