---
title: "Celebrating 25 years of Australia's woman at risk programme on World Refugee Day"
date: "2014-06-20"
creators:
  - "Cash, Michaelia"
source: "ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211409982
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3238931%22
---

 Senator the Hon. Michaelia Cash  Assistant Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

       20 June 2014 

 Celebrating 25 years of Australia’s woman at risk programme on World Refugee Day   

 Australia’s commitment to resettling almost 14 500 vulnerable refugee women and their  families will be celebrated as part of World Refugee Day, the Assistant Minister for  Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Michaelia Cash said today.   

 Minister Cash will today mark the 25-year anniversary of Australia’s woman at risk  programme by attending an event at the Adult Multicultural Education Services (AMES)  Multicultural Hub in Melbourne.   

 “Since its establishment in 1989, the woman at risk programme has been life-changing for  almost 14 500 women and their dependants,” Minister Cash said.    

 “Australia is an international leader in its resettlement of refugee women who are without the  protection of a partner or male relative. We are one of only a few countries with a specific  programme for women at risk, consistently meeting or exceeding its resettlement target.”    

 Speaking at today’s AMES event is Bishree Hamaadi from Iraq, who was given a new life in  Australia in 2012 through the woman at risk programme.   

 “I would like to say to the Australian people and government a big thank you for providing  dignity and a respectful life to so many refugees,” Ms Hamaadi said.   

 Minister Cash said that Ms Hamaadi is just one example of the thousands of women who  benefit from the programme and Australia’s ongoing humanitarian commitment.   

 “With more than half of the world’s refugees estimated to be women and children, this  government recognises the significance of the programme and the protection it offers to  those most vulnerable,” Minister Cash said.   

 “As a result, the government increased the woman at risk quota within the humanitarian  programme to 1000 places in 2013-14. This level will be maintained in 2014-15.”   

 Since the end of World War II, more than 800 000 refugees and others in humanitarian need  have been resettled in Australia, contributing and shaping today’s society.   

 Australia will again welcome 13 750 people under the 2014-15 humanitarian programme  including prioritising family reunion with at least 4000 places under the special humanitarian  programme (SHP) for those proposed by family members.   

 Refugee Week runs from June 15 to 21 to coincide with World Refugee Day. It has been  celebrated in Australia since the 1980s and a wide range of community events and activities  are taking place around the country.   

 Media Enquiries: David De Garis 0427 019 692 

