---
title: "Budget 2014: Transcript of press conference: Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney: 22 May 2014: Abbott Government's Budget of broken promises; Tony Abbott broken promises on health and education; GP Tax; Tony Abbott on ABC radio; university fee increases; Cambodia; and Gonski."
date: "2014-05-22"
creators:
  - "King, Catherine"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408497
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3182184%22
---

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

 MEMBER FOR SYDNEY   

 THE HON CATHERINE KING MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR BALLARAT   

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  ROYAL PRINCE ALFRED HOSPITAL, SYDNEY  THURSDAY, 22 MAY 2014   

 SUBJECT / S: The Abbott Government’s Budget of broken promises;  Tony Abbott broken promises on health and education; GP Tax; Tony  Abbott on ABC radio; university fee increases; Cambodia; Gonski   

 

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY OPPOSITION LEADER: Thank you for coming  here to the Royal Prince Alfred hospital today. This is a fantastic hospital, it has  seen a great deal of hundreds of millions of dollars of investment from the  previous Labor Government, including the fantastic Chris O’Brien lifehouse cancer  centre just up the road here. It is exactly the sort of hospital that will suffer  because of the funding cuts in this year’s Federal Budget. This hospital is likely to  lose hospital beds. It is likely to see people waiting longer for elective surgery  and waiting longer in emergency. But it is not the only hospital in Australia that  will feel that. Every hospital in Australia will feel that. Before the election Tony  Abbott said as clear as day there will be no cuts to health, no cuts to education,  no new taxes, no changes to the pensions. Since the election he has broken 

 every single one of those commitments. We have seen $80 billion dollars cut  from the states’ hospitals and schools. $80 billion dollars cut from health and  schools in this Budget. We have seen a whole range of health cuts that Catherine  will speak about in a minute, but in terms of education we have not only seen  massive cuts to school funding, we have seen the complete abandonment of the  Gonski school education funding model. Something that has been severely  criticized over night by the architect of the fairer funding system, David Gonski  himself. You also see massive cuts to university education with students paying  more for a university degree, and a university degree becoming out of reach for  many ordinary Australians.    

 At the same time you see cuts to vocational education and cuts to funding  programmes that help kids make the transition from school to TAFE or to  university. So right across the board cuts to school funding, cuts to vocational  education and cuts to university education. Tony Abbott also promised no new  taxes and no increases on taxes. Well he has broken that promise in spades. He  is increasing income tax for high income earners. He is increasing petrol tax for  every Australian who drives. He is also levying new taxes on a visit to the GP and  he is increasing the cost of buying medicines. He is cutting family tax benefit for  many, many hundreds of thousands of Australian families who rely on that little  bit of extra help from the government to make ends meet. And when it comes to  pensions, pensioners are perhaps the hardest hit by Tony Abbott’s budget. Not  only are they paying more for health care, not only are they paying more for  petrol, but they will actually see a fall in the value of their pensions. We know  people will be waiting longer to receive a pension, they will wait till they are 70  before they get a pension, but every pensioner, all of those people who are  already receiving the age pension, who have worked hard the whole of their life  to earn it are now going to see a reduction in the value of the age pension in  coming years. This Budget hits every Australian and it breaks every promise that  Tony Abbott made. Catherine do you want to talk a bit more about the health  cuts?   

 CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks, it is terrific  to be here in Sydney today with Tanya Plibersek, former Minister for Health, who  presided over a huge investment in health in this country. A very important  investment that has been absolutely trashed by Tony Abbott. What Tony Abbott  said before the last election is that there would be no cuts to health, no new  taxes. We know in this Budget, we have seen $80 billion dollars cuts from health  and education. That translates to $15 billion dollars in New South Wales alone.  $15 billion dollars which will see bed closures. Which will see more pressure on  emergency departments and longer waiting lists for elective surgery. These cuts  start in just under 39 days’ time. They are not cuts in the never, never. They are  cuts that will start very soon and start to immediately affect public hospitals right  the way across this country. We have also seen cuts to public dental, public 

 dental waiting lists will also increase. We have seen cuts to preventative health  measures. Measures that were put in place, funding to states and territories to  keep people well, to keep them out of hospital. And of course we have seen the  GP tax. The GP tax will cost around about $285 million dollars in out of pocket  costs every year for people of New South Wales. That is putting a barrier in the  way of people accessing general practitioners.    

 And the Treasurer Joe Hockey and the Prime Minister can’t even get the details  of that policy right. They have made a claim, twice made a claim that people  with chronic disease, people with asthma, people with other chronic conditions  such as Alzheimer’s who are going to see their GP will not pay this GP tax. That  is simply another lie from Tony Abbott. People with chronic conditions will be  paying $7 dollars every time they go to a GP for their standard consultation. That  is what this policy is designed to do, is to make people pay more for accessing a  general practitioner. And we know the results of doing that. The results of doing  that will be that people will defer important visits to the doctor. Important visits  where they may be managing their chronic condition or they may need to access  advice about how they can stay well if they find out if their family has a heart  condition or cancer within their families. People trying to access immunisation for  their children. We know people will delay those visits. And we then know that  from all of the international evidence that people will end up much sicker and  they end up in emergency departments. The cruel hoax of this budget is then  Tony Abbott wants to put a tax on hospital visits as well. So, all around this  Budget means that you will be paying more for the health services that you need  and it is picking apart at the seams the fundamental health system we have  here, Medicare. Labor will defend Medicare and we will certainly not be  supporting Tony Abbott’ imposition of a GP tax every time you go to the doctor.    

 JOURNALIST: Ms Plibersek what did you make of Tony Abbott’s wink on radio  yesterday?   

 PLIBERSEK: Well look, I think the sad thing is that it just shows that Tony  Abbott doesn’t get it. He doesn’t get what struggling Australians are facing, the  sort of difficult choices they are making, the sort of sacrifices they are making. I  think it shows Tony Abbott is completely out of touch with how hard life is for a  lot of people.   

 JOURNALIST: What about the university protests yesterday? What do you  make of them?   

 PLIBERSEK: Well like I have said before I think university protests should be  large and should be peaceful. I am disturbed when I see people being jostled or  any violence at a protest. But I am not surprised that university students and  parents frankly are very, very concerned about the changes in this Budget. And 

 the changes that are being proposed by Tony Abbott, putting university  education out of reach for a whole lot of ordinary families. You have got families  with children being born today who will already be worrying about whether they  can save enough to send their child to university. The same way parents do in  the United States. What you have got designed here is a two-tiered system  where wealthy universities will be free to charge whatever they want and  wealthy students will be the only ones who will be able to afford to go to them  and the rest of the student population will miss out.    

 They will either make the decision to not to go to university at all because they  cannot afford it or they will be going to universities that find it much more  difficult to raise funds. We are already seeing universities trying to work out how  they are going to cope with a 20 per cent reduction in student funding. That is  coming at a time when there will also be students reconsidering whether to go to  university at all because they will be copping a debt of hundreds of thousands of  dollars when they graduate at the same time as they are trying to start a family,  buy a home, doing all the things you do as you start to move into adulthood.   

 JOURNALIST: A big part of tony Abbott’s election campaign was the fact that  Labor didn’t have a mandate for the carbon tax and focusing Julia Gillard’s  comments before the election. What do you say to Tony Abbott’s mandate for  what he’s doing for health and education?    

 PLIBERSEK: Tony Abbott before the election deliberately lied to Australians. If  Tony Abbott had said before the election I am going to destroy Medicare, I am  going to make it more difficult for people to see a GP and we are going to  introduce fees for people to go to public hospitals, Australians wouldn’t have  voted for him. And he knew that, so he didn’t take them into his confidence, he  told them a deliberate lie about not cutting health funding. He told a deliberate  lie to about not cutting education funding because he knows that Australians  value quality education, not just for their own children, but for all Australian  children. That is why Australians backed the Gonski education reforms.    

 So he lied about those reforms. He lied about being on a unity ticket with Labor  about school education funding and maybe the cruellest lie of all is the lie he told  Australian pensioners that their pensions would be safe. That he wouldn’t be  going after pensioners. These are people who are already struggling on around  $20,000 dollars a year. Tony Abbott wants to pay a millionaire $50,000 to have a  baby but he wants to cut the pensions of people living on $20,000 a year or less.  He never said that before the election because he knew if he did people wouldn’t  have voted for him. People would not have voted for a two tiered user pays, dog  eat dog system in health and education and in pensions the way we see in the  United States.    

 JOURNALIST: Have you been surprised amount of opposition particularly from  within his own party? Six out of eight state and territory leaders and also a lot of  Coalition MPs.   

 PLIBERSEK: Well I am not surprised that premiers, including Liberal premiers  are saying hands off our hospitals and hand off our schools. What an outrageous  thing to do to state governments to say we want to cut our deficit so we are just  going to shove all of this spending that we used to share, we are just going to  shove it onto you. I meant it is a completely unreasonable, unbelievable thing to  without warning, without discussion without negotiation suddenly just pull out of  funding that the Commonwealth has always shared with the states in the past.  This isn’t a new thing. For decades Commonwealth and State governments have  been sharing responsibility for hospitals and sharing responsibility for schools.  And for Tony Abbott to say ‘oh no that was never our job’. It is unreal. He has  lost touch with reality to think that he can get away from that.    

 JOURNALIST: We now know that the Cambodia deal, the Cambodia  resettlement deal, will include voluntary resettlement for abled bodied refugees  who are able to work and contribute. Isn’t that enough information in the broad  sense on whether Labor would support this deal?   

 PLIBERSEK: We’ve had very little information about Cambodia. I’ve before  expressed my concerns. Cambodia is one of the poorest countries in Asia. It’s a  post-conflict country that still has many, many problems of its own. We’ve seen  no details of the deal. It’s part of the extraordinary lack of transparency in the  immigration system that Scott Morrison’s running. We still don’t have any  answers on what happened on Manus Island, the investigation of the death of  Reza Berati. So many unanswered questions and the Cambodian deal, we’re  learning more from Cambodia about what the Australian Government’s proposing  than we’re learning from the Australian Government.    

 JOURNALIST: David Gonski is pleading for Government to keep funding your  Government’s needs based funding model while expressing regret that he did put  a $5 billion price tag on those reforms. Isn’t it true that the budget can’t afford  that excess?    

 PLIBERSEK: No, it’s just nonsense that these education reforms are  unaffordable. We can’t afford not to invest in Australia’s children. We can’t afford  to leave people behind. We can’t afford to develop a permanent underclass of  kids who get a second rate education, who can never afford to go to TAFE or  university. We can’t afford to leave our kids behind. We have to invest in  education so we can compete internationally and we have to invest in education  to get the best and to get the most out of every Australian.    

 And I’ll tell you something about these school education reforms. They were  funded ten years into the future. We laid out in our budget papers how the  school education funding would happen and how the national disability insurance  scheme would happen. We found during our time in government, $180 billion  worth of sensible savings. We found during my time as Health Minister, billions  of dollars of savings in the health system that protected patients’ access to  healthcare. We found savings by paying less for older, generic medicines so that  we could afford to by the brand new medicines that are being invented all the  time. We found savings by means testing private health insurance. Both of these  things, opposed by Peter Dutton. There are ways of finding savings that don’t  hurt patients in healthcare. There are ways of finding savings in the Budget that  make sure that every dollar of taxpayers’ dollars is being well and wisely spent,  but that’s not what happened in this Budget. This Budget is an attack on the  Australian way of life and it’s an attack on Australians, it costs the health system.  That means people waiting longer for elective surgery, it means people waiting  longer in emergency departments. It means the closure of beds and the sacking  of doctors and nurses and other health professionals.    

 This Budget costs the education system. It means poor kids will get a worse  education and that our whole system will be poorer for it. You’re not only losing  funding here for kids from disadvantaged backgrounds, you’ll lose funding here  for kids for extension classes, for all of the enrichment programs that were  proposed in the funding model that would have allowed Principals to say ‘We  want to hire a music teacher’ or ‘We want to hire a language teacher’ all of those  programs that make education better quality. That’s lost here as well.    

 The argument that the Australian Budget cannot sustain health and education  funding is false. We have three triple A credit ratings from three major credit  ratings agencies. Very few countries in the world have that. It was never  achieved under the Liberals. We achieved it, Labor achieved that and frankly if  you’ve got troubles with your budget as Tony Abbott claims, why would you  spend $20 billion on a paid parental leave scheme that gives the biggest  advantage to the richest Australians?    

 JOURNALIST: I’ve got a question for Mrs King, is Labor prepared to negotiate a  lower price for the GP payment?    

 KING: Not at all. Where not prepared to negotiate on a GP tax at all. This is an  unfair tax. It is a tax that penalises people going to the doctor. What a stupid  policy. Why would you put a barrier in the way to people accessing a part of the  system where you want people to go? You want them to go for prevention, you  want them to go to manage chronic disease and you want to make sure they are  staying well. This is stupid policy and it’s not just Labor saying that. Every single  health expert in the country from the Australian Medical Association, Royal 

 Australian College of GPs, Consumers Health Forum and the Public Health  Association. They all know this is dumb policy and Tony Abbott should drop it.    

 JOURNALIST: If the problem is that low income earners can’t actually afford it,  why not negotiate to exempt them from it?    

 KING: Well Tony Abbott has made a decision that everybody will pay a GP tax  of $7 every time you go for a visit and he’s provided a very small exemption for a  small number of people who are concession card holders after ten visits. What  he doesn’t understand is it’s not just concession card holders who will feel this  pressure. There are many people on low and middle incomes who in fact will find  this very difficult. If you’ve got a family how on earth do you budget for when  your kids get sick because that is basically what he’s telling people. You now  need to factor into your budget the amount of GP visits you’re going to have  each year. What we should be doing in the health system is making sure people  have good access to General Practice. That is the basis on which Medicare is  developed, making sure you have universal access so that you can go to the GP,  the cheapest part of the system, and try to prevent unnecessary hospitalisations.  Everybody knows this is dumb policy and it is certainly not something Labor will  be negotiating on.    

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister and the Treasurer both appeared to make  mistakes this week when trying to explain the GP co-payment. Does this show  just how difficult it is to break down complicated health policy so that people can  actually understand it?   

 KING: Well it seems to be that only Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey and Peter  Dutton, the architects of this policy are seeming now to get stuck on the actual  details, they’ve been called on them, they’ve misled people by saying people with  chronic disease conditions will not have to pay that tax. They clearly do not  understand their own policy, let alone the way in which the health system  operates. We know people with chronic disease conditions will pay this tax.  Everybody will pay this tax for a standard consultation. That is the way the policy  is designed, it is in fact designed to discourage people from going to the doctors  and accessing the doctor when they need to in order for the Government to save  money.    

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACTS: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350 (PLIBERSEK)  ALEXANDER WHITE 0488 134 359 (KING)   

