---
title: "Australia and Republic of Nauru Joint Ministerial Forum to oversee implementation of regional partnership between Australia and Nauru"
date: "2014-04-11"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211406610
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3575096%22
---

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection   

 Australia and Republic of Nauru Joint Ministerial  Forum to oversee implementation of regional  partnership between Australia and Nauru  Friday, 11 April 2014 

 Joint statement with the Hon. Scott Morrison MP - Minister for Immigration and  Border Protection and the Hon. David Adeang MP - Nauru Minister for Justice 

 A meeting of the Joint Ministerial Forum to oversee implementation of the regional  processing and resettlement partnership between Australia and Nauru was held in  Sydney yesterday led by Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon  Scott Morrison MP and Nauru Minister for Justice, the Hon David Adeang MP. 

 The Australia/Nauru Joint Ministerial Forum offers clear direction and oversight of the  implementation of the Nauru arrangement and provide a timely and accountable  process to ensure that the arrangement is being converted into tangible and practical  outcomes. 

 The outcomes of yesterday's meeting were as follows: 

 • Ministers noted the process of Refugee Status  Determination is well advanced, with the Nauru  Government due to hand down the first tranche  of initial refugee assessments to a minimum of  60 transferees within a month. 

 • Ministers agreed to an ongoing commitment of  handing down refugee assessments to a  minimum of 60 transferees per month. 

 • Ministers restated commitment to resettlement  arrangements in Nauru consistent with the  arrangement agreed between the Governments  of Australia and Nauru in 2013. 

 • Minister Adeang was briefed on Minister  Morrison's recent visit to Cambodia to further  discussions on regional cooperation issues, with  the Ministers agreeing that the Government of  Nauru will be engaged as a partner in future  discussions with the Government of Cambodia. 

 • Confirmed that as a result of infrastructure  upgrades across the Nauru centre, all  transferee children are now regularly attending  school in air conditioned class rooms. 

 • Noted that families with infants are now able to  be accommodated in air conditioned marquees.  • Noted that a range of health practitioners are  providing health services to transferees 

 including general practitioners, nurses,  psychologists, counsellors, paediatrician and a  psychiatrist to support transferees. Medical  equipment and health personnel for the  provision of health care to children under 4  years is available onsite.  • Noted transferees had access to specialist 

 IHMS staff at the centre including a dedicated  midwife, a general nurse with midwifery  qualifications, a paediatric nurse, and a Medical  Officer and Senior Medical Officer both with  paediatric emergency experience.  • Noted that transfers of detainees currently held 

 on Christmas Island would continue to Nauru,  including unaccompanied minors and families.  • Noted that a further site had been identified at  Nibok for post assessment accommodation for 

 families and that the site would now be  developed. This family accommodation will be in  addition to private leased accommodation on  the Island and purpose built accommodation at  Anibare Bay. Ministers agreed to prepare the  recently rebuilt RPC1 as post assessment  accommodation for single adult males.  • Noted that essential items for the care and 

 welfare of infants have been procured and  delivered. Items include appropriate equipment  for children including prams, capsules,  dummies, infant clothing, bedding,  consumables, medical equipment and age-appropriate recreational items.  • Ministers noted the continuing successful 

 implementation of Australian funded projects in  Nauru, in addition to Australia's annual Nauru  assistance package, that formed part of  Australia's commitment to the partnership.  Delivery of these commitments has already  commenced, including around $31 million of  total assistance to Nauru.  • Ministers agreed to hold a minimum of three 

 meetings per year under the Joint Ministerial  Forum with the next meeting to be held in  Nauru. 

 

