---
title: "Funds for food crisis in Southern Sudan"
date: "2014-05-21"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408404
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3178701%22
---

 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP 

 20 May 2014 

 FUNDS FOR FOOD CRISIS IN SOUTH SUDAN   

 The Australian Government will provide an additional $2.6 million to address food shortages  in South Sudan following renewed fighting and the further deterioration of the humanitarian  situation.    

 Australia has provided $13.4 million in humanitarian assistance to South Sudan since the  outbreak of the crisis in December 2013.    

 Severe food shortages are a consequence of the fighting which prevents South Sudanese  people from planting crops or from accessing food. This additional $2.6 million contribution  will be provided to the World Food Programme to deliver food assistance to almost 80,000  displaced people sheltering in UN bases.    

 The scale and complexity of the conflict in South Sudan continues to have devastating  consequences for civilians. Over one million people have been internally displaced and more  than 310,000 people have fled to neighbouring countries. United Nations Secretary-General  Ban Ki-moon recently visited the country and warned that if the conflict continued, half of  South Sudan’s 12 million people could be displaced internally, refugees abroad, starving or  dead by the year’s end.   

 The Australian Government continues to call on all parties to the conflict to immediately halt  hostilities and observe the 9 May peace agreement which has so far gone unheeded.     

 Australia is also working in the UN Security Council to ensure that the UN Mission to South  Sudan (UNMISS) is properly mandated and equipped to fulfil its important role protecting  civilians, facilitating humanitarian access and monitoring human rights violations. The  Australian Government commends UNMISS, including the Australian Defence Force  personnel deployed there, for their valuable efforts under difficult conditions.      

 The Australian Government continues to strongly advise Australians not to travel to South  Sudan, including Juba, because of ongoing military conflict. Australians in South Sudan are  strongly advised to leave as soon as possible while commercial options are available.   

 Foreign Minister’s Office:  Catherine McDonald 0478 488 874                                            Gabrielle Young 0408 275 340       

 

