---
title: "New evidence of war crimes: PM Abbott must end policy of appeasement with Sri Lanka - Greens"
date: "2014-02-05"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403773
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2981755%22
---

 The Australian Greens   

 New evidence of war crimes: PM Abbott must end policy of appeasement with Sri  Lanka - Greens     

 Australian Greens Leader Christine Milne says new evidence of war crimes in Sri Lanka,  released by the Public Interest Advocacy Centre’s International Crimes Evidence  Project, highlights Prime Minister Tony Abbott’s sell out of human rights and  appeasement of Sri Lanka by his refusal to promote a full and independent investigation  of war crimes through the United Nations.     

 “Prime Minister Tony Abbott’s ‘turn a blind eye’ appeasement of the Sri Lankan  government is a cynical political ploy to bolster his cruel refugee policies here in  Australia,” Senator Milne said.    

 “New evidence of some of the worst alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity  provides new impetus and urgency for the Prime Minister to reverse his appeasement of  the Sri Lankan government and lead the region in supporting a full and independent  investigation.    

 “World leaders including British Prime Minister David Cameron and Canadian Prime  Minister Stephen Harper have placed huge pressure on Sri Lanka to cooperate with the  UN but Tony Abbott gifts war ships.  This is beyond an embarrassment for Australia.     

 “Australia’s refusal to drive an independent investigation into such appalling crimes and  abuse of human rights demeans us globally and undermines our influence as a middle  power.    

 “Evidence of indiscriminate artillery bombardment of civilians, extrajudicial killing, torture,  sexual violence and other atrocities is shocking.     

 “I am appealing to the Prime Minister to act quickly in light of this new evidence.     

 “International support and diplomatic representation in favour of a full and independent  investigation is the bare minimum Australia should do.    

 “I have also repeatedly raised with the Abbott and Gillard governments the post-conflict  human rights abuses such as white-van abductions and attacks on the judiciary, to no  avail.” 

 

 Media contact: Peter Stahel 0437 587 562    

 

