---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 7 June 2014: Prime Minister's overseas visit; George Brandis; asylum seekers; Indonesia; Clive Palmer"
date: "2014-06-07"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
  - "Prime Minister's overseas visit"
  - "George Brandis"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Clive Palmer"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211409362
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3216135%22
---

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

 MEMBER FOR SYDNEY 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW 

 SYDNEY 

 SATURDAY, 7 JUNE 2014   

 SUBJECT/ S: Prime Minister’s Overseas Visit; George Brandis; Asylum  seekers; Indonesia; Clive Palmer   

 TANYA PLIBERSEK: Well it seems like every time the Prime Minister travels  overseas, Australians have to worry he’ll be embarrassing us on the world stage.  First there were the comments to the Wall Street Journal about President Obama  that are still being replayed in the United States. Then we saw the embarrassing  spectacle of the Prime Minister washing Australia’s dirty laundry at the Darvos  conference talking about domestic politics in a way that was embarrassing for all of  the world leaders there. The issues with Indonesia have been well covered, about  six months down the track, after the first fracture in the relationship, things still  aren’t back to normal and we know that the comments that the Prime Minister made  about Japan being Australia’s best friend and ally really put the noses of our other  friends and allies in the region out of joint. The last few days have seen another lot  of embarrassments overseas. We hear now that Prime Minister Abbott has cancelled  his meetings with the head of the IMF and the head of the World Bank and it seems  also the Secretary of the US Treasury. This is extraordinary at a time when we’re  preparing to host world leaders in Brisbane in November for the G20 summit. The  G20 summit is the most important meeting, international meeting, that’s ever been  held on Australian soil and we know the head of the World Bank and the head of the  IMF and of course the US Treasury Secretary are absolutely critically involved in  preparations for the G20 summit. It shows that our Prime Minister doesn’t 

 understand how important the G20 Summit is, and it shows that he is not engaged  as he should be in preparing to receive those World Leaders in Australia.   

 We also know that as the rest of the world moves forward on climate change, Tony  Abbott is a Nigel-no-friends on the world stage. President Obama has announced  tough new measures to tackle climate change. China is on the brink of announcing  tough new measures. South Korea will start its coal tax very shortly and Australia is  actually moving in completely the other direction, meaning that Australia is isolated  on the world stage. That’s true of poverty reduction as well. Developed countries  around the world are setting their sights on tackling extreme poverty. In fact John  Howard was committed to that, that’s been a bi-partisan aim of Australian foreign  policy and aid policy for many years now. Tony Abbott is taking Australia backwards  when it comes to foreign aid, just as he’s taking Australia backward when it comes  to climate change, just as he’s out of step with world leaders when it comes to  economic policy and preparing to receive world leaders for the G20 summit in  November. It’s embarrassing that whenever Tony Abbott goes overseas he ends up  a Nigel-no-fiends on the world stage because Australia is so very out of step with  moves in other countries.   

 JOURNALIST: Can I ask you about the Government dropping the term occupied  territory because they claim it’s judgemental. Do you, or does Labor agree with that  decision, what do you think of the term occupied territory?   

 PLIBERSEK: Look I think it’s absolutely ridiculous that the Attorney-General George  Brandis is out there freelancing on foreign policy. That expression has been used by  Coalition governments from the ’70’s, the ‘80’s, it’s been used in a bipartisan way,  it’s been used around the world and for George Brandis to start making unilateral  pronouncements about politics in the Middle East just shows how haphazard this  government’s foreign policy is. George Brandis is using fringe language, at times, on  foreign policy and it’s disturbing to think that he’s out there freelancing like this. It  certainly doesn’t help people in Israel or the Palestinian Territories to have George  Brandis freelancing and throwing out the window bipartisan terminology just in the  heat of the moment during Senate estimates.  

 JOURNALIST: So do you support the continuing use of that term?   

 PLIBERSEK: Well I think that’s the term that’s been in use internationally and in  Australia on both sides of politics for many years and I’m very surprised that George  Brandis has taken offence at it.   

 JOURNALIST: Bill Shorten yesterday didn’t seem too comfortable in terms of  whether he supported the use of the term or not, does that show there might be  differing views in Labor about that term?   

 PLIBERSEK: Absolutely not. Labor’s policy has always been consistent on this  issue. We support a negotiated peace, a two-state settlement where Israel can live 

 behind internationally defined secure borders and the Palestinians have a viable  state of their own. Labor has been very concerned to see the progress of the peace  talks between the Palestinians and the Israelis at this time and we urge a peaceful  settlement, because it will be much better for the Israelis and the Palestinian people  to have a negotiated settlement as quickly as possible.   

 JOURNALIST: Can I ask you on another matter the Immigration Minister said that  the family of a Tamil asylum seeker who died on Sunday would face very real  difficulties getting visas to attend his funeral in Australia. Should the Minister  intervene to allow them to come here?   

 PLIBERSEK: Look I don’t know anything about the story you’re referring to but I’d  say as a general point that if a family have lost a member in such tragic  circumstances then allowing them some compassion and some flexibility would seem  a very normal human thing to do.   

 JOURNALIST: So the relationship with Jakarta is not quite back to where it should  be, what more needs to be done do you think, or what would Labor be doing in  these circumstances?   

 PLIBERSEK: Well for more than six months we’ve had a suspension in a number of  areas of cooperation between Australia and Indonesia. Thankfully, Prime Minister  Abbott has finally met with President Yuduyono after six months. That’s a good step  forward but we still see no signed agreement, no agreement despite the fact it was  promised six months ago and it’s very difficult to see what progress has been made  in that six months. Australian businesses are still reporting that it’s difficult, more  difficult, to do business in Indonesia, the number of areas of cooperation that they  would normally be able take for granted just aren’t there at the moment. Indonesia  is a very important partner for Australia, both economically and strategically, and the  fact that our relationship’s still in limbo is a very serious concern.   

 JOURNALIST: Your political colleague Clive Palmer can’t stay out of the headlines,  now he’s been thrown under a bus by the LNP saying that he tried to get favours,  basically accusing him of corruption. Your view on that?   

 PLIBERSEK: Look I’ve only read what you’ve read in the papers this morning, I  don’t have any details on it so I can’t really comment on it. But the same rules and  laws should apply to anyone. They should apply to the poorest Australians, the  wealthiest Australians, it doesn’t matter who you are you should face the same level  of inquiry and the same censure under the law if you’ve done something wrong.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think he should step down while the matter’s investigated?   

 PLIBERSEK: I just don’t have enough detail to be able to answer questions like  that.  

  ENDS 

