---
title: "Former DFAT official in report which furthers the case for Sri Lanka war crimes"
date: "2014-05-19"
creators:
  - "Rhiannon, Lee"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408317
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3176836%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE  19 May 2014   

 Former DFAT official in report which furthers the case for Sri Lanka war crimes   

 The Australian Greens are calling on Foreign Minister Julie Bishop to reveal Australia's  relationship with former Sri Lankan Foreign Minister and Australian dual citizen Palitha  Kohona in light of a new report on the final days of the White Flag massacre.   

 Human rights lawyer Yasmin Sooka, a member of the Sri Lanka panel of experts  appointed by the UN Secretary General, has documented  the final days of the 'the  White Flag incident' in which senior members of the Tamil Tigers were massacred after  a negotiated surrender http://white-flags.org/.   

 Included in the Sri Lankan Government's negotiating party is former Sri Lankan Foreign  Minister Dr Palitha Kohona, who held dual Sri Lankan-Australian citizenship during the  war and is also a former Australian diplomat.   

 "This harrowing 'White-Flag' report throws further light on the war-crimes of the  Government of Sri Lanka, which Australia continues to be silent on", Senator Rhiannon  said.   

 "The failure of successive Coalition and Labor governments to publicly condemn these  war crimes has been linked to Australia's desire to retain the Sri Lankan government's  cooperation to stop refugees who are fleeing ongoing persecution.   

 "Once again the role of former senior DFAT official Palitha Kohona who is now Sri  Lanka's Permanent Representative to the UN mission has been called into question with  details of the texts he sent regarding a negotiated surrender of Tamil Tiger officials.   

 Mobile phone texts from Mr Kohona on 17 May 2009:  0846: "Just walk across to the troops, slowly! And comply with instructions carefully. The  soldiers are nervous about suicide bombers."  1529: "white flag, hands up, walk slowly".   

 "Foreign Minister Julie Bishop should come clean about Australia's relationship with  current and former Sri Lankan officials who are implicated in war crimes.   

 "We know there is a close working relationship between Australia and Sri Lanka. A  number of Tamils have been tortured in Sri Lanka upon their deportation from Australia.  This is unacceptable and shameful.   

 "France, Germany, Britain, US and Canada are pursuing accountability through a war  crimes investigation.   

 "Meanwhile Labor and Coalition leaders are building a legacy of complicity with the Sri  Lankan government over their abuses," Senator Rhiannon said.   

 For more details on Mr Kohona see: http://bit.ly/RNGp6e.   

 Contact: 0487 350 880 

