---
title: "UN slams Australia's cruelty to refugee children"
date: "2014-11-29"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211415678
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3536749%22
---

 Saturday, 29 November 2014   

 UN slams Australia's cruelty to refugee children   

 The United Nations Committee Against Torture’s severe critique of Australia's abuse of refugee  children should be a wake-up call for the Abbott government, the Australian Greens have said.   

 “The UN has been unequivocal in its condemnation of Australia’s cruel treatment of refugee  children,” Senator Hanson-Young said.   

 “We must change our ways, as a nation, or become an international outcast that will be  remembered for destroying a generation of vulnerable young refugees.   

 “Scott Morrison has hundreds of children needlessly locked up in detention right now. He’s using  these kids’ suffering as a bargaining chip in negotiations with the Senate crossbench, trying to bully  them into accepting his latest effort in a frantic grab for power.   

 “His actions are destroying children and are illegal, under international law.   

 “The UN also slammed Australia's offshore detention camps on Manus Island and Nauru. It's time  these torturous camps of cruelty were closed, once and for all.   

 “Condemnation by the United Nations cannot be ignored, especially when it is this serious, and I call  on the Immigration Minister to respond by releasing all children immediately.”   

 

 

 

