---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra: 31 January 2014: no illegal boat arrivals for 40 days; Operation Sovereign Borders; Senate inquiry; asylum seeker claims"
date: "2014-01-31"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "no illegal boat arrivals for 40 days"
  - "Operation Sovereign Borders"
  - "Senate inquiry"
  - "asylum seeker claims"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403640
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3083327%22
---

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 

 No illegal boat arrivals for 40 days, Operation  Sovereign Borders, Senate inquiry, asylum  seeker claims  Friday, 31 January 2014 

 Interview with Kieran Gilbert, Sky News, Canberra 

 Gilbert: Immigration Minister Scott Morrison will today appear before a Greens and  Labor dominated senate inquiry to defend the Government and the Coalition's  approach, and he joins me now ahead of that Senate inquiry hearing. Minister thanks  very much for your time. So first of all, you have confirmed no boats since December  19. 

 Morrison: That's right, six weeks now and there has not been a boat that has  successfully got to Australia. That is a period of over 40 days and nights now, and  more importantly we have gone a full calendar month without having any arrival.  Now the last time that happened was February 2009 and the last time we had no  boats in January was in January 2008 before the previous government got rid of all  the policies that were working and when they did that, as we know, 50 000 people  turned up on over 800 boats and over 1100 people died. 

 Gilbert: It seems from the language you have used, as well with the News Corp  papers today, that you have also confirmed that yes boats have been turned back,  towed back outside Australia's territorial waters. 

 Morrison: What I have confirmed is that if vessels seek to illegally enter Australia  they will be stopped, they will be intercepted, and they will be removed from outside  our waters and our contiguous zone. That is the policy of the Government and that is  the policy that is standing and being implemented, and anyone who seeks to try that  should know that that's exactly what we are doing. There is no, I think, any great  surprise about that. Australia is protecting its sovereignty. 

 Gilbert: No. But that has been the assumption that the turn backs have been  happening but up until now you haven't confirmed it for operational reasons but now  you… 

 Morrison: Our policy has always been our policy and what I have articulated is our  policy. Now in terms of specific operations within that policy, well no it is our, it is the  view of those who run these operations that they are sensitive matters and we are  not going to give the smugglers a textbook on how we do things. 

 Gilbert: Well not that it's, you know we are at the end of the month, and obviously  some turn backs have happened. Can you tell us how many? 

 Morrison: No because, again, we are not going to go into the specifics of the  implementation of the policy. I mean that's the policy and I know the policy is working  for the very reason that you outlined at the start of the program with no arrivals since  the 19th of December. I mean none shall pass is our objective here and that's what  we are implementing. 

 Gilbert: You have been accused of operating under a veil of secrecy, of being too, of  being too secretive generally in this area. Are you deliberately now being more  forthcoming with information, you're attending the Senate inquiry today in a bid to try  and counter that criticism? 

 Morrison: No, I think those sorts of conspiracy theories are frankly offensive on the  part of Labor and the Greens, who have banded together to continue to attack the  government's border protection policies, they did it when they were in government  together and they are doing it while we are now in government despite our success  and I am going to appear at the hearing today on my own initiative. I wasn't invited to  attend, I haven't been summoned to attend, I am attending on my own initiative  because I am going to stand by our Navy and Customs and Border Protection  personnel and our defence forces. The chief of the Defence Force will be there also  today as will Lieutenant General Campbell, and Mike Pezzullo the chief executive of  the Customs and Border Protection Service. Together we are running this operation,  I am the Minister responsible for it and I am pleased with the results it is getting. 

 Gilbert: So you are not deliberately getting on the front foot and trying to be more  open and transparent to face that criticism? 

 Morrison: I am standing by the people who are running our operations. And today's  hearing is about one thing, and that is our use of information and how that is  released to the public. How we do that is operationally important for the success of  what we are doing and I am not going to compromise the success of an operation  that is getting results and how we use information is an important part of that. Labor  and the Greens will do anything to try and bring this all undone and they are clearly  going to try to do that today in what really is just a stunt. It may well be a stunt but I  am not going to allow our defence force personnel and others who run these  operations to be subject to that without me standing by them. 

 Gilbert: Finally, a Somali asylum seeker quoted by the ABC and The Australian says  he suffered burns when he came into contact with an engine after being sprayed with  capsicum spray. From what you have seen this morning of these reports does that fit  the accounts that you have received from the Border Protection authorities? 

 Morrison: People are changing their stories all the time. Last week it was apparently  our Navy and Customs people were torturing them. Now this week they are changing  their story again. What I can tell you is this. It is standard issue equipment to have  personal defensive devices available to people involved in operations at sea and  where they are engaged in a situation which requires the deployment of those then  of course they will. They will do it in accordance with their training, they will do it in 

 accordance with the very strict rules for doing so. Any suggestion of mistreatment or  misuse of any force or any of these devices that may be being putting out there is  without any substantiation and is completely rejected by the government. 

 Gilbert: Asylum seekers could have suffered the burns though in one of these  encounters on board if naval personnel used capsicum spray. That is entirely  possible isn't it without breaching their rules of engagement? 

 Morrison: Well I'm not going to speculate on that. I'm simply going to say, our  people operate in accordance with their training and the very strict rules for the use  of force and the use of any of this equipment, but let me make this point. We are not  running a welcoming service out there. We are not running some sort of welcoming  committee. What we are doing is implementing a policy which is strong, which can  be tough and if people seek to come into our territorial waters this way then they will  be met by our Navy or Customs and Border Protection officers as part of our patrol  fleet and that will be dealt with. 

 Gilbert: Scott Morrison thanks for your time. Appreciate it. 

 Morrison: Thanks very much. 

 

 See: Index of Speeches  

 URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm211351.htm   Last update: Friday, 31 January 2014 at 12:39 AEST 

 

