---
title: "Operation Sovereign Borders September update"
date: "2014-10-01"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211414630
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3425371%22
---

 Minister for Immigration Scott Morrison MP 

 Operation Sovereign Borders September update 

 Wednesday, 01 October 2014 

 The September update for Operation Sovereign Borders reveals another month has passed without  a successful people smuggling venture to Australia, Minister for Immigration and Border Protection,  the Hon Scott Morrison said today. 

 'Eight of nine months in 2014 have passed without a successful people smuggling venture to  Australia as the government's policies under Operation Sovereign Borders continue to sustainably  deter illegal boat arrivals,' Minister Morrison said. 

 'Just one venture arrived successfully this year with all persons on board transferred to Nauru  whereas under the former Labor Government in the year preceding Operation Sovereign Borders  401 illegal boats arrived with 26 543 people on board. 

 'Despite increasingly shrill opposition from Labor and the Greens the Coalition Government is getting  on with the job of resolving the legacy of the previous Labor Government's failed border protection  policies. 

 'The Government's efforts to resolve the caseload of 30 000 illegal arrivals continue with the  introduction of legislation to the Parliament last week that seeks to restore Temporary Protection  Visas after they were foolishly abolished by Labor and the Greens. 

 'The government will not be providing a pathway to permanent protection visas for illegal boat  arrivals. 

 'Last week the government signed a Refugee Settlement Arrangement with the government of the  Kingdom of Cambodia which will enable people assessed as refugees on Nauru to be voluntarily  settled in Cambodia. 

 'Labor had made no arrangements for permanent settlement of people assessed as refugees on  Nauru, just as their resettlement arrangement with Papua New Guinea was a blank page. 

 'Late last month installation was completed of the first of two new reverse osmosis units at Nauru  increasing the country's daily water production capability. 

 'Installation of an additional unit is expected to be completed in the coming weeks. 

 'This initiative will ensure water security for the offshore processing centres, post-assessment  facilities and broader Nauruan population. 

 'The government is meeting its election commitments on border protection and will not be deterred  from our policies including offshore processing despite calls from advocates and others who want to  see a return to the failed policies of the past. 

 'The government is stopping illegal boat arrivals, preventing deaths at sea and saving taxpayers  billions of dollars,' Minister Morrison said. 

 

