---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 17 January 2014: Abbott Government blaming the Navy for its border protection failings"
date: "2014-01-17"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403271
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2953020%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  FRIDAY, 17 JANUARY 2014  SYDNEY   

 SUBJECT/S: Abbott Government blaming the Navy for its border  protection failings. 

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: This is an incredibly serious  matter today. Scott Morrison should stop blaming the Navy and our hard working  service personnel for failures in Government policy. All Australians have the greatest  respect for our armed services. It is not acceptable for Scott Morrison and the  Abbott Government to be blaming the Navy for problems in the Abbott Government’s  policies in terms of boat people. It is not on, and Australians will not stand for the  Australian Navy being blamed for mistakes being made through Abbott Government  policies.  

 JOURNALIST: Do you not admire their honesty?   

 SHORTEN: The honesty of who?   

 JOURNALIST: Of the Government for admitting [inaudible]   

 SHORTEN: I’m sorry but when you’ve got damage being done to the relationship  with Indonesia, when you’ve got an incident that occurred on Wednesday, as I  understand, and you have the Immigration Minister saying on Wednesday that  there’d been no crossing of any borders when in fact at the time he’s speaking  borders had been crossed - this is not an honest Government, they’ve broken their  promises. The Government is getting itself deeper and deeper into trouble because  its policies are not transparent, because they’re breaking the promise they made 

 before the election.  The Prime Minister Abbott and Scott Morrison both said before  the election that they would tell Australians on a weekly basis at least, good, bad or  in-between news.  The Government has been forced to admit it’s got problems with  its policies and now they’re trying to blame the Navy. So no I don’t respect what this  Government’s doing in terms of trying to blame the Navy for their policies.    

 JOURNALIST: How many times do you think this might have happened under a  Labor Government?    

 SHORTEN: Well first of all we’re dealing with a Liberal Government who promised   before the election they would be transparent, they are not owning up to what is  happening, they’re not being straight with the Australian people. Scott Morrison’s  arrogance is damaging our relationship with Indoensia, I don’t think anyone  seriously debates that.  And now what we see is that they are going to try and  blame the Navy for implementing Abbott Government policies which are causing  more problems than they are solving.    

 JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]   

 SHORTEN: Let me be very clear, Labor does not believe the Navy should be blamed  for Abbott Government policies. All Australians have the greatest respect for the  efforts of our service people and we will not allow them to be blamed for Abbott  Government policies. The Abbott Government should stop breaking its promises  about being transparent, and just be straight with the Australian people. Tell  Australian people what’s really going on and then I will think we’ll see an  improvement overall.   

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADERS OFFICE MEDIA UNIT: 02 6277 4053   

