---
title: "Australia opens resettlement facility on Manus Island"
date: "2014-12-17"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211417483
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3568151%22
---

 Scott Morrison MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Australia opens resettlement facility on Manus Island 

 Wednesday, 17 December 2014 

 The East Lorengau resettlement facility on Manus Island has been officially opened  by Minister for Immigration and Border Protection the Hon. Scott Morrison, as part of  his visit to Papua New Guinea. 

 'This is a further positive step forward in our offshore policy arrangement with  refugees to move into this new facility on Manus Island soon,' Minister Morrison said. 

 'On Monday, the Australian Government welcomed the Papua New Guinean  government's announcement that a further 40 refugee status determinations have  been signed, bringing total determinations to 50. 

 'The Government of PNG has advised me that those transferees found to be  refugees will be given visas and moved from the Lombrum Regional Processing  Centre to the new East Lorengau resettlement facility. 

 'These determinations are further evidence that the Abbott Government is working  constructively and in partnership with the government of PNG to salvage and  implement the regional resettlement arrangement that was little more than a blank  sheet of paper when we were elected just over a year ago.' 

 The Minister also inspected the progress of key aid projects on the island that  formed part of the original commitment, launching the roads and bridges project,  inspecting construction works at Lorengau Market, and officially gifting the new wing  of the Harbourside Hotel. 

 Formal employment has increased by more than 70 per cent on the island with  around 1,000 jobs being taken up by local Manusians either in the operations of the  centre or in related construction works. 

 During the joint ministerial forum held in Port Moresby with the Minister's PNG  counterpart, the Ministers agreed to extend the Regional Resettlement Arrangement. 

 'Offshore processing and resettlement is an important component of the  Government's successful border protection strategy. We welcome the significant  progress we have made in the past year,' Minister Morrison said. 

 'However we also know that without turn backs and temporary protection visas, both  opposed by Labor, this important element of our strategy would not be sufficient to  stop the boats or keep them from returning. You have to work these policies together  to stop the boats and that's exactly what we have done. 

 'The Coalition government is getting on with the job and achieving the results we  said we would,' Minister Morrison said. 

 

