---
title: "Operation Sovereign Borders report confirms 36 days without a boat"
date: "2014-01-24"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403427
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2966691%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 Operation Sovereign Borders Report Confirms 36 Days Without  A Boat 

 24-01-2014 -  

 The Government welcomes today's Operation Sovereign Borders weekly update confirming  that there have been no persons illegally arriving by boat transferred to our immigration  authorities for 36 days. 

 This is the longest period of no illegal boat arrivals since March of 2009, when arrivals first  started to significantly escalate as a consequence of the former Labor Government's decision  to abolish the strong border protection regime they inherited from the Howard Government. 

 In the first 100 days of Operation Sovereign Borders illegal arrivals by boat declined by more  than 80%, taking us back to the levels being experienced at the time of the 2010 election. 

 While these results were pleasing, arrivals of around 300 per month do not constitute success.  Being able to sustain a zero rate of arrivals for more than five weeks, takes us further, but  these outcomes need to be sustained. 

 This is not the time for stepping back, but to maintain the full pressure of our operations on  criminal people smugglers, that are clearly getting results. 

 As always the Australian Government will continue to work with any and all partners,  especially within our region to defeat the people smugglers and to continue to keep them  informed of our own efforts and activities. 

 It is also pleasing to confirm that the detention population on Christmas Island is now below  2,000 persons for the first time since February last year. During the peak of Labor's border  failures last year this population increased to more than 3,000 detainees. 

 Continued transfers to Nauru and Manus Island, made possible by the current zero arrival rate  and the expansion of our offshore processing capacity undertaken under Operation Sovereign  Borders, means we will continue to be able to reduce the pressure on Christmas Island. 

 I commend all of our personnel involved in Operation Sovereign Borders for their  professional and dedicated efforts so far in achieving these outcomes. Whether patrolling at  sea, working with our partners on land to disrupt smugglers up through the chain or operating  our processing centres off shore, they are doing a great job for our country. 

 

 

 Operation Sovereign Borders—Joint Agency Task Force update 

 24-01-2014 -  

 This statement provides an update on Operation Sovereign Borders (OSB) activities related to  the off-water reception and processing of illegal maritime arrivals.  

 The reporting period is from 9.00am Friday 17 January 2014 to 9.00am Friday 24 January  2014. 

 During this reporting period there were no illegal maritime arrivals transferred to Australian  Immigration authorities. 

 Fifty-five illegal maritime arrivals were transferred to offshore processing centres—19 to  Manus Island and 36 to Nauru. 

 Five illegal maritime arrival detainees were voluntarily removed—one to Sri Lanka and four  to Iran. 

 As at 9.00am Friday 24 January, there was a total of 1314 people on Manus Island, 974  people in Nauru and 1913 people in the Christmas Island facilities. 

 Sri Lankan authorities have recently arrested two alleged people smuggling facilitators for  involvement in people smuggling activity. 

 

 Operational Update 24 January 2014 

 24-01-2014 -  

 Current as at 9.00am, 24 January 2014 

 ILLEGAL MARITIME ARRIVALS 

 IMAs transferred to Australian immigration authorities 

 Date* IMAs SIEVs 

 TOTAL 0 0 

 *Based on date of arrival in Australia. 

 Current transferee populations - Offshore Processing Centres 

   As at 24 January 2014 

 Manus Island 1314 

 Nauru 974 

 TOTAL OPCs 2288 

 Christmas Island Facilities 1913 

 Transfers to Offshore Processing Centres of IMAs on or after 18 September 2013 

 Destination 17 January to 24 January Since OSB commenced (18 

 Sep 2013) to 24 January 

 Manus Island 19 728 

 Nauru 36 644 

 TOTAL 55 1372 

 Voluntary returns to country of origin from Offshore Processing Centres since OSB  commenced on 18 September 2013: 139* 

 *Includes those who transited via Australia 

 Media enquiries:  

 All enquiries should be directed to Customs and Border Protection Media: (02) 6275 6793 

 

