---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Parliament House, Canberra: 26 May 2014: Review into the events of 16-18 February at the Manus Island Regional Processing Centre"
date: "2014-05-26"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Review into the events of 16-18 February at the Manus Island Regional Processing Centre"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408768
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3189981%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  CANBERRA  MONDAY, 26 MAY 2014   

 SUBJECT/ S:  Review  into  the  events  of  16-18  February  at  the  Manus   Island Regional Processing Centre    

 RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Thank you for joining me this afternoon. The Manus Island  Detention Facility is a facility which should be providing accommodation to asylum  seekers which is safe, which is dignified and which is humane. And it astounds me,  even today that we have the Minister who is unable to speak those words. What is  very clear is that for Reza Berati the Manus Island Detention Facility did not provide  a safe refuge.    

 The report which has been released today makes very clear that there were  numerous warnings provided to the Department. But most particularly, to the  Minister himself about the events and the situation at the Manus Island Detention  Facility. Last year, in October, Lieutenant General Angus Campbell undertook an  assessment at the Manus Island Detention Facility which found the fencing was  inadequate and that report was provided to the Minister last October. The  inadequacy of the fencing, the Cornall report makes clear was a key issue in the  events that occurred in February of this year. The main contractor at the Manus  Island Detention Facility, G4S wrote to the Department of Immigration on the fourth  of February this year and that letter was provided a couple of days later personally  to the Minister. And that letter makes clear that there was an imminent danger of  violent protests occurring at the Manus Island facility.    

 Now, the question which is not address in the Cornall report is what actions the  Minister took and his office took having received those warnings, having been given  a clear warning about the situation at Manus Island, a clear warning about the  likelihood of events that might transpire which did ultimately transpire. There is no  indication in this report as to what actions the Minister took, that is what the 

 Australian people now need to know. Having been given this information first in  October and then in February, what steps did the Minister take to avert what ended  up being a tragedy in the middle of February this year.    

 The Cornall report also makes clear that one of the major causes for the events  which transpired in mid-February this year was a lack of processing and ultimately  resettlement of asylum seekers in PNG. Resettlement of successful refugee claimants  in PNG was at the heart of the PNG arrangement that was struck by the Labor  Government last July, and yet what we see from this Government, from the time  they were sworn in - there was not a single ministerial conference between Minister  Morrison and his counterpart in Papua New Guinea about the resettlement of  successful refugee claimants in PNG until after the events of February this year.    

 This is a Government which staked its claim on being a Government of no surprises  and no excuses, and yet what we saw was utter inaction on the critical question  around the successful management of this facility and that was seeing people  processed and ultimately resettled in Papua New Guinea. This Government 

 absolutely in that respect dropped the ball. Today we saw Minister Morrison talk  about his aspirations for the Manus Island Detention Facility going forward, and I  say this - the Manus Island Detention Facility needs to provide safe accommodation  for every asylum seeker within it. This ought not be an aspiration, this needs to be a  guarantee.    

 REPORTER:  Does Scott Morrison have blood on his hands?   

 MARLES:  The events that we saw in February this year were enormously  distressing, what we would expect of a detention facility that is paid for by Australian  taxpayers money is that it does what it is meant to and that is to provide safe,  dignified and humane accommodation to asylum seekers. It is patently clear that  was not provided to Reza Berati. And what is also patently clear from the report  today, is that there were numerous warnings not only provided to the Government,  but to the Minister himself about measures which needed to be taken in order to  provide for that safety at the processing centre, that needed to be done and that  safety needs to be guaranteed now.   

 REPORTER:  Mr Marles there was also warnings to the former Labor Government  that the fencing needed to be improved, the security infrastructure needed to be  upgraded, there were months of inaction by Labor as well, how can you stand there  and say that the Government dropped the ball, Labor dropped the ball first didn’t it? 

 

 MARLES:  This is a facility which operated under the Labor Government and in a  different guise under the Howard Government, it is under the Abbott Government,  under the watch of Mr Morrison that we have seen this facility melt down. First with  an incident last October, then with incidents in February. It is for this Government  now to be providing the guarantee of safety to those asylum seekers who are within  this facility, and it is this Government which utterly dropped the ball in negotiating  with the Papua New Guinean Government about the question of resettlement which  went to the very heart of the agreement which the former Labor Government struck  with PNG. A circumstance where this Government was sworn in and we did not see 

 a single ministerial meeting with the minister’s counterpart in PNG about  resettlement until after the events in February says everything about how this  Government has got it completely wrong in the management of this facility.    

 REPORTER:  So why didn’t Labor take G4S’s advice and improve security and  infrastructure, why not?   

 MARLES:  Labor managed this facility in circumstances where events of this kind  did not happen. These events happened under the watch of Minister Morrison and  what is completely clear and what needs to be answered by this government now is  what actions did they take when they were given warnings first from Lieutenant  General Angus Campbell and secondly from G4S about the imminent danger of  violent protests at the Manus Island facility - what steps did the Minister then take?  And that I would say is a question which is completely unanswered by this report.    

 ENDS 

