---
title: "Speech for the Eid Al-Adha celebrations, Lakema Mosque, Sydney"
date: "2014-10-04"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211414768
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3523775%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 SPEECH - EID AL-ADHA CELEBRATIONS 

 LAKEMBA MOSQUE   

 SATURDAY, 4 OCTOBER 2014   

 *** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY *** 

 

 My fellow Australians    

 Eid Mubarak!    

 It is an honour to share in your celebrations today.    

 It is an honour to stand here in Lakemba, the heartland of Australia’s great and  dynamic Islamic community.     

 Friends, I acknowledge that even as you gather in Sydney for joyous celebration,  many present will have family on the other side of the world.   

 People you love who live in countries and communities torn by strife unimaginable  here.    

 Our thoughts are with them today.     

 Right now, we face challenges at home too.     

 The challenges of division and exclusion.     

 I am sure - that from time to time - you have to deal with the shouting of ignorant  intolerance, the ugly face of racism and prejudice.     

 These challenges have occurred before in Australian history.    

 Just ask Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.     

 Just ask the Southern Europeans arriving here after the second Word War.    

 The Vietnamese boat people.    

 Even the Irish Catholics.       

 My mother grew up an Australian Catholic, but barely 60 years ago she was refused  work at her local supermarket because of her religion.      

 Times change but challenges will always occur.    

 So let us distinguish light from dark, understanding from ignorance.    

 There is hope in the promise of tolerance, love, harmony and peace.     

 There is no hope in the promise of racism, intolerance and condoning bigotry and  violence, no matter how that promise is seductively offered.    

 Today in Lakemba, let us declare that the bigots, the racists, the haters, the  extremists, do not speak for people of faith in modern Australia.   

 Modern Australia is our home, it is testament to what good can happen when we  unite.    

 This weekend, tens of thousands of Australians will celebrate Eid Al-Adha - a feast  marking a story of sacrifice shared by all three of the Abrahamic faiths: Islam,  Christianity and Judaism.     

 Last week tens of thousands of Australians celebrated Rosh Hashanah - the Jewish  New Year.    

 And later this month, tens of thousands of Australians will celebrate Deepavali - the  Hindu festival of lights.     

 That is our modern Australia.     

 When Australians can come together we form an indivisible host of moral strength  which gives Australia a better future.      

 A better future found upon love, understanding and peace not conflict and division.      

 Friends, tradition tells us that Eid Al Adha marks a fresh start - a chance to make  new promises and new resolutions.     

 Let us today resolve that you have every right to have faith and pride in your Muslim  heritage, not to isolate from Australian society and laws and customs.  

 

 But as a guide to show that Australians come from many cultures and cultures and  religions. 

 Let us resolve today that every Australian, no matter what their faith, country of  birth or gender should believe that their background is as equal as every other  Australian.    

 Not superior or more worthy, but simply equal.    

 An Australian’s religion can be a base to build upon, not a destination to retreat into.  

 Let us resolve that prejudice and bigotry are illnesses which we treat by our  commitment to citizenship, tolerance and understanding.      

 Friends, I have a powerful belief in Australians.    

 Australian Muslims, Australian Christians, Australian Jews and Australian Hindus, and  Australians indeed of no faith.        

 Let us resolve however, that we should never surrender our faith in Australia.    

 To paraphrase what someone said, never lose faith in Australia.     

 Its faults are ours to fix, not to reject.     

 From the diversity of our people let us draw strength and not cause weakness.     

 Thank you.    

 ENDS 

