---
title: "More than three months since last successful people smuggling venture"
date: "2014-03-21"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211405494
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3071925%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 More than three months since last successful people smuggling  venture 

 Friday, 21 March 2014 

 The latest weekly update for Operation Sovereign Borders reveals there has not  been a successful people smuggling venture to Australia for more than three  months, Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon. Scott Morrison said  today. 

 More than three months, more than 13 weeks, or 92 days have now passed since  the last successful people smuggling venture to Australia. The government's strong  border protection policies, particularly maritime operations, are working to prevent  the illegal arrival of boats. 

 The government is doing what we said we would do to stop the boats and we are  getting the results we said we would get. 

 The last people smuggling venture that made it to Australia and had all passengers  handed over to Australian immigration authorities was on December 19 last year. 

 Over the same 92 day period in 2012/13 - 20 December 2012 to 21 March 2013 -  there were 48 illegal boat arrivals with a total of 2569 people on board. 

 The longest period without a successful people smuggling venture under the  previous government, after it abolished the Howard government's border protection  policies, was 61 days when Senator Chris Evans was Minister for Immigration.  Following that, under Minister Bowen, the longest period was 23 days, and then  under Ministers O'Connor and Burke the longest period was just six days. 

 Under the Coalition government if someone seeks to illegally enter Australia on a  boat, they will be stopped and removed. 

 Our Customs and Border Protection Service and Naval personnel implementing  policy under Operation Sovereign Borders are conducting themselves to the highest  standards in accordance with their training. Their work is saving lives at sea and  providing more resettlement places in Australia for refugees waiting in desperate  circumstances around the world. 

 The boats are stopping but there will be no let-up in the government's efforts to  protect our borders. The full suite of policies and strong resolve from the government  will remain in place to combat people smugglers and ensure they are not given an  inch. The way to Australia is shut for illegal boat arrivals. 

 

 Operation Sovereign Borders—Joint Agency Task Force update 

 21-03-2014 -  

 This statement provides an update on Operation Sovereign Borders (OSB) activities  related to the off-water reception and processing of illegal maritime arrivals. 

 The reporting period is from 9.00am 14 March 2014 to 9.00am 21 March 2014. 

 During this reporting period there were no illegal maritime arrivals transferred to  Australian Immigration authorities. 

 There were no illegal maritime arrivals transferred to offshore processing centres for  this reporting period. 

 Two illegal maritime arrival transferees were voluntarily returned to their country of  origin after electing to go home from an offshore processing centre — both to Iran. 

 Fifteen illegal maritime arrival detainees were voluntarily removed—five to Sri Lanka,  five to Iran, four to Vietnam, and one to Afghanistan. 

 As at 9.00am 21 March 2014, there was a total of 1310 people on Manus Island,  1138 people in Nauru and 1632 people in the Christmas Island facilities. 

 On Friday 14 March, the Court of Appeal unanimously dismissed the sentence  appeal of Ali Khorram Heydarkhani. The appeal was against the 14-year sentence  for his involvement in organising four people smuggling boats including SIEV 221  which, on 15 December 2010, crashed at Christmas Island with significant loss of  life. 

 Media enquiries: 

 All enquiries should be directed to Customs and Border Protection Media: (02) 6275  6793 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Fact Sheet: Operational Update 21 March 2014 

 21-03-2014 -  

 Current as at 9.00am, 21 March 2014 

 ILLEGAL MARITIME ARRIVALS 

 IMAs transferred to Australian immigration authorities 

 Date* IMAs SIEVs 

 TOTAL 0 0 

 *Based on date of arrival in Australia. 

 Current transferee populations - Offshore Processing Centres 

   As at 21 March 2014 

 Manus Island 1310 

 Nauru 1138 

 TOTAL OPCs 2448 

 Christmas Island Facilities 1632 

 Transfers to Offshore Processing Centres of IMAs on or after 18 September  2013 

 Destination 14 March to 21 March Since OSB commenced (18 

 Sep 2013) to 21 March 

 Manus Island 0 769 

 Nauru 0 889 

 TOTAL 0 1658 

 Voluntary returns to country of origin from Offshore Processing Centres since  OSB commenced on 18 September 2013: 184* 

 *Includes those who transited via Australia. 

 

 

 

 

