---
title: "Transcript of press conference: 12 September 2014: national security; Tony Abbott's attack on Australia's shipbuilding industry; High Court ruling on Temporary Protection Visas; Tony Abbott's royal commission into trade unions."
date: "2014-09-12"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211413929
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3525432%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 THE HON. MARK DREYFUS QC MP  SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MEMBER FOR ISAACS    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  FRIDAY, 12 SEPTEMBER 2014  SYDNEY   

 SUBJECT/S: National security; Tony Abbott’s attack on Australia’s  Shipbuilding industry; High Court ruling on Temporary Protection  Visas; Tony Abbott’s royal commission into trade unions.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Last night ASIO  independently determined that the national terrorism public alert should be  raised. Today the Government has appropriately communicated this fact to the  Australian people. This is a most serious decision and when it comes to fighting  terrorism we are in this together. Since the current alert system started in 2003  four major terrorist attacks on Australian soil have been disrupted and the  participants prosecuted, convicted and jailed. Labor has full confidence in our  security agencies. I believe our men and women in our security and police forces  do an extremely professional job extremely well. While we remain vigilant  Australians are a smart and resilient people and I know that we won’t let threats  interfere with the way we live our lives nor undermine our tolerant, inclusive  society. For the average Australian these changes should not impact their daily  lives. Labor will continue to support the Government in its most important  responsibility, ensuring the safety of Australian people. If anyone notices 

 anything out of the ordinary we encourage you to contact the National Security  Hotline on 1800 123 400 or indeed contact local police directly. When it comes to  fighting terrorism we are in this together.    

 I also want to briefly make some remarks on President Obama’s significant  statement. Labor welcomes the leadership displayed by President Obama in  responding to the atrocities that we are seeing in northern Iraq and Syria. ISIL  and other terrorist groups represent a bad enemy of peace using the trappings  of religion. An insatiable appetite for cold ruthlessness, deliberate ruthlessness,  armed with weapons to commit violence and crime. This is not a distant crisis for  us. It is absolutely in our national interest that ISIL be defeated.    

 I thank the Prime Minister for his willingness to engage with the Opposition. The  Prime Minister and I are partners when it comes to national security, which  is exactly what Australians expect of us. Happy to take questions.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten have you had a recent security briefing in relation to  any actual, sort of, threats?    

 SHORTEN: The Opposition has been briefed about these matters and whilst I  won't reveal all of the content of those briefings, I wish to put on record my  appreciation of the Prime Minister's willingness to engage in briefing with  me directly. The Prime Minister and I are partners when it comes to matters of  national security and protecting Australians. We are in this together.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you have any fears that the various sort of moves to  engage possibly in Iraq and Syria, should the Americans [inaudible] do you feel  that could make Australia more of a target to terrorist acts?    

 SHORTEN: Australia would still be a target regardless of what we did in that  region. Our way of life, our tolerant, diverse society makes other people jealous  and threatened by our very actions. So no, I do not believe that any action of the  Government or Australia in recent days has changed the set of events that we  face now.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think taking the threat level to the level it is now is the  appropriate action?    

 SHORTEN: I’ll answer that a bit first and I might also ask my Shadow Attorney-General to answer that in more detail. But what I do believe is that this raised  threat level has been undertaken independently by ASIO and our intelligence  agencies. It is a view that based on the best evidence and security intelligence  they have, that there is an increased likelihood of a threat occurring in Australia.  I might hand over to Mark to further supplement that answer. 

 

 MARK DREYFUS, SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL: And I'd just like to make  clear that we accept the advice of ASIO. Our very skilled intelligence agencies,  the Director-General of ASIO has made it clear today that this raising of the  threat level was not because of any specific plot, but in respect of a body of  intelligence, a whole set of circumstances that has led to the decision being  made by ASIO last night.    

 JOURNALIST: Was it appropriate for the outgoing ASIO chief David Irvine to  make those comments to ABC indicating that the warning level would be raised?    

 SHORTEN: Yes, I compliment the work of the outgoing ASIO chief. It's been a  distinguished period of service. I have full confidence in our security and  intelligence agencies. Our men and women who work for them do a great job  and when it comes to fighting terrorism, let me be plain, we're all in  this together.    

 JOURNALIST: When was the Opposition briefed, and to what extent can you  tell us any of the details about the actual briefings that were received in terms  of the extent and timing of those briefings?    

 SHORTEN: The Opposition has been briefed in recent days and I  acknowledge that the Prime Minister has briefed me directly in recent days and I  thank him for his willingness to engage. We are partners, the Prime Minister and  I when it comes to national security. When it comes to fighting terrorism we're  most certainly all in this together. In terms of the content of those briefings, I  will not reveal them.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you also content with the various changes to the terror  related laws and procedures, such as in some cases the possibility that people  will be required if they're heading to parts of the Middle East to prove that they  weren't engaged in any sort of a terror-related activity when they return?  Are you happy with those arrangements?    

 SHORTEN: I'm satisfied that the Government is acting appropriately when it  comes to national security. In terms of specific legislation and briefings, I'll ask  my colleague the Shadow Attorney-General to answer that question further.    

 DREYFUS: Yes, we're of course still waiting to see the bill which will contain  the proposals that the Prime Minister, the Attorney-General and the Foreign  Minister announced at a press conference on the 5th of August. We're hoping  that that draft bill will be available not only for our consideration, but for public  consideration in the very near future.    

 SHORTEN: I'm confident that the Government means what it says  about consulting us.    

 JOURNALIST: Is there some Islamic groups and also some plain old civil  rights activists are concerned that this seems to be part of [inaudible] what they  would regard as diminutions of freedom of speech, freedom of association,  freedom of movement, do you not have any concerns at all that we're heading  down a slippery path of encroaching in on a lot of those fundamental values that  we hold in this democratic society?    

 SHORTEN: I'll answer that in part first of all and then ask my colleague to  supplement. ISIL and other terrorist groups, their insatiable appetite for violence,  their deliberate cold ruthlessness is not a distant threat for Australia. It's  our independent experts, our security and intelligence agencies, have formed the  view the threat level should be raised. Labor thinks that this matter is well above  your ordinary day-to-day politics. For the average Australian, this increased  threat level shouldn't change their daily course of events. But when it comes to  fighting these evil organisations, we're in it together and I do not share  the concerns expressed in that question, but I might ask Mark to further  supplement the processes.    

 DREYFUS: We have strong security agencies here in Australia. The strength  of those security agencies, the strength of their powers, the resources they've  been given has been demonstrated in the last few years by the foiling of four  major terror plots which resulted in people being charged, convicted and jailed in  a number of cases for lengthy periods. What's important in any consideration of  the powers that are available to our security agencies is that we keep in mind  the fundamental values, the fundamental freedoms of our democratic and strong  society. We've got a bill that's going through the Senate at the moment,  being introduced in the Senate by the Government. That's being considered by  our Joint Intelligence Committee who've held a public hearing. We'll have their  report probably in the next sitting week. That's precisely the kind of  public scrutiny that there should be when the Government is proposing changes  to the powers of our agencies. I think that's important to bear in mind something  that the Director-General of ASIO has said at the Press Club a couple of weeks  ago. He said the threat is real, he was talking about the current threats that  we face, the threat is real, but it’s manageable and I think that's the right  approach for Australians.    

 JOURNALIST: On the issue of submarines, have you had any concerns  expressed to you either by any diplomats from other countries, or by business  about the possibility of the Government buying Japanese submarines, as  opposed to building Australian submarines here?    

 SHORTEN: Before I answer that question, are there any other questions related  to national security, or the raised threat levels today? I'll come back to it.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about publicly and officially acknowledging  the threat is real. What does the Government or the Opposition hope to gain  from putting that public message out there? Obviously you don't want to scare  the public. How are people supposed to remain more vigilant?    

 SHORTEN: I think it's right if the security agencies determine that the threat  level should rise, we should be open with the Australian people. I don't think not  telling the Australian people would be the right course of action. That's why I  said in my opening statement it's appropriate that the Government let's  people know and I think it's appropriate that Australians know and they expect it  of the Opposition and on a matter like this we're working together and we are all  in this together. I think it is appropriate, but I also listened carefully to the Prime  Minister's remarks, the head of ASIO, the Federal Police remarks. Also what  my own Shadow Attorney-General has informed me. It won't have an impact on  the daily lives of Australians. It doesn't mean that Australians should stop doing  what they do. It certainly doesn't mean we should be less tolerant and less  inclusive, but these are facts and I think that people respond best when you put  the facts in front of them. That's what Australians would expect us to say.    

 If there are no other questions on that I might go back to the earlier question on  submarines. The answer to your question is no. And when it comes to  standing up for Australians jobs, we will in the Opposition will stand up for  Australian jobs. When it comes to standing up and making sure the  Government keeps their election promises, we're not letting them off the hook.  To have an accountable government they need to be held account for election  promises. It was on May the 8th last year that the then Opposition,  now Government, bald-faced, stood in front of the submarine corporation  in South Australia and said "We will build submarines in Australia" and it was  a bald-faced lie. I can make no apology for standing up for Australian jobs and  we certainly will. It will be helpful if the Government who said that these  submarines if built in Australia could cost $40 billion, $60 billion, there's been an  unnamed source quoted as saying it could cost $80 billion. The  Government should talk to the Australian Submarine Corporation and ask them  how much they cost. I actually think it would be a good idea if the Government  put such a major contract out to tender and then we can see who provides the  best value and the best utility and outcomes and, of course, how do we ensure  we get the most jobs in Australia?    

 JOURNALIST: What does the Opposition think of the High Court striking down  yesterday of the Immigration Minister's policy to introduce to offer temporary  protection visas for asylum seekers and furthermore, in the judgment it also 

 outlined constitutional restrictions on mandatory detention, a policy introduced  under Labor?    

 SHORTEN: I might ask my colleague, the Shadow Attorney General to answer  that question.    

 DREYFUS: In relation to the last part of your question, we'll be looking at  the judgment in detail. It does indicate that there are in the High Court’s ruling,  limits on what mandatory detention should be, limits on the length of mandatory  detention. We think that the Government should be trying to work with the law  as determined by the High Court of Australia, not trying to work against it. It's  about time that the Government abided by the High Court's now  repeated judgments which have told the Government that it's not to keep looking  for ways to avoid the obligations that Australia has under the  refugee’s convention. It's really up to the Government now to act in a different  way than it has been acting in response now to successive High Court  decisions which have struck down attempts being made by the Government  to get around the law.    

 JOURNALIST: Evidence came out in the Royal Commission into  Union Governance recently that Sam Dastyari as ALP State Secretary knew at  least three weeks before it happened that it was your intention to apply to  the Federal Court to have HSU put into administration. Did you discuss with Mr  Dastyari weeks before you acted that you were intending to take that course of  action?    

 SHORTEN: As I've said with regard to the Tony Abbott Royal Commission into  Trade Unions, that I'm not going to provide a running commentary on all the  matters which are raised in it. People have their agendas and people have their  stories. I'll leave that to the Royal Commission to determine.    

 If there are no other questions, thanks everyone, have a nice afternoon.   

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053   

