---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 25 September 2014: UN Climate Summit; Government's dud Direct Action policy; Cambodia deal; TPVs; calls to ban the burqa"
date: "2014-09-25"
creators:
  - "Butler, Mark"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE AND WATER"
subjects:
  - "UN Climate Summit"
  - "Government's dud Direct Action policy"
  - "Cambodia deal"
  - "TPVs"
  - "calls to ban the burqa"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211414382
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3412671%22
---

 

 THE HON MARK BUTLER MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE  CHANGE AND WATER  MEMBER FOR PORT ADELAIDE 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE  THURSDAY 25 SEPTEMBER 2014    

 SUBJECT/ S: UN Climate Summit, Government’s dud Direct Action  policy, Cambodia deal, TPVs, Calls to ban the burqa    

 MARK BUTLER SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE  CHANGE AND WATER: Good morning everyone. Well, world leaders have  gathered in New York to attend Ban-Ki Moon’s Climate Summit at the United  Nations. Tony Abbott was not the only leader who was absent from that Summit,  but as far as I know, he was the only leader who decided not to attend the  Summit in spite of landing in New York - scheduled to land in New York - within  a matter of only hours. This Summit and the outcomes of this Summit reaffirmed  the commitment of so many nations - led by the United States and China - to do  everything possible for the world to be able to reach an ambitious, global  agreement next year in Paris and, as President Obama said in his speech to the  Summit, nobody gets a pass. Australia must do its bit, both as the largest  polluter per head of population in the OECD but also in order to grasp the  enormous opportunities in terms of investment and jobs that lie with a cleaner  energy future. Tony Abbott must be engaged with our friends and our partners  who are working to move forward on this issue; countries like China, the US,  Japan, South Korea, the United Kingdom and so many more. And Tony Abbott  must also reaffirm his election promise to keep the Renewable Energy Target in  place, the only credible clean energy policy that Australia still has.    

 JOURNALIST: China and India’s leaders aren’t there either, what message do  you think that’s going to send? 

 

 BUTLER: Well, China - particularly China, because I read their speech to the  Summit - sent a Vice Premier who delivered a very significant speech about the  work that China is doing and I think that everyone who is watching this policy  area knows the degree to which China has re-engaged; perhaps most  importantly in a bilateral process with the United States to work through the very  significant issues that still remain to deal with before the Paris conference next  year. As I also said in my opening remarks there were a number of leaders who  were not able to attend the New York Summit, but Tony Abbott is, as far as I  know, the only leader who was scheduled to arrive in New York within a matter  of hours anyway, but still make a deliberate decision to snub the Summit.    

 JOURNALIST: There was similar excitement and momentum before the  Copenhagen Summit, what stops this from being just another one of those talk  fests that, in the end, went a long way to destroying Kevin Rudd’s prime  ministership?    

 BUTLER: Well I don’t think anyone underestimates the difficulties of the issues  that still lie ahead between now and the Paris Summit later next year. There are  very significant issues for countries to work through. What we didn’t see in the  lead in to Copenhagen though was the same amount of preparatory work being  done by all nations, but particularly by the United States and China. As President  Obama said during the Climate Summit, and as China has indicated over the last  several months, as the major powers in the world, as the two largest polluters,  it’s really incumbent on the United States and China to lead work to the Paris  Summit later next year and they’re both doing that, in a way frankly that wasn’t  being done in the lead in to Copenhagen.    

 JOURNALIST: We’ve had recent reports the Greens might be willing to do a  deal with the Government on Direct Action, perhaps a quid-pro-quo to keep  other environment policies in place. Labor hasn’t said they’re going to do that.  Are you more ideologically driven on the environment than the Greens?    

 BUTLER: That would be hard Tom. But, look I don’t know what negotiations are  taking place between Greg Hunt and Christine Milne about Direct Action, but I’ll  say this about that policy. It’s nothing more than a dressed up slush fund. It’s a  dressed up slush fund to pay polluters for things they were probably going to be  doing anyway. In the four and a half years since the policy has been out there to  analyse and criticise, not a single credible climate scientist or economist has  come forward and said Direct Action - paying billions of dollars to polluters - will  achieve the objectives that it says it will. Now if Christine Milne and Greg Hunt  want to go away to cook up a deal to pass it through the Senate, that frankly is a  matter for them. We do agree though there is the need to restore some certainty  around the Renewable Energy Target, which I think lies at the heart of Christine 

 Milne’s call. The Renewable Energy Target was a bipartisan policy for four  elections in a row, going back to the early part of the last decade under John  Howard. Tony Abbott voted for the Renewable Energy Target in 2009 and he  promised at the 2010 and the 2013 election to keep it in place in precisely its  current form and we want to hold him to that promise - partly because it was a  clear promise, but also because it’s worked. It’s attracted billions in investment,  created thousands of jobs, reduced carbon pollution and, as even the Prime  Minister’s hand-picked panel found, has kept power prices lower than they would  otherwise be.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Butler, as a former Minister for Mental Health, are you  concerned by the Government’s plans to send refugees to Cambodia which is a  country where mental health services are non-existent?    

 BUTLER: I think Richard Marles will have more to say about the details that are  leaking out about the Cambodia agreement between the Australian Government  and the government in Cambodia. Richard Marles has already said that it’s  important that Scott Morrison come clean about the details of that agreement  and frankly explain why they were so vociferously opposed to doing an  agreement with Malaysia, which arguably has much more developed services in  the nature of education services and health support services than a developing  country like Cambodia, but is willing to do a deal with that Government. So, look,  we want to see the details. Obviously, as I’ve said for many years, it’s critically  important that asylum seekers, whether they’re in detention in Australia, in the  community and in detention centres, or in offshore processing centres be  provided with good mental health services. The process of seeking asylum can  be very distressing for adults and particularly for children and it’s incumbent on  any government, no matter what the policy framework is, to ensure that good  mental health services are in place.    

 JOURNALIST: Is Labor prepared to accept TPVs? I’ve read reports this morning  that negotiations are underway between the two parties?    

 BUTLER: Look, I’ve seen those reports. I’ll leave Richard Marles over the course  of the day to provide some more detail about those reports.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you comfortable with that prospect though, given how hard  Labor campaigned against TPVs in the past?    

 BUTLER: Well we think that TPVs as a permanent solution, as a standing  solution, to the challenge of asylum seekers is not the right way to go. We found  that in its roll out under the Howard Government and that remains our position.  Now whether there’s some sort of limited discussion between the Opposition and 

 the Government to deal with the current challenge of asylum seekers in  detention, I’ll leave to Richard Marles to explain.    

 JOURNALIST: So if there was some sort of permanent path, some way that  [Inaudible]?    

 BUTLER: Look as I said, I’ll leave Richard Marles to talk about this over the day.    

 JOURNALIST: And finally, we’ve got calls to ban the burqa in Parliament  House. What affect do you think that could have on relations?    

 BUTLER: Well look I think as all national leaders, the Acting Prime Minister, the  Leader of the Opposition, said yesterday the trauma of the last 36 hours in terms  of the terrible attack that took place in Melbourne the night before last, it is  critically important that the nation’s leaders, from whatever background they’ve  come, come together to ensure the nation sticks together at this time. And  frankly, calls by Cory Bernardi and by others to reintroduce 18C or to ban the  burqa are only going to inflame this situation. It’s critically important that the  nation stays together at this time and supports the Parliament in responding to  this very significant national security threat. Thank you.    

 ENDS  MEDIA CONTACT: JO MEEHAN 0408 803 428   

