---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House: 8 July 2014: Palmer United Party Senators; asylum seekers"
date: "2014-07-08"
creators:
  - "Cameron, Doug"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "Palmer United Party Senators"
  - "asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211410715
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3269095%22
---

 

 SENATOR THE HON DOUG CAMERON  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES  SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  TUESDAY, 8 JULY 2014  SENATE DOORS, CANBERRA   

 SUBJECT/ S: Palmer United Party Senators; Asylum Seekers.   

 DOUG CAMERON, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES: Can I  just say that it’s no use Clive Palmer talking a big game outside Parliament if his  Senators in the Senate don’t play a big game at all. I think yesterday we saw the  PUP Party one minute standing up for democracy and then a few hours later  doing a complete backflip.   

 I think the public expect better from Clive Palmer given the big game he’s talking  outside Parliament, and we really need to get to a position where there is some  courage from the PUP Senators in Parliament; courage to stand up against Eric  Abetz and the Prime Minister, the courage to stand up for ordinary Australians.  You can’t just talk the talk; you’ve got to walk the walk and when they’re in  Parliament I think the public expect the PUP Party not to be doing what they did  yesterday.   

 Be consistent, stand up for what you talk about outside Parliament, and get on  with the job of looking after ordinary Australians. I think they failed miserably in  that yesterday.   

 So there are a lot of tests for Clive Palmer and the PUP Party. I think they failed  the first test yesterday, but they’ve got an opportunity in a whole range of areas  to stand up for Australians against this Government which has lied its way into  office. They’ve got an opportunity to stand up for Australians against a 

 Government that is prepared to take rights away from workers, and they need to  stand up for all Australians against this Government.   

 JOURNALIST: Senator was it a backflip or was it a misunderstanding, a rookie  error if you like?   

 CAMERON: Well, who knows? But it can’t continue. They have to get their act  together and I think Clive Palmer needs to make sure that they’ve got courage,  that they’ve got a focus on the key issues, that they don’t make these mistakes -  if it’s a mistake. If it’s a lack of courage then they’ve got to get a bit of  backbone. They can’t be Palmer’s poodles. They need to be in there looking after  ordinary Australians and that’s what’s got to happen. They really just can’t talk a  big game and not deliver on the floor of the Senate.   

 JOURNALIST: Senator Cameron, why has Labor gone relatively mute about this  government potentially breaking International Law on the high seas?   

 CAMERON: Well I don’t know whether we are being relatively mute. I can tell  you my position on this and my position has been consistent; that asylum  seekers need to be treated with respect and that we need to abide by  International Law. This issue is before the High Court. From what I am hearing  about the conditions and the position that the Sri Lankan Government takes for  returned asylum seekers, I am very concerned for these asylum seekers, and I  think that is generally a view that is within the Labor Party. 

 

 Can I indicate that I just heard the view that there are not too many options?  There is a range of options on asylum seekers, and the first option is to treat  them with dignity and treat them as human beings. The second option is to look  for regional frameworks where we can work with the UNHCR and try to get a  better approach on asylum seekers than the one we’re taking now. Thanks.   

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ANDREWS 0417 024 890   

