---
title: "Government's border policy success continues"
date: "2014-04-28"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211407058
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3135292%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection   

 Scott Morrison 

 Government's border policy success continues 

 Saturday, 26 April 2014 

 The latest Operation Sovereign Borders update demonstrates the government's  policies continue to be a successful deterrent for illegal boat arrivals with no  successful people smuggling venture having arrived in Australia for over four  months, Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison said  today. 

 The government's high tempo of activities on our borders and up the chain into our  region and in source countries is deterring illegal boat arrivals, even into the post  monsoon period which typically sees weather conditions improving off Australia's  northwest coast. 

 While under the Abbott Government there has not been a successful venture since  December 19 last year, in the same period under Labor there were over 100 boats  with more than 6300 people who arrived illegally. 

 Illegal boat arrivals surged during the month of April on Labor's watch. For the five  years after they abolished the Howard Government's proven border protection  policies the month of April saw a combined total of 90 illegal boats with more than  5700 people on board successfully reach Australia. 

 April 2013 was the second highest month for illegal boat arrivals on record,  surpassed in July 2013 when over 4000 people arrived illegally. 

 Successful people smuggling ventures in April under Labor: 

  2009 - 8 boats, 354 people    2010 - 16 boats, 712 people    2011 - 6 boats, 362 people    2012 - 13 boats, 947 people    2013 - 47 boats, 3351 people  

 The government will not be deterred from the strong policies that are stopping the  boats, particularly our maritime operations, despite their continual condemnation  from the architects of border protection chaos - Labor and the Greens. 

 The government's policy and practice of turning back illegal boats remains in effect.  Anyone seeking to enter Australia illegally by boat will be faced with the same  policies those who previously attempted illegal entry met. 

 

