---
title: "Budget 2014: Government success stopping illegal boats to save $2.5 billion"
date: "2014-05-13"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211407779
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3165273%22
---

  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for lmmigration and Border Protection 

  MEDIA STATEMENT 

  Tuesday 13 May 2014 

  GOVERNMENT SUCCESS STOPPING  ILLEGAL BOATS TO SAVE $2.5 BILLION 

  The sustained success of the Abbott Government's border protection policies in preventing  successful people smuggling ventures t o  Australia will save taxpayers $2.5 billion over five  years, Minister for lmmigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison, said today. 

  "The Abbott Government is meeting its election commitment of stopping successful people  smuggling ventures under Operation Sovereign Borders. No successful venture has reached  Australia in almost five months," Minister Morrison said. 

  "This sustained successful prevention of further illegal boat arrivals will see the cost t o  the  budget reduce by $2.5 billion  this year and over the forward estimates. 

  "The Government is having the impact and getting the results on our borders we said we  would have. The continued full suite of policies, particularly maritime operations, and the  Government's strong resolve will ensure continued success on our borders and the  continued reduction in cost t o  taxpayers in the budget. 

  "This is in stark contrast t o  Labor's budgets which forecast less illegal boat arrivals and  reduced costs without basis, inevitably leading t o  budget blow outs which reached over $11  billion. 

  "The sustained reduction in illegal arrivals will also lead t o  a  drawdown of our immigration 

  detention network which had ballooned under the previous government at significant  cost. The Government will be closing six additional detention facilities by the end of 2014-  15 producing a saving t o  taxpayers of $283 million over four years. 

  "From 2008, under the former government, 17 detention facilities were opened across  Australia. All of these centres were reopened by Labor as part of a border failure led  detention centre revolution. 

  "In the first year of coming t o  office the Coalition Government will have closed six facilities  and ten facilities will be closed by the end of 2014-15. 

 "Operations will cease at Darwin's Northern Im migration Detention Centre  [IDC ], Darwin  Airport Lodge Alternative Place of Detention  [APOD], l nverbrackie APOD in So uth Australia,  and the Aqu a and Lilac APODs on Christmas Island.  Next year Curtin Immigratio n Detention  Fac ility will cease operating. These closures are in addition to the fou r centre closures  announced in  Janu ary. 

 "The progressive cl osure of these fac ilities will help meet the cost of en suring fl exibility and  resilience ac ross the remain ing facilitie s on main l and Australia and Christmas Island. The  de partmen t will be we ll-placed to  man age people who ha ve overstayed their visas,  breac hed visas conditions, or arrived without a valid visa. 

 "This government  is al so continuing to  cle an up Labo r's me ss throu gh management of the  le ga cy caseload of currently arou nd 30,000 un resolved asylu m cases of people who had  arrived on illegal boats on  their watch. 

 "The  Government's resol ve  to  sustain the results on our borders rem ains.  We will continue  to deter people from ta king dangerous boa t journeys to  Australia and work to rid ta xpayers  of the legacy of cost, chaos and tra ge dy that Labor left be hind on our borders," Minister  Morrison said. 

 Further information: Julian Leembruggen 0400 813 253, 

 2 

