---
title: "Government should reconsider reintroduction of mandatory sentences"
date: "2014-03-04"
creators:
  - "Dreyfus, Mark"
source: "SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404819
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3034370%22
---

 

 THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MEMBER FOR ISAACS 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 GOVERNMENT SHOULD RECONSIDER REINTRODUCTION OF  MANDATORY SENTENCES   

 Shadow Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus QC has called on the Abbott Government  to reconsider their decision to reintroduce mandatory sentences for the crew of  asylum seeker vessels convicted of low culpability people smuggling.   

 There are reports today Senator Brandis will move to revoke the direction to the  Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions made by the former Government,  which allows low culpability crew to be prosecuted under a lesser people  smuggling offence that does not require mandatory minimum penalties.    

 “This important change returned greater sentencing discretion to the courts, and  made sure it was the people smugglers who were punished appropriately,” Mr  Dreyfus said.   

 “The expert panel chaired by Angus Houston in fact recommended the complete  removal of mandatory sentences for low level people smuggling crew.   

 “Numerous judges from jurisdictions across Australia criticised mandatory  sentences for low culpability when they were in place, considering a different  penalty would have been more appropriate had they had discretion.   

 “Jailing the crew of people smuggling vessels for lengthy periods does not serve  the interests of Australians. It is the people smuggling organisers, not low level  crew members, who should be subject to tougher sentencing.    

 “In these cases mandatory sentences simply do not have any deterrent effect.   

 “I would urge Senator Brandis to reconsider his decision, which does not have  the support of the judiciary and wider legal community.”   

 TUESDAY, 4 MARCH 2014   

 MEDIA CONTACT: ANNIE WILLIAMS 0428 040 522   

