---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Parliament House: 8 July 2014: High Court challenge to Abbott Government's transfer of asylum seekers at sea"
date: "2014-07-08"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211410716
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3269098%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE   TUESDAY 8 JULY 2014 

 SUBJECT/S:  High  Court  challenge  to  Abbott  Government’s  transfer  of   asylum seekers at sea   

 RICHARD MARLES: Today it has taken the High Court to tell us what Scott  Morrison would not. It has taken the High Court to blow the lid on this Government's  secrecy. Scott Morrison is a man who is happy to cite operational matters as a  reason for going into hiding until the front page of a newspaper comes calling. This  is a man who treats transparency as an afterthought. This is a man who is treating  the Australian people with contempt. Rather than Scott Morrison being here today to  answer your questions, he has slinked out of the country. This is a shambles.  

 The Opposition retains grave concerns about the process which has been  undertaken at sea. All of this could have been done on Christmas Island or Manus  for precisely the same effect. But it would have been done more efficiently, more  thoroughly, more transparently. The only reason this has not occurred is to protect  this Government's political scoreboard and in the process this Government is  trashing Australia's reputation in order to protect Scott Morrison's ego. Now that  there is a High Court proceeding, which is underway, we expect this Government to  abide by the law, and to ensure that it does not place any Australian personnel  beyond the law. This is an assurance that this Government must give today. Are  there any questions? 

 REPORTER:  The  High  Court  says  this  group  of  150  asylum  seekers  will  not  be   handed to Sri  Lankan  authorities  within  three  days, do you  actually  think  that this  policy is acceptable?   

 MARLES: We have a circumstance which is a shambles at the moment. There is a  boat  on  the  high  seas,  an  Australian  customs  vessel  with  150  odd  Tamil  asylum   seekers on board awaiting whatever is the outcome of the High Court decision. This  is an appalling situation which need not have occurred because all of these people  could  have  been  dealt  with  either  at  Christmas  Island  or  at  Manus  and  the  only   reason  that  hasn’t  occurred  is  to  protect  this  Government’s  political  scoreboard  -  that is a disgrace.   

 REPORTER: Sri Lanka says they won’t accept people who have come from India,  what should happen with this boat now?   

 MARLES: Well  this  is a matter  which  can  easily  be  dealt with, had this  boat, this   Australian  customs  vessel,  return  to  Christmas  Island  those  on  board  could  have   been assessed there through the enhanced screening process or indeed at Manus.  The Regional Resettlement Arrangement could adequately have dealt with this issue  - of course the Regional Resettlement Arrangement has itself been endorsed by the  High Court. The only reason this has not occurred is because this Government wants  to protect a political scoreboard and that is not good enough because in the process  they are trashing this country’s reputation.   

 REPORTER:  Is  that  what you  think  should  happen  now,  they  should  be  sent  to   Christmas Island?   

 MARLES: They can easily be sent to Christmas Island and they can be dealt with  there or for that matter they can be dealt with on Manus Island. The Government  has options. The reason they are not taking those options is because they want to  protect nothing other than a political scoreboard and that is not good enough and in  the process what they are doing is trashing this country’s international reputation.   

 REPORTER: The Sri Lankan High Commissioner to Australia says the 41 that have  already been returned won’t be persecuted, do you believe him?   

 MARLES:  Well  I  think  it  is  a  matter  for  the  Minister  to  explain  to  the  Australian   people what awaits the 41 who have been returned to Sri Lanka. It is a matter for  him now to be clear with the Australian people and to give the Australian people a  sense  of  confidence  about  the  fate  of  those  who  have  been  returned.  That  is  a   question he needs to be answering today rather than slinking out of the country and  avoiding really important questions of this kind.   

 

 ENDS 

