---
title: "Secrecy on the high seas, sailors destroyed by avoidable tragedy"
date: "2014-12-02"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211415947
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3541670%22
---

 Tuesday, 2 December 2014   

 Secrecy on the  high seas, sailors destroyed by avoidable  tragedy   

 The Australian Greens have called for an independent judicial inquiry into revelations that sailors are  being destroyed by the political pressure and obsessive secrecy of the government’s oppressive  border protection regime.   

 “Coordinated delays in rescuing boats, political interference that endangered lives and an unhealthy  obsession with secrecy are destroying Australian sailors,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson,  Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “These are serious accusation from defence personnel and the government can’t investigate itself on  this one. There needs to be an independent judicial inquiry into the secrecy and political pressure  that is being applied to Australian service men and women on the high seas.   

 “The government needs to be upfront with the Australian people and explain what’s really going on.   

 “Disturbingly, the Immigration Minister is currently trying to give himself even more unfettered  power. Scott Morrison wants to be able to break international law with impunity and the Senate  now stands as the last line of defence against his dangerous grab for power.   

 “Australia has to process asylum seekers’ claims in the region and bring refugees to safety directly,  before they’re forced onto dangerous boats. That way we will save lives at sea without destroying  the mental health of Australian sailors.”   

 

 

 

