---
title: "Australia gives $4 million in humanitarian assistance to the Central African Republic"
date: "2014-03-07"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404987
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3045549%22
---

 Minister for Foreign Affairs 

 Julie Bishop 

 Australia gives $4 million in humanitarian assistance to the  Central African Republic 

 7 March 2014 

 The Australian Government will provide $4 million in emergency assistance for communities  affected by the ongoing violence and instability in the Central African Republic. 

 The funding will be used to provide critical humanitarian aid, including emergency medical, 

 food, water and essential household items for people displaced by the conflict. 

 The humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic is dire, with more than half of the 

 country's population in need of assistance. Approximately 700,000 people are displaced  internally and there are nearly 300,000 refugees in neighbouring countries. The Central  African Republic is one of only four United Nations-declared Level 3 humanitarian 

 emergencies worldwide, representing the highest level of emergency. 

 Australia has been active in the UN Security Council since the early stages of the crisis in  the Central African Republic, including co-sponsoring UN Security Council decisions which 

 have strengthened the UN Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic,  approved targeted sanctions and authorised a European Union military mission to support 

 African Union and French troops on the ground. Most recently, Australia has contributed to 

 high level consultations on the Secretary-General's recommendation to transition to a UN  peacekeeping operation. 

 The Australian Government continues to strongly advise Australians not to travel to the 

 Central African Republic due to the dangerous security situation, activities of armed rebels  and high levels of serious crime. 

 Media enquiries 

  Foreign Minister's Office: (02) 6277 7500  

  DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555  

 

