---
title: "Damning Manus Island report: government failure led to Reza Barati tragedy"
date: "2014-12-11"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211417239
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3554369%22
---

 SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Thursday, 11 December 2014   

 Damning Manus Island report: government  failure led to Reza Barati tragedy   

 The final report from a Senate inquiry into the violence at the Manus Island detention centre in  February has slammed the government for failing to protect asylum seekers that were in its  care.   

 “This damning report clearly shows that the Abbott government has ultimate responsibility for  the centre and for the people held there,” Senator Hanson-Young said.   

 “The committee has said that the victims of this attack deserve to be compensated. It’s now up  to the government to do the right thing.   

 “The Immigration Minister can’t keep blaming the PNG government for what happened that  night. The fact is the buck stops with him and he’s responsible for everything that goes on in the  centre.   

 “We know now that Reza Barati’s death was entirely preventable. The government was warned  repeatedly that the situation there was deteriorating and that security provisions were  inadequate. The government’s inaction led to this tragedy and they must be held accountable.   

 “The mountain of evidence submitted to this inquiry all points to one undeniable fact; the Manus  Island centre is untenable and must be closed down now.   

 “The severe lack of training for Manus Island workers contributed directly to the tragic results of  the attack.   

 “It’s clear that the media and independent observers like the UN must be given full and free  access to the centre. The government should heed the committee’s recommendations and let  them in.   

 “Scott Morrison’s behaviour following the brutal attack on the centre was reprehensible. He lied  to the Australian people and blamed the victims themselves.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

