---
title: "UN World Food Program funding crisis"
date: "2014-12-02"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211415941
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3541719%22
---

 

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

 MEMBER FOR SYDNEY    

 

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 UN WORLD FOOD PROGRAM FUNDING CRISIS   

 

 The Abbott Government must act immediately to help relieve the UN World Food  Program’s (WFP) funding crisis which threatens to see more than 1.7 million Syrian  refugees go hungry through winter.   

 The WFP says it has been forced to suspend its food voucher program for Syrian  refugees due to lack of funding.  It has called for $US64 million immediately so support  can be resumed this month.     

 Instead of threatening further cuts to Australia’s overseas aid budget, the Abbott  Government must step up and contribute funds to help resolve this terrible humanitarian  emergency.   

 This WFP food voucher program allows Syrian refugees in Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey,  Iraq and Egypt to buy food in local shops.   

 The conflict in Syria has caused an overwhelming humanitarian crisis, with 3 million  refugees, and another 6.5 million internally displaced.  This has put significant pressure  on international aid agencies, including the WFP.   

 I visited Syrian refugee camps in Jordan and Lebanon earlier this year.  The need there  is enormous.  The international community, including Australia, can’t let those families,  those children, go through winter without food. 

 

 The Abbott Government has only contributed about $35 million to humanitarian relief for  the Syrian crisis.  By contrast, the former Labor Government delivered around $100  million in assistance.   

 In its first Budget, the Abbott Government has cut $7.6 billion from overseas aid,  including $51.1 million from the Middle East and North Africa.   

 By contrast, the former Labor Government almost doubled the aid budget - from $2.9  billion to $5.7 billion.   

 TUESDAY, 2 DECEMBER 2014 

 MEDIA CONTACTS:        DAN DORAN 0427 464 350 

 

