---
title: "Australia and PNG to establish monthly Joint Ministerial Forum to oversee implementation of Regional Resettlement Arrangement"
date: "2014-03-03"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404748
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3030750%22
---

 Australia and PNG to establish monthly joint ministerial forum  to oversee implementation of regional resettlement  arrangement  Joint statement with Scott Morrison - Minister for Immigration and Border  Protection, Rimbink Pato - Attorney General, Papua New Guinea and Kerenga  Kua - Minister for Foreign Affairs and Immigration, Papua New Guinea.  

 At a special meeting in Port Moresby on March 1 between Papua New Guinea  Minister for Foreign Affairs and Immigration, the Hon Rimbink Pato, Papua New  Guinea Attorney General, the Hon Kerenga Kua and the Australian Minister for  Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison, Australia and PNG  agreed to establish a monthly Joint Ministerial Forum to directly oversee  implementation of the Regional Resettlement Arrangement (RRA) between the two  countries. 

 The meeting also saw PNG and Australia recommit themselves to the RRA and the  broader partnership that is necessary to effectively deliver on the good intentions of  this agreement. 

 The  monthly Joint  Ministerial Forum, beginning in April, will also involve the  Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Hon Julie Bishop. It will provide clear  direction and oversight to the implementation of the RRA and provide a timely and  accountable process to ensure that the arrangement is being converted into tangible  and practical outcomes. 

 At the meeting Ministers expressed their great regret, sympathy and condolences  regarding the tragic death of Mr Barati  and the injuries as a result of the events that  took place at Manus Island on the night of February 17. 

 Ministers also confirmed their commitment to the comprehensive investigations  already underway into these events. 

 The tragic incident on Manus Island and the joint response to these events will be an  early focus of the monthly Ministerial Forum, to ensure a coordinated and  cooperative approach consistent with the spirit of the partnership that already exists. 

 This work will include greater synchronisation of our efforts and communication as  well as seeking to draw together our respective inquiry and review processes into the  incident. 

 To this end Ministers agreed that Australia and PNG would work to synthesise, as  appropriate, the independent administrative review, the police investigation and the  coronial inquiry to ensure a clear statement of the facts and a shared understanding  of the findings and implications of these events for the ongoing management of the  centre and the resettlement process. 

 With respect to the independent administrative inquiry to be conducted by Mr  Cornall, Ministers agreed this review should be conducted in partnership and with 

 the participation of the PNG Government and that arrangements would be made to  incorporate this into the conduct of the review. 

 The forum will also receive regular updates on the delivery of $420m in projects, in  addition to Australia's annual PNG aid programme, that formed part of Australia's  commitments to this arrangement. 

 Delivery of these commitments has already commenced with the deployment of 50  Australian Federal Police officers in PNG prior to Christmas last year. Work  continues on the many other projects as well as on the $26m in new aid activities in  Manus Province where upgrades are being made to schools, the hospital, roads and  local market infrastructure. 

 Ministers agreed that central to the RRA is the processing of asylum claims and the  resettlement of genuine refugees in PNG. The new Ministerial Forum will enable  progress on processing and resettlement arrangements to be reported on a monthly  basis to Ministers, to ensure that the momentum that is necessary to fulfil the  objectives of the agreement is maintained. 

 Minister Pato said: 'This meeting was timely and opportune to discuss some of the  issues of recent times and the positive outcomes we are both working to achieve as  Ministers at a leadership level, moving forward for both Australia and PNG. 

 'I welcome the monthly Joint Ministerial Forum. It will create an impetus to highlight  the issues and manage the outcomes going forward,' he said. 

 Minister Morrison said: 'The boats are stopping and our partnership with PNG has  been an important component in what we have been able to achieve to date. This  monthly Joint Ministerial Forum will aid us to keep this important arrangement on  track and translate announcements into action, when it comes to the critical issues of  processing claims and resettling refugees in PNG.' 

 

