---
title: "Appointment of Integrity Commissioner"
date: "2014-12-12"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "MINISTER FOR JUSTICE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211417285
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3561570%22
---

 

 The Hon Michael Keenan MP  Minister for Justice 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 12 December 2014 

 Appointment of Integrity Commissioner 

 Mr Michael Griffin AM has been appointed as the Integrity Commissioner and statutory head of  the Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity (ACLEI).  

 ACLEI is responsible for detecting, disrupting and deterring corrupt conduct and criminal  infiltration in Commonwealth law enforcement agencies. 

 The Integrity Commissioner has jurisdiction over the Australian Federal Police, the Australian  Crime Commission, the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service, Australian  Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre, the CrimTrac Agency and prescribed aspects of the  Department of Agriculture’s border operations. 

 Mr Griffin’s appointment comes at a time of new challenges for ACLEI as Australia’s crime-fighting agencies respond to increasing pressure from organised crime, particularly  corruption-enabled border crime.  

 Mr Griffin’s extensive experience in investigating crime and misconduct positions him well to  lead ACLEI’s continued success in the fight against corruption.   

 Mr Griffin is currently the Director of Military Prosecutions in the Department of Defence.  In  this role, he has been responsible for leading prosecutions for service offences. 

 Before his appointment to this role, Mr Griffin was an examiner at the Australian Crime  Commission for two years.   

 Prior to this, he spent a combined 12 years as a Principal Member, Senior Member and Member  at the Veterans’ Review Board, the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, the Migration Review  Tribunal and the Refugee Review Tribunal. 

 The Government thanks the previous Integrity Commissioner Mr Philip Moss for his service  from 2007 to 2014 and Mr Robert Cornall AO for his service as Acting Integrity Commissioner  since Mr Moss’ departure. 

 I congratulate Mr Griffin on his appointment as Integrity Commissioner.  I am confident he will  provide strong leadership in the important role of assuring the integrity of public officers  responsible for safeguarding our community’s safety. 

 Mr Griffin commences his appointment on 19 January 2015 for a period of five years. 

 Media contact: Emily Broadbent 0400 390 008 

 

