---
title: "International Women's Day"
date: "2014-03-07"
creators:
  - "Cash, Michaelia"
source: "MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR WOMEN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404993
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3045552%22
---

 

 

 THE HON BRUCE BILLSON MP  Minister for Small Business   

 SENATOR THE HON MICHAELIA CASH  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Women   

 

 JOINT MEDIA RELEASE 

 Minister Billson’s media contact: Candice Lester 0428 338 902  Minister Cash’s media contact: David De Garis 0427 019 692   

 

 7 March 2014 

 

 International Women’s Day 

 On the eve of International Women’s Day, the Federal Government is recognising  women who have played a significant role in building Australia’s economy and  encourage more to enter the small business sector.   

 “Australia is fortunate to have around 617,000 women either employed or running their  own small business,” the Minister for Small Business Bruce Billson said.   

 “Despite what people may think, statistics have shown women are more likely to enter  the small business sector than men and women will tough it out longer.    

 “International Women’s Day is a time to reflect on the huge progress made, to call for  change and to celebrate acts of courage and determination by everyday women who  have played an extraordinary role in their communities.   

 “Women dominate many industries including the direct selling industry, and more than  81 per cent of salespersons are female, creating revenue of $1.4 billion annually.”   

 The Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  said we all have a role to play to ensure Australia is economically strong, and our  workforce is innovative, productive and above all, full of opportunities.   

 “This is why the Federal Government is working to implement the Paid Parental Leave  scheme so women feel more supported and have a better chance at combining family  and career,” Senator Cash said.   

 “The Coalition Government has also demonstrated our commitment to increasing  workforce participation through the Productivity Commission’s review into childcare  which will aim to make child care more flexible, affordable and accessible.   

 “Increasing the workforce participation of women doesn’t just improve gender equity it  improves economic, health and early childhood development outcomes.   

 “Harnessing the economic potential of women should be a top priority and Australian  businesses will only benefit from diversity within their organisations.”   

