---
title: "Nauru accusations dismissed before investigation starts"
date: "2014-10-03"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211414722
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3427254%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Friday, 3 October 2014    

 Nauru accusations dismissed before  investigation starts    

 It is extremely concerning to hear the Immigration Minister dismissing claims of sexual abuse of  children in the Nauru detention centre before an independent investigation has even begun, the  Australian Greens have said.    

 “This is a Minister that blames the victim and then shoots the messenger,” the Greens’  immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.    

 “Reports of the toxic situation on Nauru have circulated for months and have come from  multiple sources.    

 “Security staff, mental health staff and the refugees themselves have contacted my office and  made extremely serious allegations in recent months. I welcome the fact that those report will  finally be investigated.    

 “It’s concerning that the Immigration Minister seems to be pre-judging the investigation. He  should look into these claims before dismissing them.    

 “Save the Children do amazing work on Nauru. They’re professionals with the sole mission of  protecting children from harm and there is no reason to believe that reports have been  fabricated.    

 “If there’s one person who fabricates stories, let’s not forget it was Scott Morrison who said  Reza Barati was killed because he left the Manus centre. That was a lie.    

 “Save the Children have refuted the government’s claims and it’s important to remember that  the Coalition has an unfortunate track record of cover-up and blame shifting.”    

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760    

 

 

