---
title: "Australia to say no to refugee cruelty at Palm Sunday rallies"
date: "2014-04-12"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211406615
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3113828%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Saturday, 12 April 2014   

 Australia to say no to refugee cruelty at Palm  Sunday rallies   

 On Palm Sunday church and community groups are hosting refugee rallies across the country.   

 In capital cities and regional centres marches, rallies and candle light vigils will be held with people  calling for an end to the Abbott Government's cruel refugee policies.   

 "The Government's cruelty has gone too far and this Sunday, thousands of Australians will call for a  better way," Senator Hanson-Young said.   

 "Church and community groups across the country have been organising rallies and prayer vigils to  mark this important day.   

 "Many Australians want our Parliament to find a kinder, more compassionate refugee policy. It's  time to stop playing politics with the lives of vulnerable people and to end the war against refugees,  who are simply asking our nation for a helping hand.    

 "From Perth to Melbourne and Adelaide to Brisbane, Australians are saying that the Government's  cruelty towards refugees must end.   

 "There are over 1000 children locked up right now, including hundreds on Nauru, and after the  brutal attacks on the Manus Island detention camp, refugees are living in fear.   

 "There is a better way and Australia should be working with our neighbours to build a genuine  regional solution, not using them as dumping grounds for vulnerable refugees."   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

