---
title: "The conflict in Israel and the Palestinian territories"
date: "2014-08-08"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211412123
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3324300%22
---

 

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY 

 

 STATEMENT   

 THE CONFLICT IN ISRAEL AND THE PALESTINIAN TERRITORIES   

 

 Labor calls on all parties to agree to a continuation of the 72-hour ceasefire in  Gaza, which is scheduled to end at 3:00pm AEST on Friday 8 August.    

 With reports of almost 1900 dead, including hundreds of children, we urge the  parties to agree to an extension of the ceasefire and work to achieve a  permanent end to the conflict.   

 Labor has been especially concerned that even when taking shelter in UN run  facilities, residents of Gaza have not been safe.   

 Labor deplores the abuse of civilian facilities for military purposes, including  reportedly to hide rockets.    

 Australia needs to work with the international community to facilitate lasting  peace and an end to this terrible conflict - including through our position on the  United Nations Security Council.   

 Labor supports an Australian contribution to the huge humanitarian task in Gaza.  Gaza has faced enormous social and economic difficulties due to the blockade,  even before the recent fighting.   

 Labor welcomes the $5 million the Australian Government has recently  contributed to humanitarian efforts, but notes that this follows an earlier decision  by the Government to cut $4.5 million in Australian aid funding this year to the  Palestinian Territories.   

 While the conflict in Gaza has been distressing it is important that debate is kept  within civil bounds. Labor utterly condemns any racist, bigoted or sectarian  attacks directed at members of our own community or the communities in the  Middle East.   

 THURSDAY, 8 AUGUST 2014   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

 

 

 __________________________________________________________________ 

