---
title: "Victoria leads country with thousands of new citizens on Australia Day"
date: "2014-01-26"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403460
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3073792%22
---

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection   

 Victoria leads country with thousands of new  citizens on Australia Day  Sunday, 26 January 2014 

 Victoria will host the most new citizens today out of all the states and territories as  it celebrates Australia Day and marks 65 years of Australian citizenship, the  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison, said  today. 

 Nearly 4500 new Victorian citizens, originally from 118 different countries, will  make the pledge to become Australian citizens in some 76 ceremonies to be  staged across the state. They will be among a record 17 863 people receiving  citizenship nationally. 

 Mr Morrison said the occasion was not only a chance to celebrate what unites  Australians on Australia Day but also to acknowledge the importance of citizenship  in Australia. 

 'The Australian story is one of courage, mateship, endurance and sacrifice. It is  our duty to honour the contribution of previous generations and to uphold the  values that guided them and have stood the test of time,' Mr Morrison said. 

 'Australia Day is always a special day for Australians and with this year's events  also marking the 65th year of Australian citizenship there has never been a better  time to celebrate the spirit and diversity of our country.' 

 In a highlight citizenship ceremony at Melbourne's Etihad Stadium, El Salvador-born Jose Guzman Portillo will join 100 conferees in an on-field honour guard to  welcome players as they run out for the Melbourne Victory-Sydney soccer match  later today. 

 Jose, a Melbourne Victory supporter, said the ceremony would be doubly  enjoyable for him. 'My sister, Morena, and our mother, Maria, will become  Australian citizens with me,' the Braybrook apprentice mechanic said. His family  arrived as refugees in 2009. 

 Mr Morrison said the Guzman Portillos and Victoria's newest Australians joined  the more than 4.5 million others who had chosen to become Australian citizens  since the first citizenship ceremony in 1949, acknowledging the significance of the  65th anniversary of citizenship here. The status of Australian citizenship was  created by the Nationality and Citizenship Act 1948 which came into force on 26  January 1949. 

 'The 65th anniversary of Australian citizenship is an opportunity for all of us -  whether Australian by birth or by pledge - to pause and reflect on the privileges  and responsibilities which come with being an Australian citizen,' Mr Morrison  said. 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases  

 URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm211160.htm   Last update: Tuesday, 28 January 2014 at 12:38 AEST 

 

