---
title: "Government can't ignore the warnings in Christmas Island violence"
date: "2014-06-03"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211409131
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3204997%22
---

 OFFICE OF SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA   

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Tuesday, 3 June 2014    

 Government can’t ignore the warnings in  Christmas Island violence    

 After the Immigration Minister’s attempts to downplay the significance of the violence on  Christmas Island yesterday, it’s time the Abbott Government prioritised the safety of refugees  and Australian personnel, the Australian Greens have said.    

 “The Abbott Government must recognise the dangers on Christmas Island before it’s too late,”  the Greens’ immigration spokesperson, senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.    

 “Yesterday’s violent clashes are extremely concerning and the Minister must take these warning  signs seriously. The Abbott Government ignored increasing tensions on Manus Island, with  tragic results.    

 “Despite the Minister’s attempts to play down the significance of the disturbance yesterday,  concerned whistle-blowers have forced him to reveal some of the worrying details.    

 “The fact that four refugees were taken to hospital with broken bones after the riot squad was  sent in to break up a peaceful protests is very concerning.    

 “Operation Blame the Victims was in full swing again today as Scott Morrison insisted that it was  the unarmed men who received the beating that are to blame.    

 “My office has been contacted by people working in the centre who are genuinely afraid that  more violence is on the horizon. I hope they are wrong.”    

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

 

