---
title: "Sen Kate Lundy"
date: "2014-11-27"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211415582
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3528795%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 STATEMENT    

 KATE LUNDY 

 

 Kate Lundy has made an outstanding contribution to the Australian Labor Party  and the ACT.       

 Kate’s time in the Senate from 1996 has been underpinned by her belief in  equality, her passion for technology and her deep understanding of the dreams  of ordinary Australians.    

 During Labor’s time in Government, Kate showed the utmost commitment to her  portfolios; whether it was in Sport, Multicultural Affairs, Industry and Innovation  and the Digital Economy.      

 As Sports Minister, Senator Lundy steered through the most significant changes  to the Australian Government's funding of high performance sport since the  Australian Institute of Sport was established in 1981.     

 In high-performance sport, Kate improved accountability, fought for integrity,  boosted the profile of women, and gave Australia a winning edge.      

 In the community, Kate led programs to reach out to migrants and refugees,  helping new arrivals engage with our culture, including through sport.     

 In her first speech to the Senate, Kate Lundy promised to represent ‘ordinary  people’:    

 “people who are working or trying to work; the people who are caring for others  and those that they care for; young people who are hopeful for the future and 

 those that are in despair; older people, active in retirement or in need of care  themselves; and, of course, the children whose future is in our hands”.    

 Kate fulfilled this promise, she lived up to this goal, she kept faith with ordinary  people and for that we thank her.      

 Labor salutes Kate Lundy’s exceptional dedication, commitment and service to  the Senate, and the people of the ACT.    

 We wish her all the very best for the next chapter of her life, and more quality  time with her family which she adores.    

 THURSDAY, 27 NOVEMBER 2014    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053   

