---
title: "No response from Minister on Christmas Island request: Clive Palmer"
date: "2014-01-30"
creators:
  - "Palmer, Clive"
source: "PALMER UNITED PARTY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403585
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3007996%22
---

 BY PALMER UNITED  

 ON JANUARY 30, 2014  

 POSTED IN MEDIA RELEASE, UNCATEGORIZED  

 Media Release 

 No Response from Minister on Christmas  Island Request: Clive Palmer  The Federal Leader of the Palmer United Party and Member for Fairfax, Clive  Palmer, says he has yet to receive a response from Immigration Minister Scott  Morrison after seeking his approval to visit the Christmas Island detention centre. 

 Mr Palmer said he wrote to Mr Morrison’s office almost two weeks ago requesting  approval to visit Christmas Island and its detention facilities in late March or early  April, 2014. 

 “I have received reports from my constituents that in asylum seeker detention centres  in Australia, new born babies are separated from their mothers at birth and kept in  separate detention areas,” Mr Palmer said. 

 “Additionally, children of school age in detention centres are not receiving any  schooling which is in breach of state legislation. I am seeking confirmation of whether 

 these reports are true. 

 “It’s very disappointing that there has been no response from Minister Morrison’s  office on the request to visit the island and the detention facilities. I hope that will be  rectified.” 

 Mr Palmer said he had always believed it was wrong to keep children behind bars and  the birth last month of his daughter Lucy had renewed his commitment to help the  children of asylum seekers. 

 “Whether they took this dangerous voyage with their parents, or were born in 

 detention, every child deserves a safe and loving upbringing with a range of  experiences, not just the inside of a cell or an exercise yard,” he said. 

 Last year, a delegation of Palmer United Party federal election candidates undertook a  fact finding mission to Christmas Island. 

 Mr Palmer said he had made a New Year’s resolution to personally visit Christmas  Island this year. 

 The Palmer United Party advocates allowing asylum seekers to fly to Australia and be  quickly processed at airports. 

 ENDS 

