---
title: "Australia must apologise to Indonesia for refugee arrogance"
date: "2014-11-20"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211536294
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3516043%22
---

 SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Thursday, 20 November 2014   

 Australia must apologise to Indonesia for  refugee arrogance   

 Following criticism from Indonesian officials, The Abbott government should apologise and  reverse its cruel and xenophobic refugee ban, the Australian Greens have said.   

 “This was a dangerous mistake and, in the long run, it will cost lives,” the Greens’ immigration  spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “The Abbott government needs to apologise to Indonesia and reverse this senseless decision.  The arrogance of the Australian government in telling our neighbours to deal with the refugee  crisis alone is breathtaking.   

 “The government’s real agenda has been exposed. This isn't about resettling genuine refugees  the 'right way', it's about choosing who gets help and who gets left behind.   

 “Australia should be leading a genuine, collaborative solution based on processing and  resettling refugees, not slamming the door in people’s faces.   

 “Stopping families from fleeing war and reaching safety in Australia is not the answer and will  have disastrous consequences.   

 “Australia has the capacity to be a world leader on caring for refugees but, because of the  Abbott government’s obsession with cruelty, we are lagging far behind.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

