---
title: "Minister must tell us where refugees will go: Greens"
date: "2014-01-14"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403189
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2943612%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Tuesday 14 January 2014 

 Minister must tell us where refugees will go: Greens 

 The Greens have expressed concern for refugees, including children, at the Christmas Island  detention camp where a hunger strike is taking place.  

 “It is distressing to hear vulnerable refugees being pushed to breaking point and sewing their lips  together in sheer desperation after being locked up for too long and enduring the government’s  practice of separating families” Australian Greens spokesperson for immigration, Senator Sarah  Hanson-Young said today. 

 “I am especially concerned for the hundreds of children locked inside the camp. No child should bear  witness to the horrors of long term detention and the desperation it causes. 

 “Minister Morrison’s announcement today that he will be closing 4 of Australia’s mainland detention  facilities comes at a time when desperation is spreading through the detention camps.  

 “There is a toxic culture breeding in these detention centres and todays reports that refugees are  self-harming and hunger striking is evidence of the straining conditions inside. 

 “Today the Minister is gloating about saving the taxpayer $88 million by closing these centres. This is  a mere drop in the ocean when we look at the billions of dollars being spent on detaining people  offshore. 

 “Tony Abbott’s MYEFO statement in December detailed an extra $2 billion for offshore detention.  

 “It is the gulags of Manus Island and Nauru that are costing the Australian taxpayer billions of  dollars.  

 “We know that community assessment for refugees is 90% cheaper than locking them up in  detention camps. If the government wanted to save money that’s what they’d do.  

  “This is a government who is obsessed with secrecy and obsessed with keeping the Australian public  in the dark, the Minister needs to be upfront and tell us where are these people going to go?” 

 Media contact: Ali Neyle 0427 604 760 

 

 

 

