---
title: "Sri Lankan boat arrivals returned to Colombo"
date: "2014-02-06"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403821
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2985439%22
---

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection   

 Sri Lankan boat arrivals returned to Colombo  Thursday, 06 February 2014 

 The Australian Government has today successfully returned 45 Sri Lankans who  arrived illegally in Australia by boat. 

 Eight of the detainees chose to return voluntarily. All 45 detainees were screened  out of a protection assessment process.  

 As they had no matters ongoing with the Department of Immigration and Border  Protection, they were removed. This is consistent with Australia's obligations. 

 'We will never allow people who come illegally by boat to settle here,' Scott  Morrison said. 

 Mr Morrison said the Australian Government's message is crystal clear: you  should not come because you will not be allowed to stay. 

 'Anyone who arrives by boat illegally will either be sent to Papua New Guinea or  Nauru, or sent home,' Mr Morrison said. 

 'The Australian Government does not deal in half measures and has the policies  and resolve to fight people smugglers and stop illegal boat arrivals. 

 'The government will continue to return people seeking to come to Australia  illegally by boat.' 

 Today's voluntary returnees may be helped to resume their lives in Sri Lanka by a  reintegration assistance program. The assistance is available only to those who  voluntarily agree to return to their country of origin. 

 People removed involuntarily do not have access to this assistance. 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases  

 URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm211527.htm   Last update: Friday, 07 February 2014 at 08:45 AEST 

 

