---
title: "2015 Endeavour Scholarships and Fellowships"
date: "2014-11-04"
creators:
  - "Pyne, Christopher"
source: "MINISTER FOR EDUCATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211447152
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3488638%22
---

 

 

 THE HON CHRISTOPHER PYNE MP  Minister for Education  Leader of the House   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 4 November 2014   

 2015 Endeavour Scholarships and Fellowships     

 The Minister for Education, the Hon Christopher Pyne MP today announced the recipients of  the Australian Government’s Endeavour Scholarships and Fellowships for 2015.    

 “The Endeavour Scholarships and Fellowships are internationally competitive and promote  knowledge, education links and enduring ties between Australia and its neighbours,” Mr  Pyne said.    

 “These scholarships will support 528 high achieving international recipients with an  opportunity to study in Australia and 154 Australians to further their skills and knowledge  overseas while building their international awareness.”    

 Four inspiring Indigenous Australians will undertake their Endeavour research fellowship in  justice and law enforcement, epidemiology, behavioural science and Indigenous studies.    

 Mr Pyne said that increasing opportunities for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students  is an essential part of the Government’s vision for a world class higher education system.     

 “I look forward to celebrating the successes of these outstanding Australians and those of  future recipients of this fellowship,” Mr Pyne said.    

 Mr Pyne was also pleased to congratulate Dr Felicity Brown from the University of  Queensland who was awarded the prestigious Endeavour Queen Elizabeth II Diamond  Jubilee Scholarship.    

 The scholarship will enable Dr Brown to undertake postdoctoral research at Harvard School  of Public Health in the area of mental health in refugee children and families. Dr Brown says  she will utilise her established clinical and research skills to make a difference to the lives of 

 individuals facing hardship, in particular those displaced due to humanitarian emergencies.    

 “The Government understands the importance of giving high achieving people the  opportunity to further their education, research and professional development—be it at home  or overseas,” Mr Pyne said.    

 Applications for the 2016 Endeavour Scholarship and Fellowship round open in April 2015.    

 To view the 2015 recipients, visit: 

 https://internationaleducation.gov.au/Scholarships-and-Fellowships/alumni/Documents/07-15%20Endeavour%20Recipients.pdf     

 Mr Pyne’s Media: 0407 691 050, pynemedia@education.gov.au   Department Media: media@education.gov.au   

