---
title: "Four full calendar months without successful people smuggling venture"
date: "2014-05-02"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211407307
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3142160%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection  

 Scott Morrison 

 Four full calendar months without successful people smuggling  venture 

 Friday, 02 May 2014 

 The latest update from Operation Sovereign Borders reveals four full calendar  months have passed without a successful people smuggling venture to Australia,  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison said today. 

 Four consecutive months from January to April, or a third of the year, has now  passed without people smugglers sending successful ventures to Australia. 

 The last successful venture was on December 19 last year. Over the same period  last year under the previous government over 100 illegal boats with more than 7000  people arrived illegally. 

 Operation Sovereign Borders is producing a sustainable deterrence effect on people  smugglers and those who would seek to arrive illegally by boat. 

 Any ventures that seek to get to Australia will be faced with the same set of policies  that have so far prevented other ventures achieving success. 

 The success of the government's measures, particularly maritime operations, under  Operation Sovereign Borders in this post monsoon phase is continuing and is a  testament to the hard work and dedication of the men and women involved in  implementing these policies. 

 The Abbott Government will not shirk responsibility for our borders as the previous  Labor Government did when they abolished the Howard Government's border  protection policies resulting in over 50 000 illegal arrivals to Australia. 

 The government's resolve remains. We will continue to confront people smugglers  and those seeking to arrive in Australia illegally by boat. 

 

