---
title: "The wrong side of history - human rights abuses in Sri Lanka"
date: "2014-03-04"
creators:
  - "Madigan, John"
source: "Office of MADIGAN, SEN JOHN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404812
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3032493%22
---

 ` 

 

 

 

 

 

 Media release 

 The wrong side of history - human rights abuses in Sri Lanka  ***For immediate release*** 

 Tuesday, March 4, 2014   

 In a speech to be given at adjournment tonight, DLP Victorian Senator John Madigan will call for  the government to support an international inquiry into human rights abuses in Sri Lanka.  He will also outline the devastating story of a Sri Lankan refugee who arrived here in Australia  after suffering ongoing torture and sexual abuse.   

 “Australia is now lining up alongside Russia, China and Cuba to actively undermine a push for an  international inquiry into human rights in Sri Lanka,” Senator Madigan said.   

 “Even with overwhelming evidence of human rights violations in the country, our Prime  Minister has chosen to look the other way and stay mum on the subject.   

 “Tonight I will tell the story of a Sri Lankan refugee who has suffered unimaginable torture at  the hands of the Sri Lankan military.    

 “His story is harrowing. He has allowed me to tell it.     

 “He is one of thousands who have been subject to torture. He was able to escape to Australia, but  his family remains in Sri Lanka.    

 “His experiences have been ignored by our Prime Minister who has said on Sri Lankan human  rights abuses ‘difficult things happen’.   

 “Our government stands mute in the face of torture and we are complicit in our silence. Sri  Lanka now stands in a list of countries where we have failed to act against human rights abuses.    

 “Our international reputation as a country of fairness is and compassion is being trashed by our  sycophancy towards Sri Lanka.   

 “We are siding with a leader who condones torture, enforced disappearances, rape and sexual  violence.   

 “The Australian government may stop the boats, but will they help stop the abuse?   

 “The reasons why people get on boats and flee their countries needs to be addressed.   

 “We will find our country on the wrong side of history unless we not only back the calls for an  international inquiry into human rights abuses in Sri Lanka, but actively push for one.”   

