---
title: "Budget 2014: Abbott's budget betrayal hits Refugee Council"
date: "2014-05-30"
creators:
  - "Rowland, Michelle"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURALISM"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408958
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3195533%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO 

 

 MICHELLE ROWLAND MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND  MULTICULTULRALISM  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR 

 COMMUNICATIONS  MEMBER FOR GREENWAY   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 ABBOTT’S BUDGET BETRAYAL HITS REFUGEE COUNCIL   

 It’s another day and another Budget betrayal with the Abbott Government axing  funding to the Refugee Council of Australia.   

 This vengeful decision by the Immigration Minister Scott Morrison is a blatant  attempt to punish an organisation that keeps the Government accountable.    

 This is a churlish move by Mr Morrison that will affect support for asylum seekers  and refugees.    

 This announcement proves Mr Morrison is only interested in chest beating on our  borders with no regard for the well-being of people fleeing persecution.   

 Why is it that Mr Morrison finds it so difficult to treat asylum seekers and  refugees with dignity and compassion?   

 The Refugee Council has been playing an important role for more than three  decades as a refugee advocate. It has taken less than 12 months for this  Government to attempt to destroy it.   

 The Australian Government must immediately reverse this short-sighted decision  and restore funding to the Refugee Council.    

 FRIDAY, 30 MAY 2014   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563 (MARLES)  NICK TRAINOR 0407 078 138 (ROWLAND)   

