---
title: "Transcript of press conference: 18 September 2014: anti-terror raids; asylum seekers"
date: "2014-09-18"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211414128
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3401810%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  MELBOURNE  THURSDAY, 18 SEPTEMBER 2014   

 SUBJECT/S:  Anti-terror raids; Asylum Seekers.    

 RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION:  I’d like to make some comments on immigration matters, before I  do, in relation to the very significant events of this morning we have just witnessed  the largest counter terrorism operation in Australia’s history. And I would like to take  this opportunity to place on record Labor’s thanks to the men and women of our  agencies for their professionalism and their diligence which is keeping us safe.  The  fact that this is happening in suburbs across Australia makes it very clear that this  threat of terror is real but what is also real is the reassurance that all of us should  feel about the vigilant efforts of our counter terrorism agencies which is keeping us  safe. Labor stands united with the Government in defeating this brutality be it in the  towns of Iraqi or the streets of Sydney.     

 Now in relation to immigration matters, Labor welcomes the reduction in the flow of  asylum seeker vessels and we very much welcome the reduction in the loss of life at  sea.  We hope that we have seen an end to this human tragedy.  It’s because of this  that Labor in government took the very difficult step of introducing the Regional  Resettlement Arrangement with Papua New Guinea.  This has been the single most  important step taken by an Australian Government which has seen a reduction in the  flow of asylum seeker vessels.  Now we have been anxious about the Government’s  lack of transparency when it comes to asylum seeker policy.  We have always  thought that the question of whether or not something is an operational matter has  had more to do with whether or not the Government has wanted to put out a press  release and given this morning’s media obviously the significance of operational  matters is not a particular concern today.     

 Amidst all the self-congratulation of the Government we should not forget that they  enjoy an Opposition which shares the aim of reducing the flow of asylum seeker  vessels to Australia.  This is not something Labor enjoyed when we were in office.   As Scott Morrison seeks to apportion blame, we should also not forget that it was  the Liberals and the Greens who teamed up together to defeat Labor’s Malaysian  arrangement which could have resolved this issue three years ago.  Since then 680  people have lost their life at sea.  Labor will continue to do everything that is  necessary to ensure this human tragedy never plays out again. Are there any  questions?   

 JOURNALIST:  Do you claim that offshore processing has (inaudible) single  greatest factor that has attributed to this stopping flow in terms of (inaudible) this  morning but how can you claim that when boats continued to come after the  introduction of that policy by your government?   

 RICHARD MARLES: What we saw from the 19th July last year when Labor  introduced the Regional Resettlement Arrangement with PNG was within a couple of  months a reduction of the flow of asylum seeker vessels by 90 per cent. Now that  continued right through until the end of last year without the Government putting in  place any single substantive piece of policy at all when it came to dealing with the  flow of asylum seeker vessels so it’s on that basis that I make the claim that it more  than anything is what has resulted in a reduction in the flow of asylum seeker  vessels.   

 JOURNALIST:  Even if you consider that to be the primary factor, you surely have  to concede the entire suite of Coalition policies have worked?   

 RICHARD MARLES: Well the policy of turn backs obviously has had an effect but  we retain a concern about this policy because of its impact on our relationship with  Indonesia and in this respect. It is not just about seeing an end to the flow of  asylum seeker vessels over the last few months it’s about ensuring that we see an  end of the flow of asylum seeker vessels over the next few years and decades and if  we are to do that then we need to work cooperatively with our nearest neighbours  in particular Indonesia. It’s just plain common sense that we work cooperatively with  the country from which these boats are coming and so any policy which erodes our  relationship with Indonesia rather than enhances it is for us a concern in terms of its  long term sustainability.   

 JOURNALIST:  Do you rule out ever using boat turn backs if Labor wins  Government?   

 RICHARD MARLES: We have an open mind about any measure which sees an end  to the flow of asylum seeker vessels and an end to the loss of life at sea but we  retain a concern about the turn back policy because of its impact on our relationship  with Indonesia.  Now we acknowledge there have been positive developments in our  relationship with Indonesia over the last few weeks but we should not be under any  illusion that this is a policy that the Indonesian’s like, this is a policy which saw the  cancellation of a Prime Ministerial visit to Indonesia, this is a policy by the Minister’s 

 own admission has seen incursions into Indonesia territorial waters and this is a  policy which has no transparency about it at all and so for all those reasons we  retain concerns.   

 JOURNALIST:  Now just finally, this morning Malcolm Turnbull said many of those  asylum seekers have plausible claims for asylum?   

 RICHARD MARLES: If you look at those who have come to Australia by asylum  seeker vessel the vast majority have been found to be genuine refugees. It’s for that  reason we have never seen the asylum seekers themselves as the enemy.  We have  never referred to them being illegals we do not see it as being something unlawful  to seek asylum in this country.  The real criminals here are the people smugglers  who risk the lives of those people through criminal syndicates and so what we need  to be doing is combatting them in their efforts and making sure that we shut down a  journey which was the most dangerous journey in pursuit of refuge anywhere in the  world precisely to save the lives to those very asylum seekers.   

 JOURNALIST:  So if the boats contain someone that has a plausible claim for  refugee status should the boat be turned back?   

 RICHARD MARLES: We need to do everything we can to close down the journey  to Australia by boat. We need to do that because we were seeing an enormous loss  of life at sea on our border.  We were seeing a human tragedy unfold on our  boarder.  Now on the question of turn backs specifically I’ve answered our view  about that.  We have an open mind about any measure which will see an end to the  loss of life at sea but retain a concern about that policy specifically because of its  impact on our relationship with Indonesia.  But it is important to understand that the  enemy here is not the asylum seekers themselves. It’s the people smugglers who  put their lives at risk and who have ultimately seen more than a thousand people  perish in our waters.  Thank you.   

 ENDS   

