---
title: "Champagne flows as concerns grow: Cambodia deal leads to despair on Nauru"
date: "2014-09-27"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211414480
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3421794%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Saturday, 27 September 2014   

 Champagne flows as concerns grow: Cambodia  deal leads to despair on Nauru   

 Harrowing reports of self-harm and suicide attempts at the Nauru detention camp in the wake of the  signing of a refugee deal with Cambodia are extremely concerning, the Australian Greens have said.   

 “First we had Joe Hockey dancing on Budget night and now we have Scott Morrison quaffing  champagne as he signs a dirty deal with Cambodia,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator  Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “This was not something to celebrate. Watching Scott Morrison popping champagne corks as he  condemned families to a life of danger and poverty in Cambodia was sickening.   

 “A series of concerning reports coming out of Nauru in the wake of this shameful announcement  must be investigated.   

 “Scott Morrison needs to explain exactly what is happening and I call on him to be up front with the  Australian people. Reports of suicide attempts, teenagers involved in self harm and mothers eating  dirt in despair need to be addressed.   

 “The most serious of these reports, that a young girl has attempted suicide before being evacuated  to Brisbane for treatment, is extremely concerning. Children should not be driven to breaking point  like this and the Minister needs to explain what’s going on.   

 “The Abbott government has paid corrupt Cambodian officials a $40m bribe, and they’ve only  committed to taking 4 or 5 refugees. By all accounts, this dirty deal is a monumental failure.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

