---
title: "Increase refugee intake to account for Iraq crisis"
date: "2014-08-17"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211412381
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3342958%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Sunday, 17 August 2014 

 Increase refugee intake to account for Iraq crisis,  Greens  The Abbott government’s plan to quarantine refugee places for those fleeing Iraq and Syria is 

 meaningless, unless the government also increases the overall intake, the Australian Greens have 

 said. 

 “When it comes to the crisis in Iraq, any humanitarian effort is welcome, but will mean very little if 

 the overall number of refugee places isn’t increased,” the Green’s immigration spokesperson, 

 Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said. 

 “Disappointingly, the government’s announcement doesn’t increase Australia’s refugee intake at all. 

 “The big problem here is that, after the election, the Abbott government slashed Australia's refugee 

 intake by more than 6,000 places per year. That's 6,000 people in need who have had the door 

 slammed in their face. 

 “Despite the spin, there are Iraqi and Syrian refugees already in Australia that the government has 

 locked up in detention. They too should be given refuge and protection. 

 “The Abbott government must commit to a moratorium on sending refugees back to the Iraqi and 

 Syrian warzones. 

 Australia is able to do much more to help those in need and that's why the Greens will introduce a 

 bill to restore our refugee intake to 20,000 places per year.” 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760 

 

