---
title: "Operation Sovereign Borders November update"
date: "2014-12-02"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211415969
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3575100%22
---

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection   

 Operation Sovereign Borders November update  Tuesday, 02 December 2014 

 The November update for Operation Sovereign Borders reveals yet another month  has passed without a successful people smuggling venture to Australia, Minister for  Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon. Scott Morrison said today. 

 'Ten of eleven full months of 2014 have passed without a successful people  smuggling venture to Australia. Just one such venture has arrived this year - 128  days ago,' Minister Morrison said. 

 'The government's border protection policies are continuing to deter people  smugglers. There is no greater deterrent to protecting our borders and stopping  boats coming to Australia than by stopping the boats physically and returning those  vessels from where they came. 

 'This occurred last week when the Australian and Sri Lankan governments worked  together to disrupt a people smuggling venture carrying 38 Sri Lankan nationals who  attempted to travel illegally by boat to Australia. 

 'In that instance one referral for a refugee determination process was recommended.  That individual was transferred to an offshore processing centre this month. 

 'The turn back policy has been the stand out performer of the suite of measures that  we have introduced since we came to government to stop illegal boat arrivals.  Despite this Bill Shorten and Labor oppose turn backs outright. If Bill Shorten is ever  elected to government he wouldn't turn back the boats, he would bring back the  boats. 

 'I commend the work of our Customs and Border Protection Service and Border  Protection Command together with Operation Sovereign Borders that has resulted in  yet another successful month. 

 'The Government's resolve will not alter despite Labor and the Greens' attempts to  force the Coalition Government to abandon its strong border protection policies,'  Minister Morrison said. 

 

