---
title: "Operation Sovereign Borders August update"
date: "2014-09-01"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211412988
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3372558%22
---

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Operation Sovereign Borders August update  Monday, 01 September 2014 

 The latest monthly update for Operation Sovereign Borders reveals no illegal boats  arrived in August while offshore processing of asylum claims continues to progress,  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison said today. 

 Another month has passed under Operation Sovereign Borders without a successful  people smuggling venture to Australia. Of the eleven full months under Operation  Sovereign Borders seven have passed without such a venture arriving in Australia. 

 So far in 2014 just one successful people smuggling venture has had passengers  transferred to Australian immigration authorities. The passengers from this venture,  which originated in India, were all transferred to Nauru in August. 

 In the first eight months of 2013 under Labor a total of 268 illegal boats arrived with  more than 18 800 people on board. 

 Processing of asylum claims at offshore centres continues with over 300 refugee status  determinations or interim determinations handed down on Nauru and Manus Island. 

 As of 27 August, 179 refugees have been settled on Nauru. Thirty-three have been  employed in a range of occupations across Nauru such as dental assistant, electrical  engineer, carpenter, gardener and school teacher. 

 The Government is advised a further 12 refugees have applied for business licences to  establish their own local businesses. 

 The progress of processing at offshore centres under the Coalition Government  contrasts to Labor’s record. Labor ran offshore processing for more than a year without  a single refugee status determination being handed down and a single refugee being  resettled offshore. 

 In addition 412 transferees at offshore processing centres have voluntarily elected to  return home since Operation Sovereign Borders began. This is more than three times  the number to have voluntarily returned in 13 months under Labor. 

 

