---
title: "Expand public TAFE system - Senate backs Greens motion to mark National TAFE Day"
date: "2014-06-18"
creators:
  - "Rhiannon, Lee"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211409821
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3231360%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE  18 June 2014   

 Expand public TAFE system - Senate backs Greens motion to mark National  TAFE Day    

 The Australian Senate today passed a Greens’ motion calling on the Abbott government  to reverse the harsh budget cuts to TAFE and to abandon changes that undermine  TAFE as a public provider.   

 Greens higher education spokesperson Senator Lee Rhiannon said the motion was  moved to mark National TAFE Day, with similar motions being moved in state and  territory Parliaments around the country.   

 “The proposed $1.5 billion in cuts to VET will have disastrous impacts on TAFE staff and  students in a sector that has already been severely undermined by successive Coalition  and Labor governments,” said Senator Rhiannon.   

 “Greens MPs in state parliaments around Australia have given notice of similar motions,  calling on state governments to stop gutting TAFE through budget cuts and for an end to  the diversion of substantial public funding from TAFE to private for-profit training  providers.   

 “The failure of the current competitive funding model, implemented by both Labor and  Coalition governments was repeatedly raised in the recent Greens initiated Senate  inquiry into TAFE.   

 “Thousands of TAFE jobs across the country have already been slashed as a result of  this privatisation agenda, and there have been enormous fee increases, putting TAFE  out of reach for many prospective students.   

 “The stories I heard of how vital TAFE is range from giving a young vision impaired  refugee from Ghana the ability to learn Australian sign language and get a job in that  field to retraining a man who had become quadriplegic as a design instructor.   

 “As a result of huge funding cuts to TAFE both these men would no longer receive  assistance to follow their TAFE pathway that delivered the training and work they  wanted.   

 “It is vital that TAFE continue its historic role in providing high quality technical and  further education to Australians of all ages and backgrounds and from all communities  including regional Australia.   

 “The Greens are calling for guaranteed funding for public TAFEs based on the real costs  of providing education including delivery to students in rural and remote areas as well as  for students from disadvantaged backgrounds and those with a disability.   

 “The Coalition is on a war path with public higher education in Australia and this is going  to have irreversible consequences for generations to come,” said Senator Lee Rhiannon.   

 

 

 Greens TAFE motion passed by the Senate on 18 June 2014   

 The Senate:   

 

 1.       Notes: 

 

 a)      National TAFE day will be held on 18 June this year;   

 b)      The proposed cuts to TAFE budgets across Australia will have disastrous impacts  on staff and students and Australia’s economic future and social well-being;   

 c)       The changes to TAFE are adversely impacting regional, rural and disadvantaged  communities and people with varying abilities;   

 d)      The Senate inquiry into TAFE unearthed widespread concerns across industries  and interests about the quality of education and training provided through the private  VET market.   

 

 

 2.       Calls on the federal and state governments to:   

 a)      Reverse the harsh budget cuts to TAFE and to abandon changes proposed to  vocational education and training that undermine TAFE as a public provider;   

 b)      Review the current competitive tendering model of government funding as it  impacts on TAFE.   

 c)       Support and expand the capacity of the public TAFE system to allow it to continue  its historic role providing high quality technical and further education to Australians of all  ages and backgrounds;   

 d)      Properly recognise the importance of TAFE in providing vocational and technical  education in areas of high and low demand, in rural and remote areas and in supporting  access and participation for disadvantaged learners;   

 e)      Work collaboratively to develop a national workforce strategy for the TAFE sector.   

 

 

 Contact - 0487 350 880   

 

