---
title: "Morrison's "work rights for refugees" a cruel joke"
date: "2014-12-12"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211417328
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3589694%22
---

 SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Friday, 12 December 2014   

 Morrison’s “work rights for refugees” a  cruel joke   

 Revelations that refugees in the community on Bridging Visas won’t be given work rights  automatically are concerning and expose the fact that the Immigration Minister’s deal with the  cross bench on TPVs is a joke, the Australian Greens have said.   

 “Scott Morrison’s cruel trick will see thousands of refugees left without the right to work and  support themselves,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “The Immigration Minister has set himself up as the gate-keeper and will have to personally  intervene, on a case by case basis, for anyone to be granted work rights. It’s clear that, because  of the sheer volume of interventions required and the excessive bureaucracy, the vast majority  of refugees will be left to languish without work rights.   

 “Scott Morrison has conned the cross bench with a dodgy deal and it’s the refugees who have  lost out.   

 “These people, who are already in the community, should be given the ability to work, contribute  to society and support themselves. It’s only the Abbott government’s obsession with punishing  refugees that’s standing in the way.   

 “The Minister should honour his deal with the cross bench and immediately grant work rights to  every Bridging Visa holder in the country. It’s the only decent thing to do.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

