---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 1 June 2014: death of asylum seeker on bridging visa, visas for locally engaged Afghans, Federal Budget"
date: "2014-06-01"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "death of asylum seeker on bridging visa"
  - "visas for locally engaged Afghans"
  - "Federal Budget"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211409041
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3201600%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 Death of asylum seeker on bridging visa, visas for locally engaged  Afghans, Federal Budget 

 Sunday, 01 June 2014 

 Doorstop interview, Sydney 

 Minister Morrison: Overnight a man who was on a bridging visa in the community  passed away after suffering very serious injuries. I am advised by my department  that a man believed to be an illegal maritime arrival of Sri Lankan nationality suffered  serious burns in an incident in Geelong yesterday morning and was taken to the  Alfred Hospital. I understand he died of his injuries overnight. The department and its  Asylum Seeker Assistance Scheme provider are working with the hospital and  community, with members of the family also to make funeral arrangements and to  contact the next of kin none of whom are understood to be in Australia. I and the  department and the government extend our deepest sympathies to his family and to  his friends who are here in Australia. There are many matters about this incident that  are still not known at this time and when those details are appropriate to be released  then that will be done at the convenient and appropriate time. This is a very serious  incident. It is not the first of these incidents that has taken place and it is a matter  now of working through the important next steps to ensure all the necessary  processes are followed. I can also say that the formal police processes of  identification of the man have not yet been completed and as family have not yet  been formally notified at the time of this press conference - I have not been advised  his family have yet been notified - then it is not appropriate to release his name or  other details. Those who were close to him in the community would be aware of this  incident and they are also, to the extent that they are asylum seekers in the  community on bridging visas, receiving the necessary support. 

 On other incidents today I issued a statement with the Defence Minister and Minister  for Social Services to note what has been a very important programme to resettle  Afghans who have assisted our defence forces and other government agencies in  Afghanistan in that theatre of operations. The vast majority of those Afghans who  have been resettled were resettled late last year and early this year. It was the  product of a very lengthy and extensive and very secure and discreet process that  went about accepting the applications on recommendation from the Defence  Department and then working though the various sensitivities and details of those  individuals to arrive at a decision point for a visa. The visas were provided not just to  the individuals themselves but members of their family and that also required a fair  degree of assessment and following through in checks, whether health security or  otherwise. More than 500 of those Afghans are now in Australia. They served with  our defence forces in Afghanistan and now they are here becoming Australians and I  think that is something the Australian people can be very proud of. Just as was the  case in Iraq, so is the case in Afghanistan that those who have provided that support  to our servicemen and women we have been able to bring them here with their  families so they can become Australians and live their lives here in peace and safety. 

 Question: The fatality, was that an assault? 

 Minister Morrison: No it was not an assault but the specific circumstance of the  incident is one that I would be able to comment on later. At this stage I can just  confirm that he passed away from his injuries that were burn injuries. 

 Question: You said this has happened before, that type of incident. 

 Minister Morrison: That people have died in the community while they have been  on bridging visas. 

 Question: When did he sustain those burn injuries? 

 Minister Morrison: Yesterday. 

 Question: Was it a self-harm attempt? 

 Minister Morrison: Well again I do not want to confirm anything at this point until we  have a better picture from the police and particularly once we have been able to go  through the identification issues. The man's injuries were quite significant there were  burns to 90% of his body. 

 Question: How long had he been in Australia? 

 Minister Morrison: He arrived in January of last year and he was provided a  bridging visa in May first in last year and also in July. 

 Question: On Christmas Island, a significant protest at the detention centre there  continues I think its sixth day. Are there are any steps to bring that to an end or any  concerns that it's going on? 

 Minister Morrison: Well I am advised that that situation is under control at the  moment. It is not uncommon for peaceful protests to occur in detention facilities. It is  not helpful for refugee activists I think to dramatise these events and seek to whip  them up in the public mind because frankly that is the purpose of these protests is to  do just that. This is a matter that currently is under control and under management  and that is the advice I have only just had confirmed to me again before this press  conference but these matters you have to handle sensitively and our service  providers and all those on Christmas Island are doing just that to ensure that the  situation remains under control. There are large numbers of federal police who are  based and are on Christmas Island and there are also significantly numbered and  appropriately trained security personnel as part of the RT team there on Christmas  Island. 

 Question: Have detainees sewn their lips together, is that part of the dramatization  you are referring to? 

 Minister Morrison: I never comment on what protest activity that people get  engaged in for two reasons, one is the purpose of engaging in such activity is to gain  media attention and so I am not going to do that, and the second one is where there 

 are those sorts of allegations of people's behaviour I am not about to encourage  others to engage in it either by giving it publicity. 

 Question: The man who died, sorry, had he been in a detention facility before he  was granted a bridging visa? 

 Minister Morrison: Well he was originally he arrived in Darwin so he was not  someone who was subject to the normal processes because he had arrived on the  mainland before the excision of the mainland under the previous government's  legislation. So he arrived in Australia like someone who may have arrived at an  airport or something of that nature, so he was able to make protection visa  applications directly and wasn't part of that same processing system. So his case of  arrival was quite unique. 

 Question: Is Malcolm Turnbull do you think content as a senior minister not a  leader? 

 Minister Morrison: Malcolm Turnbull is doing an outstanding job as  Communications Minister. Malcolm and I sit together in the parliament and both of us  are just completely absorbed with the significant challenges that we have, whether it  is stopping the boats or whether it is fixing the NBN both of us have our plates full  and Malcolm's plate is certainly full when it comes to challenge he has in  communications and he is doing a great job, he is part of a great team. 

 Question: Is it a concern the Prime Minister is getting questions on national TV  about these issues this early in the term for the government? 

 Minister Morrison: Well I think the questions are bunkum. 

 Question: So yeah, there is no hint from your close colleague Malcolm Turnbull that  he is restless? 

 Minister Morrison: I think all this is just complete bunkum. 

 Question: No one is counting numbers? 

 Minister Morrison: It is all bunkum. I don't think I could be any clearer. See our  government is focussed on one thing and that is fixing Labor's mess. The previous  government left behind a debt and deficit disaster, they left behind a border  protection disaster, they left behind an NBN disaster. Everywhere you look is just  mess and the Australian people know a mess when they see one and they also  know a team that has got its head down and focussed on the issues that are of most  concern to them and that is fixing that mess and that is what all of us are doing. Ok,  thanks for your time. 

 

