---
title: "Ambassador to UN in Geneva"
date: "2014-08-24"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211412629
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3356139%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP  24 August 2014 

 AMBASSADOR TO UNITED NATIONS IN GENEVA   

 Today I announce the appointment of Mr John Quinn as Australia’s next Ambassador  and Permanent Representative to the United Nations in Geneva. Mr Quinn will also be  Australia’s Ambassador for Disarmament. 

 Mr Quinn is a senior career officer with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade  and was until recently an Assistant Secretary in the International Security Division.  Overseas, he has served as Consul-General in Honolulu, as well as in Tokyo, Manila  and Nairobi. He also served at the Australian Permanent Mission to the United Nations  in New York, specialising in human rights and social issues. 

 Mr Quinn holds a Bachelor of Arts (First Class Honours) and a Bachelor of Laws from  Sydney University. He speaks French and is married with an adult son and daughter.  

 Australia plays an active role in the UN, its specialised agencies and other fora based  in Geneva. Australia contributes to their work on disarmament, human rights,  humanitarian, refugee, health, telecommunications and labour issues, to set global  standards and responses on key issues affecting our interests.  

 Australia is particularly engaged in the work of the Human Rights Council in Geneva,  consistent with the Government’s commitment to support the protection and promotion  of human rights internationally. Australia has announced its candidacy for the Human  Rights Council for the term 2018-20.  

 Mr Quinn will also be responsible for advancing Australia’s interests in disarmament,  non-proliferation and conventional arms control in Geneva. The revitalisation of the  Conference on Disarmament and the effective functioning of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) are a key focus for Australia’s disarmament efforts, as well  as strengthening the global regimes to prevent WMD proliferation. 

 Parallel work including towards a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty and early entry-into-force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty are also fundamental to  Australia’s security. With the entry-into-force of the Arms Trade Treaty expected by the  end of this year, Australia will continue to work with key supporters based in Geneva  and elsewhere for the Treaty’s effective implementation. 

 Mr Quinn is expected up his to take appointment in September 2014, replacing Mr  Peter Woolcott.  Foreign Minister’s Office:  Gabrielle Young 0408 275 340  DFAT Media Liaison:  02 6261 1555 

