---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Brisbane: 22 January 2014: Griffith by-election; LNP health cuts; asylum seekers; Australia's relationship with Indonesia; Abbott Government's cuts to payments; Tony Abbott airbrushed from Griffith campaign material; asbestos; inflation figures"
date: "2014-01-22"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Griffith by-election"
  - "LNP health cuts"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Australia's relationship with Indonesia"
  - "Abbott Government's cuts to payments"
  - "Tony Abbott airbrushed from Griffith campaign material"
  - "asbestos"
  - "inflation figures"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403377
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2958134%22
---

 

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP   WEDNESDAY, 22 JANUARY 2014  BRISBANE 

 

 SUBJECT/S: Griffith by-election; LNP health cuts; Asylum seekers;  Australia’s relationship with Indonesia; Abbott Government’s cuts to  payments; Tony Abbott airbrushed from Griffith campaign material;  Asbestos; Inflation figures.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon, everyone.  Great to be at Princess Alexandra Hospital with Labor candidate for Griffith Terri  Butler. Great to talk to 60 or 70 health workers, the people who keep this system  going; nurses, radiographers, orderlies, cleaners, catering staff. What we see  here is real concern from the local people and the local health workforce that the  Abbott Government has just got its own unannounced, hidden strategy to cut  healthcare. In Queensland the damage done by the LNP and Campbell Newman,  to the health system, the job losses, the bed closures, has left a whole lot of  Queenslanders reeling with shock.   

 Now we see the Abbott Government, supported by their local candidate, flagging  a new GP tax to go to the doctor. What this is about is this is proposed by people  who want to take away the universal nature of our health system, they want to  increase the cost of living for ordinary southsiders, Queenslanders and  Australians to go to the doctor. The people working in the hospital tell me they  think that if the GP tax comes in they’ll see a deluge of people passing the GPs,  going straight to the hospitals. That worries them. They see people opting not to  take their kids or their older relatives to the doctor because it costs too much in  the future. It is now at this by-election that we draw a line in the sand about  defending our healthcare system. It is also important that we have local  representatives who will speak up on local issues in the national Parliament. And 

 there's nothing more local than making sure that a mum can take her sick child to  the doctor when they need to, or making sure that an older relative gets that  constant care that they require in their older years of life. I'd like to hand over to  Terri Butler to say a few words about the campaign so far and this gathering  today.   

 

 TERRI BUTLER, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR GRIFFITH: We're here because  people are concerned about costs, they're concerned about the cost of living,  they're concerned about the impact that the GP tax will have on their cost of  living and they're concerned particularly about cuts to healthcare. Here at the 

 Princess Alexandra Hospital on the southside we've seen 68 bed closures under  Campbell Newman. When there were cuts to health services, to health funding  here under Campbell Newman, Bill Glasson didn't stand up for the people who  live here. Bill Glasson defended those cuts. As recently as a couple of days ago  he's laughed it off as though it was only a few jobs that have gone here in Griffith.  Well, that's not the feedback that we're getting on the ground and we're talking to  healthcare workers. People here deserve someone who will stand up for them,  who will be a strong voice. Bill Glasson’s already shown he will not do that. He  will be a rubber stamp for Tony Abbott and for Campbell Newman. But I will be a  strong voice for this community and I will be a strong voice against the LNP cuts.  Thanks very much.   

 SHORTEN: Happy to take questions, thank you.   

 JOURNALIST: Just on the issue of the asylum seekers, do you think navy  personnel may have been involved in mistreatment of asylum seekers?   

 SHORTEN: I'm very concerned that our relationship with Indonesia seems to go  from bad to worse under the Abbott Government. It's important to have a strong  relationship with Indonesia and indeed, when it comes to this latest issue, the  reports are very concerning. But I also want to put on the record that our naval  personnel, our servicemen and women, do an extremely tough job. Their  extremely tough job is being made even tougher by the Abbott Government's  policies.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think that navy personnel could have mistreated asylum  seekers though?    

 SHORTEN: What I think is important is that we keep a strong relationship  Indonesia, that we don't damage the relationship with our nearest neighbour by  foolish policies. The reports are very concerning, but I want to put on the record  that our armed forces, in this case our naval personnel, do an extremely tough  job and their tough job is being made even harder by the policies of the Abbott  Government.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think an investigation should be launched until [inaudible]  ? 

 

 SHORTEN: The armed forces and the appropriate authorities will have their  processes, but I want to make clear what I think is the real issue here. We should  have a strong relationship with our neighbour Indonesia. We are damaging that  relationship, and I don't think anyone can seriously dispute that. We're putting the  Abbott Government boats policy at the centre of our relationship with Indonesia.  In terms of the reports today, they are concerning, they are concerning. But what  I'd also say is that our military personnel, and to their families in Australia who  are worried about them as they're representing our national interests on water or  overseas, I say to you too: Labor respects the extremely tough job that our naval  and military personnel have to do. But we think their tough job is made extremely  hard by the Abbott Government's policies, which I think need to be addressed  especially in terms of transparency.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think the Abbott Government's putting our naval  personnel in danger with their asylum seeker policies?    

 SHORTEN: I think when it comes to the priorities that need to be dealt with, a  strong relationship with your neighbours is always a sensible idea. Trying to get  on with your neighbours and not go out of your way to cause an argument with  your neighbours is just common sense, doesn't matter where you are. But what is  also important here is that whilst the reports are very concerning, and they are  very concerning, that we also stand up and recognise that our military personnel  have an extremely tough job and their tough job is being made even harder by  the Abbott Government's policies.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied with the terms of reference of the investigation  into why our naval ships went into Indonesian waters?    

 SHORTEN: Well again, I think that the Abbott Government should stop making  secrecy to the Australian public the defining basis of our relationship with  Indonesia. What I think's important is a strong and sensible relationship with our  neighbours. What I also think is important is that we've seen our personnel,  there's been all sorts of reports about what they have or haven't done. I think  they have an extremely tough job and I think that the Abbott Government needs  to stop making policies which make their hard job even harder.   

 JOURNALIST: Human Rights Watch has criticised both major parties of  accusing them of scaremongering during the last election campaign. Were you  trying to appear tougher than the Coalition Opposition?    

 SHORTEN: No, I don't accept the proposition about Labor. I think the challenge  is that we have a Government in place who promised to be open and  transparent. They said in Brisbane, in the electorate of Griffith on the 9th of 

 August, they said, Tony Abbott said if it's a good week or if it's a bad week, or if  it's an in-between week, we'll be up-front with the Australian people. Well what  happened to that broken promise, Tony Abbott? Not a lot of up-front, a lot of  hiding, a lot of lack of detail. It is ridiculous that we can find out more about  what's happening with Australian policy through the Indonesian press than we  can through our own Government and, you know, the rubbish has to stop. And in  the meantime our service personnel, who do a tough job, are being caught up in  these policies which I don't think is fair.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you accept this criticism, though, by the Human Rights  Commission?    

 SHORTEN: I believe that Labor's policy which saw regional resettlement at the  centre of it was beginning to show success. It is a difficult issue. What I don't  accept is that the Abbott Government's approach on boats - remember, they  were going to buy boats, now they're giving boats away, now they're hiding boats  and now they're hiding the Minister. This is rubbish, it's silly. It's time for the  Government to keep its promises, stop breaking its promises and start being a  Government, not an Opposition in Government.   

 JOURNALIST: The current Chief Executive of Mission Australia, Toby Hall, says  our welfare system is broken. Do you concede that within the DSP and NewStart  schemes that there are changes that could be made to streamline them to make  them more efficient, or do you believe they are 100% perfect as is?    

 SHORTERN: I believe that the Abbott Government's agenda when it comes to  pensioners, carers, people with disabilities, unemployed people is a mean and  tricky agenda. Does anyone remember the Abbott Government saying before the  election that they were going to take the axe to people on the DSP or carers? I  don't think so. Yet again, Tony Abbott, one thing before an election, breaking his  promise and another thing after the election. There are thousands of blind people  on the DSP, there are tens of thousands of amputees, there are tens of  thousands of people in wheelchairs. Why on earth does the Abbott Government  think when they get into power the only way for Australia to have a bright future is  to go after the most vulnerable in our society? So my answer to your question,  the Abbott Government has the wrong priorities. Hands off the vulnerable, hands  off the poor, hands off the people who don't have a voice and if you want to start  saving some money in the budget, climb down from your hill, climb down from  your box and admit that the paid parental leave scheme is ridiculously over-expensive and that is a colossal waste of taxpayer money.    

 JOURNALIST: Is there any room for improvement in the DSP and NewStart?    

 SHORTEN: We believe that people with disabilities don't get a fair go in the  employment market. I believe that carers don’t get a fair go. I think if you want to  help people engage in the benefits of jobs, have policies which support jobs, 

 have policies which encourage the employment of people with disabilities. A lot  of people on the DSP are older Australians. The truth of the matter is there's too  much prejudice, it's unconscious prejudice, in our society against older  jobseekers, especially if you’ve had compo claims. I think if we want to help  people with disability and you want to decrease the number of people on the  disability pension, help find them work, don’t punish them for their impairment.    

 JOURNALIST: They say that the Griffith by-election is going to be a report card  on the Abbott Government and also Campbell Newman. Do you think that Tony  Abbott and Campbell Newman will be appearing and campaigning much with the  local candidate Bill Glasson?  

 

 SHORTEN: Campbell Newman, if he appears in the Griffith by-election it’ll just  be an accident, caught in a traffic jam going somewhere else. I’ve got no doubt  Tony Abbott might make a fleeting visit. It is remarkable that only four and a half  months after the federal election Tony Abbott's not even, as reported in the  Courier Mail, not even on the how-to-vote card. They’re airbrushing. The Liberal  Party and the LNP are trying to pretend, as they talk about a GP tax, as they talk  about breaking promises, what they're trying to do is pretend that this by-election  has nothing to do with national politics. The issues are local in that people in this  seat don't want to see their hospitals overcrowded, they don't want to see their  people being sacked unnecessarily, they want to make sure that their cost of  living doesn't skyrocket because of a tax by the Abbott government on  healthcare. So they're the issues. And I've got no doubt that the fact that Tony  Abbott's not on the how-to-vote card, the fact that Campbell Newman will not be 

 sighted or doing a lot of campaign events with the LNP candidate show you that  they know - and their research tells them - that the harsh cuts in the health  system, this Commission of Audit that the Federal Government's proposing which  will go after health conditions along with others, that's why they're trying to  pretend this has got nothing to do with national politics.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, just on another issue, you've done a lot of work in  the past on asbestos removal safe practices of asbestos. There's been several  cases of mismanagement of Telstra pits here in Queensland. Would you like to  see Telstra establish a database of which pits do contain asbestos and which  don’t? Because they don’t have any plans to, and should the government put in  such measures?    

 SHORTEN: Asbestos is a silent killer. Asbestos will kill more Australians than  died in World War I. It is a dreadful disease for which that there is no cure. I  believe that in our community where asbestos exists, there should be the ability  of the community to know where the asbestos is. It’s not an easy exercise, I get  that, and the communication pits operated by Telstra have taken decades to  accumulate, asbestos was only banned in the last couple of decades. But I do  believe that Telstra does have a duty of care to make sure that communities are  not needlessly scared about asbestos, and that where it is measured we do know 

 that if those pits are ever interfered with in the future that it will be removed  safely. I think it's a duty of care to our community which companies who are  aware of asbestos need to stand up and be measured on. So I do think more  needs to be done.   

 JOURNALIST: Can I ask about inflation? Inflation figures have come out today  and they're extremely high. Joe Hockey was critical in Opposition saying Labor  hadn't done enough to curtail cost of living. Do you think he should bear, or the  Abbott Government should bear, some culpability for these figures?    

 SHORTEN: It's a new year and the Abbott Government's got to stop trying to  blame previous governments for everything that's happening under the Abbott  Government watch. Cost of living is a real issue and one thing's for sure, if  people are feeling cost of living pressure, which they are, the answer does not  make - it is not to make it more expensive to go to the doctor. The answer is not  to make it more expensive. Why on earth with inflation going up and pressure on  unemployment under a Coalition Government would the Abbott government be  considering raising the cost of going to the doctor? It defies belief that they could  be so out of touch, and it’s certainly a broken promise in that before the election  the Abbott Government never spoke about increasing the cost of living and going  to the doctor.    

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]    

 SHORTEN: I’ll tell you what’s cocky,  Mr Abbott - it’s daring Holden to take  thousands of jobs away from Australia. I’ll tell you what’s cocky, Mr Abbott - it’s  proposing to increase the cost of living and the cost of healthcare in this country.  I’ll tell you what’s cocky, Mr Abbott - it’s lying to the Australian people about the  cuts you have got in store.   

 Thanks everyone, have a lovely afternoon, try and keep cool.   

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADERS OFFICE MEDIA UNIT: 02 6277 4053   

