---
title: "Senate backs refugee children over Abbott cruelty"
date: "2014-07-16"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211411088
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3283318%22
---

 OFFICE OF SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Wednesday, 16 July 2014   

 Senate backs refugee children over  Abbott cruelty   

 The Senate has voted in support of a Greens’ motion calling on the Immigration Minister to act  in the interests of a group of refugee children who have gone into hiding in South Australia.   

 “The Senate has said that it won’t accept the government’s cruelty and Tony Abbott needs to  take notice,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator Hanson-Young said.   

 “It’s unacceptable that children in South Australia are running scared from the Immigration  Minister, their supposed legal guardian.   

 “These children are Scott Morrison's responsibility but, instead of caring for them, he has  frightened and now lost them. If he can't care for them properly, he needs to hand his  guardianship to someone who can.   

 “By supporting this motion, Senators of all stripes have told the Minister that he must act in the  best interest of these children, not throw them behind bars.   

 “Unaccompanied children should be spared from the cruel politics of this Abbott Government  but, as we speak, dozens are languishing on Christmas Island and Nauru.   

 “The Immigration Minister must now explain to the Parliament what he will do to ensure that  these missing children will be cared for and kept safe in the future.   

 “At its heart, Australia is a generous nation and I will continue to work with Senators from all  sides to bring an end to this needless cruelty.”   

 

 The motion, as passed by the Senate, reads;   

 Senator Sarah Hanson-Young   

 I move that;   

 The Senate expresses its concern for the asylum seeker children who are currently missing in  South Australia. Noting that the Minister for Immigration is the legal guardian of these  unaccompanied minors, the Senate urges the government to act in their best interest and  ensure their safety.   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760 

