---
title: "Greens will vote to block Cambodia deal"
date: "2014-05-20"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408327
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3176852%22
---

 OFFICE OF SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Tuesday, 20 May 2014   

 Greens will vote to block Cambodia deal   

 The Australian Greens have vowed to use their numbers in the Senate to block any deal to  establish a refugee dump in Cambodia.   

 “We will vote to block Tony Abbott’s secret, dirty deal with Cambodia,” the Greens’ immigration  spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “The Abbott Government needs the Parliament’s approval to make this deal happen. Chest  thumping arrogance alone won’t be enough and the Greens are ready to stand in his way.   

 “Bouncing people around the region like Ping-Pong balls, sending them from one impoverished  nation to another, is not a lasting solution.   

 “It’s unacceptable that the Abbott Government is shaping up to send women and children to a  country with a history of whippings, caning and electro-shock torture.   

 “Amnesty International have noted that the rape of young girls is on the increase in Cambodia.  How Tony Abbott thinks that it is an appropriate place to send anyone, let alone women and  children, is beyond belief.   

 “As one of the poorest countries in the world, with one of the worst human rights records,  Cambodia is a fundamentally unacceptable place for Australia to dump its refugees.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

