---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Maribyrnong: 2 June 2014: Tony Abbott's Budget of broken promises; Prime Minister's D-Day message; Abbott Government's policy shambles; GP Tax; increase in university fees"
date: "2014-06-02"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Tony Abbott's Budget of broken promises"
  - "Prime Minister's D-Day message"
  - "Abbott Government's policy shambles"
  - "GP Tax"
  - "increase in university fees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211409067
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3201640%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  

 DOORSTOP INTERVIEW 

 CANBERRA 

 MONDAY, 2 JUNE 2014 

 

 SUBJECT / S: Tony Abbott’s Budget of broken promises; Prime Minister’s  D-Day message; Abbott Government’s policy shambles; GP Tax; Increase  in university fees.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everyone, it’s  great to be at Winnunga Health Centre. This is a great health centre which  has 4,000 clients, doing a lot of good deeds in their community. We've been  privileged to look at the operation of this front line of medical care of hard-working  clinicians and medical staff. Joining me on the tour today was my shadow health  spokesperson Catherine King and local member for this electorate of Canberra, Gai  Brodtmann. What we've seen here today from the hard-working staff at this medical  clinic, which every day, daily supports and saves lives, is that we are seeing that a  GP tax will cause more harm for ordinary Australians. There are people who will  be deterred from going to the doctor. There will be people who will receive less care  as a result of Tony Abbott's unfair, mean GP tax. The experts today have warned  Australians that the GP tax will put unbelievable pressure on our GPs and the health  services they provide. The Australian Medical Association today has warned that the  GP tax could lead Australia down the road of four-minute medicine where  the services which Australians receive will be diminished because of Tony Abbott's  policy decisions.    

 But it's not just the Winnunga Health Clinic, it's not just the AMA and  medical experts around Australia. Ordinary Australians everywhere are saying to  Tony Abbott that his unfair GP tax and his unfair Budget built upon broken promises  and lies before the last election. Australians are giving Tony Abbott's Budget  the thumbs down. We now see in the last 24 hours a Prime Minister who knows that 

 his Budget is sinking fast, who can't control what his ministers say, and in the space  of 24-hour period we are seeing the Government change its mind on key issues. This  Budget shows that Tony Abbott either doesn't care what people think of his Budget  and how it affects them or that indeed he can't even convince Australians that his  Budget is any good for them. Today at Winnunga I'm more convinced than ever that 

 the Abbott Government and their rotten unfair Budget is out of touch with the needs  of ordinary Australians. I might ask my colleague Catherine King to say a few words,  and then I'll make some further comments about this D-day video.   

 CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks, Bill. I want  to thank Julie and Nadine and the other doctors for having us here and to Gai for  bringing Bill and I out to this fantastic service that's providing very critical primary  care to patients across the Canberra area. We know from all of the health experts in  the country that this GP tax will have a very significant impact on patients. But what  we're also starting to hear with the Australian Medical Association today that it will  also have an impact on the way in which GPs are able to deliver that very important  primary care. We know that the GP tax is deliberately designed to put a barrier  in the way to people going to the doctor. The Government has said it's deliberately  there to put a price signal on primary care and to drop the number of doctor visits in  this country. Primary care, these frontline services at Winnunga, are where people  go to manage diabetes, where they go to make sure that their children are  vaccinated and that they stay well. And the GP tax will mean that these people will  find that they have some very difficult choices to make and the doctors who care  for them are being forced into a position as the AMA says of having to provide  potentially 4-minute medicine to actually manage their system. What we've also  seen from the Abbott Government which hasn't got a lot of press, but is $80  billion worth of cuts, $50 billion of which is directly to public hospitals. Now those  start in 28 days' time. They will put pressure on emergency departments, on  elective surgery waiting lists and see bed closures. This is the Government's health  policy. They have the wrong policies when it comes to health and frankly, Tony  Abbott should drop his GP tax.   

 SHORTEN: I will make a quick comment about this D-day video controversy. Many  Australians are disappointed that an event as significant as D-day has been  tarnished by domestic politics. As many Australians believe, it is disrespectful and  inappropriate to tarnish the sacrifice of heroes in the most significant battle, in  the most significant war of the 20th century and raise domestic Australian politics.  Happy to take questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Over the weekend, Tony Abbott did appear to signal that he may  be willing to compromise on the GP co-payment. Would you be willing to sit down  with Tony Abbott and compromise on the issue?   

 SHORTEN: The GP tax is a bad idea. Voters in Australia are telling Labor loud and  clear, please oppose the GP tax. You can't save a bad idea, and this is a bad idea. It  is a rotten unfair tax, it will make sick people sicker. You don't make GPs have to  work any harder than they already are. You should be having a smarter health 

 system. This is a rotten idea, this GP tax. Labor will never compromise and give in to  Tony Abbott when the price that ordinary Australians will pay is a worse health  care system.   

 JOURNALIST: By not negotiating don't you deal yourself out of the possibility of  making this change fairer?   

 SHORTEN: You can't make a bad idea better. You can't put lipstick on this idea.  No amount of Tony Abbott weasel words are going to -and tweaking at the edges -   are going to make a new tax on sick people anything other than a terrible and 

 unfair idea. What Tony Abbott needs to do is show that he's got the courage to go  back to the drawing board and start again. This is a bad tax, Labor will never vote  for this bad tax.   

 JOURNALIST: You were saying in there, you sounded pretty confident that  it wasn't going - the co-payment wasn’t going to become a reality. What are you  going to make sure that it doesn't become law?   

 SHORTEN: Labor will stick to its principles. Labor believes in a universal free health  care system. You were there with me as we walked around, there are people  there who will be dreadfully affected. They’re going to have to make those terrible  decisions about do you buy the extra item and put it in the shopping trolley or  you’ve got to make decisions about your own health care. Diabetes is a huge issue  for many low income communities in Australia. It's the sort of questions people will  weigh up and they won't necessarily go to the doctor. This is a bad idea.  I'm optimistic that a bad idea will eventually be defeated and a GP tax is a shocker.   

 JOURNALIST: By blocking these budget measures is your strategy to try to force  an early election as Mr Abbott tried to do in the last term?   

 SHORTEN: Labor's strategy is to save Medicare from the hands of Tony Abbott.  Labor's strategy is to make sure that sick people are not taxed. Labor's strategy is to  make sure that we got and keep one of the best health care systems in the  word and we don't go down the American path where the - where it's your credit  card not your health care card which determines the level of care you've got.   

 JOURNALIST: But would an early election be a good result?    

 SHORTEN: Not interested in the politics, I’m interested in what’s best for Australia.  Labor will stand up on this Budget, in health care, we'll stand up for the pensioners,  we'll stand up for people who shouldn't have to pay an extra petrol tax. We'll stand  up for all the people that Tony Abbott has lied to before the election and wilfully and  systemically lied to. We're going to stand up for Australia against Tony  Abbott's rotten unfair Budget.   

 JOURNALIST: Will you be chatting to the Independent senators that are coming  into the Parliament from July the 1st to ensure that the co-payment doesn't  become law? 

 

 SHORTEN: The most important conversation the Labor Party's having is with the  Australian people. I ask myself not of what, you know, the date-to-day  political hurly-burly in Canberra, I and Labor ask ourselves what's in the best  interests of Australian families? Let's not lose sight of what's important here. It's not  what a particular crossbencher does or how Tony Abbott’s feeling this morning, it is  what is good for the families and people of Australia. The GP tax is not good for  the people of Australia, it's not good for the families of Australia. Labor can never  vote for such a bad idea and we will do everything we can to protect Australians  against this bad rotten unfair Budget.   

 JOURNALIST: Why did you choose to come to an Aboriginal medical service?  Are you particularly concerned about this could affect Indigenous people?   

 SHORTEN: Good point. We’re most concerned about how all Australian’s are  affected, but there's no doubt that the poorer you are the harder this Budget  is. Many Indigenous Australians have unacceptably high rates of mortality and  illness. We need to make sure that our first Australians, that we close the gap, not  widen the gap. This GP tax will widen the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia and Labor will fight to defend Indigenous Australians. It's one  thing to have your photo taken visiting a settlement, you know, on your week off.  It's another thing to actually have policies as the Prime Minister of Australia which  close the gap.   

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister’s heading to North America this week. Do you  think he should have discussions on climate change with President Obama?   

 SHORTEN: Well, the whole world, except for Tony Abbott, knows that climate  change is real. I will be most interested to see if Tony Abbott even raises climate  change. But what's he going to boast about? He's going to boast about not believing  in the science of climate change or coming up with a policy which will pay big  polluters more money to be big polluters.   

 JOURNALIST: We’ve seen the first line of questioning Tony Abbott, nine months in  to his Prime Ministership, about his leadership. What do you make about those sort  of questions?   

 SHORTEN: For me the issue is what's in the best interests of the Australian people.  Tony Abbott needs to show some courage. Not tweak at the edges of his rotten  Budget. He needs to start again. There is no case for going after pensioners, there is  no case for wrecking Medicare, there's no case for discouraging kids from  ordinary backgrounds to be able to have the hope of going to university. There's  no case for the petrol tax that he’s made.   

 JOURNALIST: But do you think he’s losing control of his leadership?   

 SHORTEN: He’s clearly losing control of his ministers, I mean in the last week  we've seen Kevin Andrews off on policy frolics, and then he gets slapped down by 

 the Prime Minister. We had the minister for higher education Christopher Pyne talk  about deceased students' estates paying debt taxes, then Tony Abbott rushes out  and slaps them down. This is a government who can't sell their Budget and it's not  a matter of spin to sell their Budget. It's a bad Budget, built upon lies, it's not in  the best interests of this country. Labor won't vote for big parts of this Budget. We  can't vote for them and Australians don't want us to.   

 JOURNALIST: What do you make of some Liberal MPs still suggesting that dole  recipients should undergo drug testing as well as MPs?   

 SHORTEN: The Liberal Party is addicted to distractions. They want you to look at  everything but the Budget. Labor is not going to get distracted by thought  bubbles. As we all know, a Liberal thought bubble, a new policy idea from one of  their ministers lasts anywhere between 30 minute and 24 hours before Tony  Abbott slaps it down. The real issue here is not what Liberal ministers think, the real  issue is: is this Budget in the best interests of Australia's future? How is it in  the interests of Australia's future, of Australia's families if the dream of, if your kids  will have to pay twice as much or more to go to university if you're going to  be slugged with a new GP tax, if pensioners are going to have their rate of increases  cut in real terms? There's nothing good about this Budget and this Government  needs to stop talking about everything else and just redesign its own Budget which  is chronically not up to the task of looking after Australian families.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten a Tamil refugee died over the weekend. Scott Morrison  has just spoken about it. Obviously a tragic issues but what do you make of it? Do  you think government policy is putting more stress on asylum seekers?   

 SHORTEN: I’m not going to politicise today this tragic death. My thoughts are with  this person's family. It's tragic and today I'm not going to let politics intrude in the  grief of a family coming to terms with what is the worst news any family can ever  hear.   

 JOURNALIST: Just back on the Prime Minister's trips, is now the best time to go  over there? Obviously they'll going to talk about trade and investment and so  on. But is now a good time to be talking to pension funds, talking to potential  investors, to try and speed up the economy?   

 SHORTEN: It is appropriate that leaders of Australia travel overseas to promote  Australia. That is appropriate. But again, I do say, I do not believe and I think  most Australians believe it's disrespectful and inappropriate to attach to the D-

 day celebrations domestic political comments. That is not appropriate.   

 JOURNALIST: What kind of message is that sending to the community, do you  think?   

 SHORTEN: The trip or the?    

 JOURNALIST: The D-day and the carbon tax.  

 

 SHORTEN: Well, every student of history, everyone who loves freedom knows that  D-day was the most remarkable return to the European continent to defeat Hitler  and the Nazis. It is not appropriate, wouldn't matter what political party the 

 Prime Minister belonged to, it is not appropriate, it is inappropriate and  disrespectful to contaminate the sacrifice of heroes with the domestic political issues  of the day. Thanks everyone. Have a lovely day. 

 

 ENDS 

