---
title: "Put Cambodia deal to Parliament"
date: "2014-11-24"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211536414
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3523721%22
---

 

 SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Monday, 24 November 2014   

 Put Cambodia deal to Parliament: Greens   

 Following her return from a fact-finding mission to Cambodia, the Greens’ immigration  spokesperson Senator Sarah Hanson-Young has called on the Abbott government to put their  refugee deal to the Australian Parliament.   

 “If the government believes this dodgy deal is the best way to spend over $40m of tax payer  money, they should put it to the Parliament,” Senator Hanson-Young said.   

 “While I was in Cambodia many NGOs and community groups said that, if the deal with  Australia does go ahead, it will be disastrous.   

 “The providers who I met with can’t deal with the handful of refugees who are already there.  This deal will see hundreds more refugees dumped in a developing nation that simply can’t  handle it.   

 “Corruption is endemic in Cambodia and will be a constant barrier stopping refugees from  gaining work, education, citizenship and identification papers.   

 “Unlike the Minister, I actually went to see the realities of life in Cambodia. I urge Scott Morrison  to go to the slums in Phnom Penh and to the regional areas that struggle with unemployment,  rather than just clinking champagne with government Ministers.   

 “This deal is a disaster waiting to happen. It will condemn families to a life of poverty and abject  destitution and will expose young women and girls to a dangerous sex industry.   

 “The government should present this deal to the Parliament, have the debate and stop hiding  behind a wall of secrecy.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

