---
title: "Restoring TPVs to resolve Labor's legacy caseload"
date: "2014-09-25"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211414430
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3414548%22
---

 Scott Morrison MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Restoring TPVs to resolve labor's legacy caseload 

 Thursday, 25 September 2014 

 The Coalition Government has secured support of the Palmer United Party to  reintroduce Temporary Protection Visas (TPVs) to assist resolving Labor's legacy  caseload of 30,000 Illegal Maritime Arrivals (IMAs). 

 'We are stopping the boats, with just one venture having arrived this year, and we  are now seeking to resolve the backlog of 30,000 IMAs who arrived under the  previous government by restoring TPVs,' Minister Morrison said. 

 'TPVs were foolishly abolished by Labor and the Greens in 2008 in their pursuit of  weaker borders, providing a product for people smugglers to sell. 

 'The support of the Palmer United Party to restore TPVs through legislation to be  introduced this week after they were abolished by Labor and the Greens following  the last election is welcome. 

 'We will continue to engage other crossbenchers on our proposals. The discussions  we have had to date have been very positive. 

 'Denying permanent protection visas to IMAs has been Coalition policy for over a  decade and was overwhelmingly backed by the Australian people at the election. 

 'Under new legislation - the Migration and Maritime Powers Legislation Amendment  (Resolving the Asylum Legacy Caseload) Bill 2014 - two new temporary visas will be  established. These visas will not provide a pathway to a permanent protection visa in  Australia. 

 'IMAs found to be owed protection will be offered a TPV for up to 3 years. TPVs do  not include family reunion or a right to re-enter Australia. Holders will have access to  targeted support arrangements including: work rights, access to employment  services and mutual obligation, access to Medicare and income support, torture and  trauma counselling, translating and interpreting services, complex case support and  access to education for school aged children. 

 'A further temporary visa, a Safe Haven Enterprise Visa (SHEV) - where holders  work in a designated self-nominated regional area to encourage filling of job  vacancies - will be introduced as an alternative to a TPV. 

 'SHEVs will be valid for 5 years and like TPVs will not include family reunion or a  right to depart and re-enter Australia. 

 'SHEV holders who have worked in regional Australia without requiring income  support for three and a half years of their visa period will then be eligible to apply for  other onshore visas to be granted where they satisfy the relevant criteria. They will  not be eligible for a permanent protection visa. 

 'If a SHEV holder was to access government assistance to study for a degree,  diploma or trade certificate in a designated regional area, this would not be classified  as accessing social security benefits for the purposes of calculating the period  required before the holder becomes eligible to apply for other onshore visas. 

 'The new visa arrangements will allow the government to commence processing  asylum claims of the legacy caseload. More rapid processing and streamlined review  arrangements, as detailed at the election, will be implemented. 

 'Any further delays in processing or repeated processing of claims simply adds to  cost and uncertainty and prevents people getting on with their lives. 

 'Upon passage of the Migration and Maritime Powers Legislation Amendment  (Resolving the Asylum Legacy Caseload) Bill 2014 and the Migration Amendment  (Protection and Other Measures) Bill 2014 the government will agree to process  IMAs currently on Christmas Island and the mainland who arrived last year and who  have not been transferred to Nauru or Manus Island, as part of the legacy caseload. 

 'If found to be refugees they will be provided a TPV or SHEV. They will not be  eligible for a permanent protection visa. These visas only apply to those IMAs who  are part of the legacy caseload. 

 'All IMAs already transferred to Nauru or Manus Island will remain subject to the  offshore processing policy, regardless of their date of arrival. They will remain on  Nauru or Manus Island, where their asylum claims will be assessed. Under this  policy, they will not be resettled in Australia. 

 'Furthermore, any and all new illegal maritime arrivals will continue to be transferred  to Manus Island or Nauru for offshore processing and resettlement, as was  demonstrated by the recent ‘Indian' venture where all 157 IMAs were sent to Nauru.  This will apply in all such cases, without exception, as a necessary part of our border  protection regime that is successfully stopping the boats. 

 'The Government will also continue to support Assisted Voluntary Return (AVR)  packages for those in the legacy caseload, particularly as a mechanism to reunite  unaccompanied minors with their families in their home countries. 

 'I thank the Palmer United Party for their support of temporary protection visas. The  Coalition Government is stopping the boats, restoring integrity to our immigration  programme and can now get on with the job of resolving Labor's legacy of failed  border protection,' Minister Morrison said. 

 

