---
title: "Transcript of press conference: 17 February 2014: Manus Island incident; Navy mistreatment allegations; Operation Sovereign Borders"
date: "2014-02-17"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404215
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3077322%22
---

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection   

 

 Manus Island incident, Navy mistreatment  allegations, Operation Sovereign Borders  Monday, 17 February 2014 

 Press Conference, Canberra 

 Minister Morrison: Thank you for joining me I am here to brief on the incident at  Manus Island last evening having just had a further briefing on the incident within the  past hour. I'm advised of the following. 

 At Approximately 1600 hours local time in Manus, on 16 February, the PNG  Immigration and Citizenship Services Authority convened a meeting with transferees  at the Manus Centre to respond to questions posed earlier in February. 

 During that meeting, transferees became agitated and commenced chanting at  which time all officials departed the compound where the meeting was taking place. 

 The centre remained calm but tense until approximately 1815 hours local time, when  about 35 transferees from Oscar compound absconded from the centre. They were  quickly located and returned to the centre. While further internal fence breaches  between compounds continued during the incident, there were no further centre  perimeter preachers. 

 All non-essential staff at the time were evacuated from the centre while all essential  Immigration Department, IHMS and G4S staff remained at the centre. While the  Royal PNG constabulary was in attendance it was primarily containing a number of  Manusians outside the centre. 

 Service providers have reported minor damage to the centre; a couple of light poles  inside the perimeter were knocked down; several internal and external fences were  knocked over; several glass panels on marquee doors were smashed, however, they  are made of safety glass and remain intact; a shade tent was thrown over the fence  and a couple of bunk beds were broken apart. 

 G4S have confirmed that no fires were lit during the incident nor was any  accommodation destroyed. Current reports are that the only weapons seen were the  broken parts of the bunk beds, some of which were thrown, however the majority of  pieces were confiscated by G4S before they could be used any further. 

 G4S utilised personal protection gear but no batons or other weapons were in situ  and were in control of the centre for the entire period. 

 At 1930 hours local time all compounds were secure whilst minor incidents continued  into the evening and tensions remained, all compounds were calm by 11pm. 

 At 0700 hours local time here in Australia, on the East Coast, eight transferees had  been arrested and taken to the Lorengau Police Station, so earlier this morning. 19  transferees had attended the IHMS clinic for medical attention, none of whom were  exhibiting life-threatening conditions. As at this morning, five of those transferees  remained at the IHMS clinic. 

 A number of G4S staff also sustained minor injuries. 

 A full face to photo identification has been conducted and all transferees have been  accounted for, I'm advised. 

 At 0700 hours this morning our time, the mood was reported as subdued with the  expectation that the centre would resume normal operations. 

 With regard to reports that the transferees were advised that they will not be settled  in PNG, I'm advised that those reports are false. 

 The Department understands that during the meeting on February 16 the transferees  were advised by the PNG ISCA that those found to be refugees will be offered  settlement in PNG. However, Mr Kiangali who is the ISCA centre manager confirmed  with the transferees that a third country option will not be offered and that neither the  PNG nor Australian governments will be acting on behalf of the transferees in  seeking alternative settlement countries to PNG. 

 A full incident review, as per standard procedure, is underway involving my  department and the PNG Immigration and Citizenship Services Authority, which is  what ISCA stands for, and service providers and I will await the outcome of that  review before commenting further. 

 That is the information that I have up-to-date and the detail that I have it, up-to- date. I'm happy to take a few brief questions. I do have an engagement in the not too  distant future. 

 Journalist: What is the extent of the injuries of those who are still being looked  after? 

 Minister Morrison: Well, I don't have a full report on that yet Michelle, and when I  do then we can make that information available but as I said they were non-life  threatening injuries and only five of those remained at the clinic this morning. 

 Journalist: [indistinct] what do you understand to have been the cause? 

 Minister Morrison: Well, again that review as to causes is something that is not  before me at this point. I simply sought to brief you on what has occurred as soon as  I could do that and once the matter has been further reviewed, then I will have a  better understanding of the tensions that underpin it. 

 Journalist: Is it your intention that none of those who are sent to Manus Island who  are found to be refugees will be resettled in any other country? 

 Minister Morrison: It's our intention that they will never be resettled in Australia- 

 Journalist: Not Australia, any other country. 

 Minister Morrison: - No, the arrangement that the previous Prime Minister had  done with the Papua New Guinean Government is the same arrangement that we  have with the Prime Minister and the Government of Papua New Guinea. 

 Journalist: What is your understanding of the resettlement in PNG, will they be  resettled on Manus Island or somewhere else? 

 Minister Morrison: Well, as I've answered that question here previously to you  before Lenore, all of those issues are still being worked through with the PNG  Government. 

 Journalist: You said that the guards didn't use batons - were they armed with  capsicum spray? 

 Minister Morrison: I can advise you simply that they did not use batons as that is  what I have been advised. I don't have the full kit though acquitted with, before me. 

 Journalist: Even though it is still a work in progress as you say, how long do you  think - what's your best guess as to how long before the thousand plus people are  processed? 

 Minister Morrison: Well, processing and resettlement are two different issues and it  is our intention to have processing completed as soon as that can be practically  achieved, and that's what both the Government of Papua New Guinea and Australia  are working towards. 

 The issue of resettlement is a further challenge and that's why we've been moving so  quickly to establish that accommodation on Manus that provides a place for people  to be accommodated post assessment if they are found to be refugees. 

 Journalist: What is the timeframe? 

 Minister Morrison: Well I'm not about to speculate on that. 

 Journalist: [indistinct] 

 Minister Morrison: They're very patient back there- 

 Journalist: -can I ask you about the Michael Bachelard report from a couple weeks  ago? One of the- 

 Minister Morrison: -is this on the Manus Island incident? 

 Journalist: Ah, no- 

 Minister Morrison: -let's just stay with the Manus Island incident first. 

 Journalist: Does the principle of 'no advantage' still apply? 

 Minister Morrison: Well that is largely been superseded, I think, by the more robust  arrangements that we now have in place for offshore processing, because no one is  getting to Australia. 

 The previous arrangement involved people being settled in Australia, that's what the  'no advantage' statement of the previous government, as I understand it, applied to. 

 Now given that people aren't being resettled in Australia, that would be superseded  by the arrangements and frankly it's even further superseded by our more broader  operations under Operation Sovereign Borders, which means not only will you not be  resettled here, but it's our plan under Operation Sovereign Borders to ensure you  never get here. 

 Journalist: Minister, has anyone on Manus actually been found to be a refugee - is  that processing- 

 Minister Morrison: -no yet, no. 

 Journalist: Given that they were effectively in limbo, the group that we are talking  about, can you understand why these tensions have erupted as they are? 

 Minister Morrison: Look, in any situation whether it's here onshore where there are  30 000 people, over 30 000 people in fact who have been left behind by the previous  government that they couldn't be bothered to process for a period of, I think, over 18  months, probably even longer than that, that's going to create all sorts of tensions  and that's why we've moved so quickly as a government to try and get in place  appropriate facilities both at Manus Island and Nauru to enable us to deal with  situations exactly like this. 

 It was in the first few months that I ordered a force protection review, through  General Campbell, to be conducted on both of those facilities; The steps that we've  taken as a result of those reviews were in part responsible for being able to contain  the situation last night and the way we did. 

 Journalist: Minister is the other accommodation you're building on Manus - post- assessment people intended as short term accommodation while other settlement  arrangements are made? 

 Minister Morrison: Look, it's not restricted to being a temporary accommodation. 

 Journalist: So people could stay there indefinitely? 

 Minister Morrison: Well, if people are resettled there, then that is a possibility but  those sorts of details haven't been confirmed. It is not restricted to being temporary  accommodation but that's a matter that can be considered down the track. 

 Journalist: Why is it taking so long to confirm - why-? 

 Minister Morrison: -because the previous government left us a blank sheet of  paper on this issue Michelle. An absolute blank sheet of paper, so this government  has had to salvage what the previous government didn't do. 

 Journalist: Minister, you said that there are some gaps, I suppose, in the fencing  and the sort of perimeter. What's the security situation like there now? Are there are  members of the security forces or the police there? 

 Minister Morrison: PNG police are always on call and available there, that's why  they're there, but it was pleasing that on this occasion that G4S were able to address  the situation directly and in recent times we further beefed up the security presence  of that personnel to deal with situations like this and we have been very much on the  front foot in trying to proactively manage these issues to ensure that they don't  escalate beyond what is manageable. 

 Journalist: Minister there have been reports of broken bones of detainees, is this  true? 

 Minister Morrison: Well, as I said I don't have a full report yet on what the medical  condition of those who were treated, and when I do then I'd be able to answer that  question but I'm not going to speculate on that and I don't suggest others should  either. 

 Journalist: Is it correct that you have sent another group of unaccompanied minors  to Nauru, and if so, how do you address the tension between what is in the  government's political interest and your job as guardian of those unaccompanied  minors to do what's in their best interests. 

 Minister Morrison: Well I do that by ensuring the facilities are in place in Nauru and  when my guardianship responsibilities are transferred to the Justice Minister in  Nauru, that's how I do it, and that's what I've been doing. 

 Journalist: But you decided to send them there in the first place? 

 Minister Morrison: That's right, because there are no exceptions to this policy,  that's why together with all the other measures that we have in place that our  measures are working. 

 You have to be consistent when pursuing policies to stop the boats and that is why  we have not had a successful people smuggling venture get to Australia in the last  more than 8 weeks. Now, that is an outcome I welcome it's an outcome I'd hope  everyone would welcome because when people aren't coming on boats, people  aren't dying on boats. 

 People don't have to be sent to detention centres and the extraordinary costs that  are associated with all of those policies don't become necessary over the longer  term, and so that is why we are pursuing such a consistent position on this issue. But  in terms of the care of those specifically involved that is why I've been putting the  resources and facilities in place on Nauru, and that's why Save the Children are  there. 

 Journalist: Minister, can I, turning to that report fortnight ago- 

 Minister Morrison: -are there any other questions on Manus, because I do have a  Cabinet meeting to get to? I'll take one on that. 

 Journalist: Ok. There are a couple of details in the recording a fortnight ago that  remain sort of unanswered. One was this notion that are people who are put on a  lifeboat are under the custody of Australian Naval personnel, that they are denied to  go to the toilet, or they're allowed the opportunity to go to the toilet once a day. And  secondly,- 

 Minister Morrison: - well that's already been dismissed. 

 Journalist: Well, you can dismiss it here and explain that if that was ever a protocol.  Secondly, do you talk about - there was talk about the boats being, the lifeboats,  being let go to Indonesia within 7.5 nautical miles with the naval ships having their  lights turned off. Has that also been dismissed specifically? 

 Minister Morrison: Well, I don't comment on specific operations as you know. You  know what the government's policy on this is, and I know that might prove frustrating  to members of the media and I understand that. But equally as you've heard that our  testimony, both mine and General Campbell's, before the Senate about the very  genuine operational reasons for doing that. It contributes to the success of the  operation. 

 Journalist: But you publicly stated, or the government has publicly stated- 

 Minister Morrison: -no your question was in relation to people not being permitted  to use the lavatory facilities on a vessel - generally speaking, and that is not our  practice and that's what my comment related to. 

 All the issues regarding the review that is being undertaken for the Chief Executive  of Customs and Border Protection and the Chief of the Defence Force, that report  will be made available shortly. The appropriate briefings that need to be undertaken  in relation to that report are being undertaken. 

 I should stress that that included my offer to the Opposition that they would be  briefed prior to that report being released. Now the earliest that that can be done, I  understand for the Opposition, is late tomorrow and those details are still not able to  be confirmed so that review will be released when it is available to be released. 

 Journalist: [Inaudible]-7.5 nautical miles from Indonesia is it incorrect? Could it be  an inadvertent shift into Indonesian territorial waters so close to the shore? 

 Minister Morrison: Well I'm not quite sure what question you're now asking  Andrew? 

 Journalist: The allegation is that they were led to 7.5 nautical miles from Indonesia? 

 Minister Morrison: Any issues regarding the incursion of our vessels into  Indonesia's waters which is something that I've already briefed, from this podium  before on, that is covered in the review that is being conducted by the Chief  Executive of Customs and Chief of the Defence Force. Now that review is the  property of those two gentlemen and an unclassified report will be released of that  review once we've completed the briefings we promised to do. That of course  involves briefing Indonesia and key officials there but also I undertook to the  Opposition to ensure that they were briefed as well and they will be I understand  tomorrow afternoon. 

 Journalist: Can I ask you how many asylum seekers have come here by plane  since the beginning of the year? And secondly, the lifeboats that you're sending the  asylum seekers back to Indonesia on are you seeking to retrieve those? 

 Minister Morrison: Well, on the second point that goes to operational detail and  you're aware of the government's policy on that so I don't offer any comment on that  at all. 

 On the former point I'm sure that we can get those details to you, but I can tell you  this, the number of people who've sought to come to Australia by plane without any  form of documentation would be arguably less than the number of people who are  sitting in this room. 

 Thank you. 

 

 See: Index of Speeches  

 URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm211855.htm   Last update: Tuesday, 18 February 2014 at 09:46 AEST 

 

