---
title: "Lowest January arrivals for six years - Minister for Immigration and Border Protection"
date: "2014-02-04"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403724
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2980137%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 The Hon Scott Morrison 

 Lowest January Arrivals For Six Years - Minister for Immigration and  Border Protection 

 04-02-2014 -  

 The latest weekly report for Operation Sovereign Borders confirms illegal boat arrivals for  January as the lowest in six years, Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon  Scott Morrison said today.  

 The last illegal boat to have arrived was on December 19, over six weeks ago. 

 Despite the failure of any vessels to reach Australia, as a result of our maritime operations  during this latest reporting period, one person was later today transferred to Christmas Island,  who was subject to a current operation, for urgent medical treatment in relation to a heart  condition. 

 The arrival of the person for medical treatment took place at approximately 2.30 pm AEDT  this afternoon. 

 I was briefed on this matter after the conclusion of today’s Senate hearing and was advised  that this person was transferred at the earliest possible opportunity. 

 The Government’s policies and, more importantly, the effective and professional  implementation of those policies by the hundreds of men and women serving our country to  protect our borders is stopping the boats. 

 Unsubstantiated claims have recently been made against our Navy and Customs and Border  Protection personnel serving as part of Operation Sovereign Borders. I wish to stress those  officers serve with a high degree of professionalism and integrity. They are trained to  undertake the tasks they are performing. They perform those tasks consistent within their  lawful orders and the guidelines and procedures that govern their conduct. 

 This Government takes seriously any slur against the character of Australian service men and  women tasked to protect our borders and does not give credibility to un-substantiated and  baseless claims by triggering further formal processes of inquiry, where no credible evidence  is provided to substantiate such claims. 

 

