---
title: "Australia and PNG inaugural Joint Ministerial Forum to oversee implementation of the Regional Resettlement Arrangement"
date: "2014-04-03"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211406272
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3099038%22
---

 Australia and PNG inaugural joint ministerial forum to oversee  implementation of the regional resettlement arrangement 

 Thursday, 03 April 2014 

 Joint media release with the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Minister for Immigration  and Border Protection and the Hon. Rimbink Pato, Papua New Guinean  Minister for Foreign Affairs and Immigration. 

 The first monthly Joint Ministerial Forum to oversee implementation of the Regional  Resettlement Arrangement (RRA) was held in Port Moresby on 2 April between  Papua New Guinean Minister for Foreign Affairs and Immigration, the Hon Rimbink  Pato, and Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison  MP. 

 The outcomes of the meeting were as follows: 

 • Ministers welcomed the decision by the PNG  Cabinet that allows the first tranche of initial  assessments to be delivered to transferees  within a month.  

 • The process of Refugee Status Determination is  well advanced, with two-thirds of transferees  having had initial interviews at the Regional  Processing Centre.  

 • The development of a review process for those  initially assessed not to be refugees was  underway and due for completion in April.  

 • A refugee visa has been approved by the  Government of PNG for those determined to be  refugees. The visa will provide for work rights  and freedom of movement.  

 • Ministers noted that the PNG Expert Panel on  Settlement convened on 1 April with a  scheduled report back to the PNG Government  at the end of April on recommendations on  implementing refugee resettlement.  

 • Australia reaffirmed its commitment under the  RRA to meet costs relating to the settlement of  refugees in PNG and would await the  recommendations of the Settlement Expert  Panel, which will influence the level of  assistance required. It was anticipated the first  refugees could be resettled in June 2014.  

 • Ministers reiterated that all persons transferred  to PNG under the RRA who are found to be  refugees will be resettled in PNG. No-one will  be resettled in Australia.  

 • Those persons found not to be refugees will be  held in detention in PNG pending removal to 

 their home country or another country where  they have a right of entry - no-one found not to  be a refugee will be transferred to Australia.   • Improvements to infrastructure facilities at the  Manus Regional Processing Centres for asylum  seekers continue at pace.   • The transition of garrison and support services  to Transfield Services Ltd from G4S is now  complete and Ministers noted the transition  process had proceeded smoothly.   • Ministers affirmed the urgency and need to  complete the comprehensive investigations  underway into the events that took place at  Manus Island of 16-18 February.  

 •  

 o Australian Government committed to  continue to provide all assistance  necessary, if requested by PNG  authorities to finalise their official police  investigation into the incident, including  providing legal assistance for witnesses  to alleged criminal acts.  

 o Ministers also agreed to facilitate  interviews of persons of interest who are  no longer in PNG.  

 o Ministers agreed that all relevant  information from the independent  administrative reviews would be handed  over to the police investigation to enable  swift prosecutions.  

 o The outcomes of the investigations will  inform a coronial inquiry in PNG.   o Both governments will expedite the  implementation of recommendations 

 arising from the investigations.   • Ministers received an update on the good  progress of implementation of the Joint  Understanding and additional assistance 

 package for Manus.   • Ministers noted positive progress to deliver  projects in Manus Province with the additional 

 $26m in Australian development assistance,  including:   •  

 o improvements to infrastructure and  equipment at Lorengau Hospital   o infrastructure school kits for Manus  schools   o road and bridge maintenance 

 rehabilitation works  

 o renovation of the Lorengau Market roof  and   o community grants for youth activities.   • Ministers also noted the ongoing successful 

 implementation of the $420m broader Australian  development assistance package under the  Joint Understanding on Further Bilateral  Cooperation on Health, Education and Law and  Order, including:  

 •  

 o Angau Memorial Hospital -  redevelopment on a 50/50 basis with  Government of PNG  

 o Lower Courts Complex - design of a  magistrates complex in Port Moresby   o Madang to Lae Road - design of the  road   o University of PNG - infrastructure and 

 twinning support.  

 Ministers noted the recent successful visit to Papua New Guinea by Prime Minister  Abbott, the longest visit by an Australian Prime Minister for twenty five years, during  which Mr Abbott announced Australia's commitment to support Papua New Guinea's  preparations to host the APEC Summit in 2018, and Australia's willingness to  increase the Australian police presence in Papua New Guinea. 

 Ministers also noted the ongoing strong commitment of both governments to  strengthen the higher education sector in Papua New Guinea. 

 The next scheduled meeting is on 9 May 2014. 

 

