---
title: "Urgent overhaul of training procedures needed at offshore detention centres"
date: "2014-04-12"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211406614
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3113825%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Saturday, 12 April 2014 

 Urgent overhaul of training procedures needed at offshore detention  centres: Greens 

 The Australian Greens are calling for an urgent overhaul of training requirements for staff employed  at Australian offshore detention centres on Manus Island and Nauru. 

  “Reports today of drug use, staff misconduct and inadequate background checks are extremely  concerning and must be addressed”, Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said. 

 “It is clear that there is a toxic culture brewing in these remote detention centres and the Abbott  Government cannot continue to ignore the sense of lawlessness. 

  “An urgent overhaul of recruitment procedures and training requirements is desperately needed. 

  “The Government must conduct an immediate review of training procedures and minimum  standards for all staff employed at the Manus Island and Nauru detention camps. 

  “New employees are being deployed to offshore detention centres in under a week of applying for  the job. 

 “It is hard to believe that proper background checks can be conducted and adequate training  provided in this short time frame. 

  “Appropriate mental health and cultural training along with child safety protocols should be  standard practice. 

  “This is a shoddy approach that puts both asylum seekers and staff working in the centres at  extreme risk.” 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

