---
title: "Children held hostage, Morrison all powerful"
date: "2014-12-05"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211416755
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3561599%22
---

 SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA   

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Friday, 5 December 2014    

 Children held hostage, Morrison all powerful    

 The Immigration Minister’s new powers, which give him the ability to deny protection to  refugees, return them to face guaranteed torture and send babies to the detention camp on  Nauru, will have disastrous consequences the Australian Greens have said.    

 “Scott Morrison has successfully blackmailed the Senate cross bench by holding refugee  children hostage,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.    

 “Never before has a Minister behaved in such a brutal way when dealing with the Senate and  vulnerable children. Telling Senators that they’d better do what he wants or kids will be  destroyed is a disgraceful new low for Scott Morrison.    

 “It’s painfully clear that the Minister will abuse his new, wide ranging powers and welch on many  aspects of his deal with the cross bench.    

 “The factories of abuse, death and mental illness on Nauru and Manus Island will continue to  destroy people, including hundreds of children.    

 “We will continue to fight for all compassionate Australians who want to see refugees give  genuine, lasting protection.    

 “We should be working with neighbouring countries, accelerating refugee processing and  increasing Australia’s intake from the region so that people are given a safe way to reach  protection. That’s the only way we can save lives at sea while caring for refugees.”    

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

