---
title: "Funding for low SES students is under threat by secret and biased consultation"
date: "2014-09-09"
creators:
  - "Save Our Schools"
source: "SAVE OUR SCHOOLS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211413711
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3385440%22
---

 1 

 

 

 SAVE OUR SCHOOLS  Media Release 

 Funding for Low SES Students is Under Threat  by Secret and Biased Consultation  Save Our Schools today condemned the Federal Government for secrecy and biased  representation of private schools in its consultation on the Gonski funding loadings for low SES  students. SOS National Convenor, Trevor Cobbold, said that the secret consultation on the  loadings is extremely unrepresentative and threatens future funding for low SES students.   

 “The secrecy surrounding this consultation is scandalous. It is an invitation-only consultation.  There was no public announcement that the consultation had begun and only select organisations  were told of it and invited to participate. There is no process for public submissions. Submissions  are restricted to invited organisations.   

 “The invitation list is loaded against public schools. Private school organisations comprise the  large majority of invitees and are vastly over-represented compared to public schools.    

 “Of 47 organisations invited, 29 are private school organisations. Only one directly represents  public school organisations - the Australian Education Union. Eight state and territory  government education departments are represented, but they are responsible for both public and  private schools and all but two are controlled by Coalition governments. Another seven  organisations are cross-sectoral groups and the other two are refugee organisations.   

 “It is incredible that peak private school principals’ and parent organisations were invited but not  the peak public school principal and parent organisations.    

 “Clearly, the consultation is rigged against public schools. Yet, it is public schools that enrol the  vast proportion of low SES students. Eighty-two per cent of all students in the bottom SES  quarter are enrolled in government schools compared to 12 per cent in Catholic schools and 6 per  cent in Independent schools.    

 “The 690,000 low SES students enrolled in public schools are represented directly by one  organisation while the 153,000 in private schools are represented by 29 organisations.    

 “This extreme over-representation of private schools demonstrates the Government’s contempt  for public school organisations, but it is not surprising given the Prime Minister’s proud boast  that “It’s in our DNA” to give priority to private schools.   

 “The consultation also excludes the broader public who have an interest in funding low SES  students and schools. The Gonski review attracted over 7000 submissions, including hundreds  and hundreds from parents, teachers and schools in low SES communities. All are  disenfranchised by being excluded.”   

 Mr. Cobbold said that there is widespread concern that a secret deal is being hatched between the  Federal Government and private school associations to dismantle funding for low SES students  and schools. 

 2 

 

 

 “The Government’s secret discussion paper for the review re-opens the issue of whether there  should be any low SES funding loadings. The first question asks: “Is there a need for a low SES  loading?”    

 “Re-opening this issue can only be perceived as a threat to the future of the loadings given the  biased representation in the consultation and statements by the Federal Minister for Education,  his advisors and private school organisations denying the need for the loadings.    

 “Despite the evidence presented by the Gonski report, the Federal Minister has repeatedly said  that Australia does not have an equity problem in education and he has even claimed that the  Gonski report was not about equity. He told Lateline presenter Steve Cannane:    

 Steve, you're the first person who has described the Gonski report as being all about equity...  If it was  all about equity then that is news to most people.  [Lateline, 26 November 2013].    

 “Independent Schools Victoria has long argued that low SES students should not receive extra  funding because it claims that “low SES has a minor influence on student performance”. The  Minister’s senior advisor, Scott Prasser, says that the focus of education policy should be on  “quality rather than disadvantage”. Another prominent advisor, Kevin Donnelly, says that the link  between student performance and SES “is far from proven” despite overwhelming international  and Australian research evidence to the contrary.    

 “The Government has already dismembered a key component of the Gonski funding plan by  refusing to fund the last two years of the funding increases. Now, there is a clear threat to the  future of the low SES loadings.    

 “This would particularly suit Independent school associations as their schools get little benefit  from the loadings because the large proportion of their students comes from more privileged  backgrounds. They would like to return to the incoherent Howard era funding model which suited  them better.   

 “Only 9 per cent of students in Independent schools are in the bottom SES quarter compared to  30 per cent of government school students. Almost 50 per cent of Independent school student are  in the top SES quarter compared to 20 per cent of government school students.”   

 Mr. Cobbold called for an open public submission process to review the loadings. He said that  SOS would be making an uninvited submission next week.   

 9 September 2014    

 Trevor Cobbold  National Convenor   

 SOS - Fighting for Equity in Education 

 http://www.saveourschools.com.au 

 https://twitter.com/SOSAust 

 

