---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 8 January 2014: Infrastructure Australia; Coalition's infrastructure funding priorities; toll roads; Qantas; government secrecy on asylum seekers"
date: "2014-01-08"
creators:
  - "Albanese, Anthony"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE AND TRANSPORT"
subjects:
  - "Infrastructure Australia"
  - "Coalition's infrastructure funding priorities"
  - "toll roads"
  - "Qantas"
  - "government secrecy on asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403091
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2935200%22
---

 The Hon Anthony Albanese MP  Shadow Minister for Infrastructure and Transport  Shadow Minister for Tourism   

 

 TRANSCRIPT 

 

 DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA 

 JANUARY 8, 2014 

 

 SUBJECTS: Infrastructure Australia, Coalition’s infrastructure funding  priorities, toll roads, Qantas, government secrecy on asylum seekers 

 

 ALBANESE: Thanks for joining me. Infrastructure Australia have released this  document - Urban Transport Strategy - that provides a blue print for a way  forward to ease urban congestion in our cities. 

 It confirms the need for an integrated approach to transport infrastructure  investment. Transport infrastructure is vital to make sure that people can get to  and from where they want to go, but also to move freight in and around our  cities and between our cities and communities. 

 What this report emphasises is that you can't have support for just one mode. 

 It emphasises the need for an integrated approach between the passenger  transport and freight transport, between public transport and our road network. 

 And it's important that the Abbott Government get this message - that the idea  that they will only invest in roads and will have no investment in urban public  transport - indeed the thought that they will take billions of dollars that have  been allocated for urban public transport and take that away from State 

 governments in the first Abbott-Hockey Budget - is one that will ensure that  families continue to spend more time in their cars travelling to and from work  than they do at home with their kids. 

 It’s an obvious approach; it's an approach which emphasises the need to ensure  our cities are more productive, more sustainable and more livable. 

 And it’s one that emphasises the need for proper analysis of projects on a case-by-case basis, a proper economic analysis of the cost-benefit of particular  projects and that it is that analysis by Infrastructure Australia which should guide  investment in our national transport network. 

 So this is important document. 

 It's time for the Abbott Government to recognise that they have made a strategic  mistake in saying that that public transport is off limits, that that distorts the  market. It not only ensures that public transport suffers but, as this paper  indicates, it also ensures that the road network is not as efficient as it would be  otherwise because it is more congested. 

 So it's time for the Abbott Government to work co-operatively to acknowledge  that there is a need for investment in vital projects such as the Cross River Rail  project in Brisbane, the Melbourne Metro project - for which funds have been  allocated in the budget, as well as for urban public transport in Western Australia  - a fact that the Barnett Government have made very clear will be put back  without this investment by the Abbott Government that had already been  allocated in the budget. 

 

 REPORTER: Would Labor put the money instead into urban rail or is there  (inaudible) … some magic source of cash given the current state of the deficit? 

 

 ALBANESE: Certainly it’s a matter of what of what your priorities are. 

 Our priority was always infrastructure investment. What we did in Government  was to increase the public transport Budget. 

 We allocated more funds since 2007 to 2013 than had been allocated by every  government combined from Federation right through to 2007. 

 But we also doubled the roads Budget. 

 Infrastructure for Labor and nation building investment was a priority. Why?  Because it produces a return. If you increase productivity and you increase  economic growth, then you get a return to the budget. 

 We also of course rebuilt one-third of the interstate rail freight network. That  was absolutely vital. And if you look at some of the big projects that are going  ahead, whether it be the Moorebank intermodal project in Sydney or the  preliminary stages of intermodal for Melbourne in Melbourne's west, then what  you see is, if you like, they are physical depictions of why you need that  integrated approach between rail and road, with those inter-modal facilities. 

 The Moorebank Intermodal project, which is proceeding and has been  established by the establishment of a government business enterprise and then  will run by the sector, what that will do is do more to ease traffic congestion in  Sydney perhaps than any other project and that is now recognised by the  incoming government and by the NSW Government. 

 But when it was first put forward that was opposed as well, indeed the Liberal  Party ran ads against that project at the 2010 election campaign with the  member for Hughes campaigning very strongly against that project. 

 So there is evidence that the Coalition can change its mind. What they need to  do is change their mind. What they are doing at the moment though, is talking  about road projects, talking about infrastructure but they have to be the right  ones. 

 For example, in South Australia, the Torrens to Torrens project in Adelaide on  the South Road is ready to go. 

 They're saying they won't fund that, they will fund Darlington interchange  project, which is not ready to go, which will lead to a two-year delay in  infrastructure investment in South Australia. 

 So it's a matter of the right projects. The only project indeed that's been  advanced by the Abbott Government that had not already had funding allocated 

 by the former Labor Government is the East-West road project in Melbourne and  for that we simply said we want to see the business case. 

 You can't say that you are going to have proper analysis and yet   introduce legislation into the Parliament, which they have, which would rule out  or enable the Minister to rule out whole sections of funding for transport,  including public transport, and then allocate funds without there being business  case presented to the Government for a particular project. 

 

 REPORTER: Given the budget deficit do we need to look at more toll roads to  build the infrastructure that is needed? 

 

 ALBANESE: Well it’s a matter of looking at the specific examples. If you have a  new road such as the F3 to M2 in Sydney, which was the agreement finalised  between the former Labor Government - myself and Duncan Gay as the NSW  Roads Minister - we had an agreement between the Commonwealth and the  state and Transurban as the operators of most of the existing road network  around Sydney, the M7, the M2 whereby there will be concessions made   on those tolls - an increase in timing in which they will allocated - which will  assist in funding that road project. 

 Now we supported that and we also supported the fact there should be some  differential toll whereby freight users pay more than the average passenger car,  which doesn't occur at the moment on the M7. 

 So it's a matter of making sure that you have the analysis that is there. 

 What people I don't think want to do, though, is to pay new tolls on old roads. 

 And that is what we have is said. Roads that have already been paid for by  taxpayers should not be paid for again and that was our position with regard  reintroducing a toll on the M4. 

 

 REPORTER: inaudible. (Question related to suggestions of change to  restrictions of the foreign ownership of Qantas) 

 

 ALBANESE: We are very firm because we understand exactly what a break-up  of Qantas would mean. 

 If you reduce the restrictions that are there and eliminate completely the Qantas  Sale Act, it's there for a very good reason. It’s there to protect the Australian  national interest. And that's why Qantas have said that that is not their first  priority. Qantas itself is saying that what they need are other measures of which  we've made a number of suggestions and the Government, for reasons that I  can't comprehend frankly, has failed to make a decision on Qantas that they said  they would make last year. 

 If you simply open up Qantas to a free-for-all terms of the market, what you will  see, particularly given what the price of Qantas is at the moment, where you  have a share value that is less the cash reserves of the company, what you will 

 see, therefore, is an obvious move which would be to come in to split up the  company. 

 If you split up the company, as occurred in places like Canada when Air Canada  was moved in on from some of the equity companies, what you saw was a  breaking-up and, if you have a look then, you had the Government had to step in  ensure to ensure the people in regional communities could have some access to  aviation. 

 Qantas plays an important role in our national economy and is not just another  company. 

 If it is split up, then the consequences for Qantas Link, for people in  regional communities are severe indeed. And that is what you would see. That is  what the risk is if you remove all of the restrictions that are there. 

 Furthermore, if you have a look around the world, nation states recognise the  need to have airlines that are their national airlines that operate as such. 

 Whether it be Singapore or any of the countries in the UAE, whether it be the  United States, which has ownership restrictions in terms of the national carrier. 

 Whether it be the fact that Air New Zealand - the government had to intervene  there to make sure that the airline could continue to play that national interest  role. 

 When Australians have been in difficulty overseas Qantas has, without exception,  played a role and that is just one of the reasons why, particularly as an island  continent, we have an interest in ensuring that Qantas remain a strong  Australian airline. 

 

 REPORTER: Seven News understand that one of the boats was drained of fuel  by the Australian Navy. Do you think that was a responsible course of action? 

 

 ALBANESE: Well I can’t comment on events of which the facts aren’t known.  That’s the problem. The problem is that where you have a government that is  failing to act in a transparent manner and acting in Australia’s name but not  telling Australians what is going on, then you will have speculation. 

 I mean in a democracy you need transparency. This is not North Korea. This is  the Australian democracy and the Australian people have a right to know what is  going on in their name. 

 

 REPORTER: Inaudible. (Question related to Immigration Minister Scott Morrison  not holding his weekly press conference this Friday to report on the handling of  asylum seeker vessels.) 

 

 ALBANESE: We’ll there should not be a weekly conference. There should be  information given to the Australian people as it occurs and frankly the Australian  people do have a right to know. Otherwise what you will have is a range of  speculation, you have reports in the Jakarta Post and on social media and you  don’t know if they are fact or not. 

 That is just one of the reasons why that isn’t appropriate. It is appropriate in a  democracy that you have accountability and you have transparency. That is not  occurring at the moment. 

 

 REPORTER: Inflatable boats to turn asylum seekers around? 

 

 ALBANESE: Well again the facts are not known. What is important is that the  government has a responsibility to outline what the facts are. To be transparent  to be open and to be like a democratic government should be. This is not North  Korea. This is not a Stalinist regime. The government needs to get its act  together and tell the Australian people what is going on because it’s being done  after all in the Australian people’s name. 

 REPORTER: Just back on Qantas, in 2009 the Labor government supported the  recommendations of an aviation White Paper … 

 

 ALBANESE: I commissioned that White Paper. 

 

 REPORTER: … that recommended foreign airlines be allowed to own more than  35 per cent of Qantas. Would you regard that as a compromise? 

 

 ALBANESE: Well that is a matter for the government to come up with a  proposal. At the time it was not possible to get that change through the  Parliament. But that isn’t a priority for Qantas in terms of discussions that have  been held. 

 I think the key elements of the Qantas Sale act are 51 percent Australian  ownership, a board based here in Australia and making sure that Qantas can  continue to be a successful Australian airline. 

 In terms of the government’s response, I responded when requested, and the  government released some of this information. I didn’t do it in the public glare,  you might have noticed. I did it properly in terms of defending the Australian  national interest prior to the election. 

 What we have seen from the incoming government is just a failure to act, a  failure to defend the national economic interest. Qantas is not just another  company; it is one that plays a vital role, not just in terms of an iconic brand, but  plays a vital role in the Australian national economic interest and the government  should act accordingly. 

 

 REPORTER: Well Qantas wants some kind of help from Canberra though it  won’t say publicly exactly what that is. But the ideas include an investment by  Canberra or a debt guarantee to help the company cut borrowing costs. Now do  you support either of those options? 

 

 ALBANESE: I think I’ve put my views pretty clearly on the table in the past and  I’ve had discussions with Qantas. I’ve suggested that measures such as ensuring  that any commitment from the government should be one that isn’t simply a one  way. It should be a two-way exchange. 

 A small investment by the government in the airline would ensure that the  government got something out of it because at the moment I think that Qantas  shares, given the price they are, probably are pretty good value frankly in terms  of a small investment. 

 So that is something that is worthy of consideration. 

 But I don’t have access to the advice of Treasury and Finance and the  Department of Infrastructure. What is important is that the government act. We  have said that we would consider constructively any proposal from the  government as a result of discussions taking place with Qantas that ensures that  Qantas remains a strong, Australian-based airline. 

 

 REPORTER: Do you think that Qantas should say publicly what it wants, or do  you think its fine for commercial reasons that it is all behind closed doors. 

 

 ALBANESE: I do not have a problem with discussions taking place in private.  But then it’s a matter of when there’s a concrete proposal from the government -  it’s not up to Qantas to determine the government’s position, it’s up to the  government to determine its position. The government needs to do that. 

 Qantas has very clearly said we would like some assistance. They have put  forward a range of proposals. They certainly have consulted with both the  government and with the Opposition at the leadership level and at the ministerial  and shadow ministerial level. It’s important that the government make a decision  and then the opposition can determine its response. 

 What we have here, and I wonder how long the good burghers in the press  gallery will continue to show the great patience which has been shown with the  new government. You know I am the opposition spokesman out here doing a  press conference. Where is the government? 

 On any issue of the day, where have they been since September 7? 

 This is a mob that had a plan to get into government. They do not have a plan  for governing and whatever issue that you look at, what you see is characterised  by is a lack of transparency, a lack of openness, a lack of a plan, a lack of  accountability. 

 It’s about time that Tony Abbott recognized, now he’s back from the ski fields of  France, recognized that he’s just been elected the Australian Prime Minister and  he’s got a responsibility to actually be accountable to the people that elected him  as Prime Minister. And that’s the Australian people. Thank you. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

