---
title: "PNG resettlement still in doubt, while refugees live in danger"
date: "2014-05-10"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211407626
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3161086%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Saturday, 10 May 2014   

 PNG resettlement still in doubt, while refugees  live in danger   

 The PNG Government's claim that it will choose which refugees are allowed to resettle in their  country exposes the PNG deal as a sham, the Australian Greens have said.   

 "Someone's not telling the truth, and I'd bet good money it's the Abbott Government's spin machine  that's wilfully misleading the public," the Greens' immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 "Saying that PNG will gladly resettle all of the refugees we dump on Manus Island, when that clearly  isn't the case, is deeply irresponsible.   

 "What Scott Morrison needs to understand is that spin doesn't cut it when you're making life and  death decisions for people who are fleeing war and torture.   

 "It's very concerning to hear PNG's Minister for Immigration say that he'll choose who is resettled in  his country based on what skills they have. A genuine refugee program is about protection and  saving lives, nothing else.   

 "With refugee status decisions already being handed down, despite there being no rigorous process  in place, it's clear the PNG solution is putting lives at risk.   

 "The uncertainty surrounding processing and resettlement, for which the Australian Government is  solely responsible, contributed directly to the tension and violence in February. It's disappointing  that the Abbott Government has not learned from previous, tragic mistakes."   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760 

 

