---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra: 17 June 2014:SIEV 221, Alex Vella, PNG, Labor caucus asylum debate"
date: "2014-06-17"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "SIEV 221"
  - "Alex Vella"
  - "PNG"
  - "Labor caucus asylum debate"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211409785
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3229249%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 SIEV 221, Alex Vella, PNG, Labor caucus asylum debate 

 Tuesday, 17 June 2014 

 Doorstop interview, Canberra 

 Minister Morrison: I want to make points about three matters. The first one is in  relation to the claim that has been made in the Supreme Court regarding SIEV 221  in the terrible and tragic incidents that took place on the 15th December 2010. This  claim brought by Shine Lawyers and George Newhouse on behalf of seven plaintiffs,  seven plaintiffs who were rescued by the brave men and women of the Australian  Customs and Border Protection Service and the Australian Navy under the  command of the Border Protection Command, they are the seven people who are  bringing this claim with George Newhouse and Shine Lawyers. I said last night in the  House that I became aware of this late yesterday and there are further details that  are up about this issue today. Frankly I think this a shameful and offensive claim to  be making. Sure people have the right to bring cases to court, we are a free country,  but they also have to be accountable for the claims that they bring. The men and  women who served that day showed a level of bravery, self-sacrifice that we have  seen only on rare occasions and the response of the people of Christmas Island, our  fellow Australians there was also extraordinary and for this claim to be brought in this  way today it just beggars belief. This is like someone who was saved from a fire  suing the fireman, it's like someone who has been saved by an ambulance officer at  the scene of an accident being sued for saving the person's life, it's like someone  who is held hostage and being saved by police and suing the police. This is really I  think a very shameful and offensive claim to be bringing and again I just want to give  my total support to the men and women of the Australian Customs and Border  Protection Service and the Australian Navy whose reputation, whose character, and  whose conduct on that day is unimpeachable and I know it enjoys as it should the  broad support of this parliament both from the Labor party which I'm sure you have  just heard from Brendan O'Connor who was the Minister at the time, he and I spoke  yesterday afternoon and this is something that both, I am sure Labor and the  Coalition are at one on, so that is that matter. 

 The second matter I just wish to confirm in the reports today that last Friday I  cancelled the resident return visa of Mr Alex Vella who was known as the national  president of the Rebels motorcycle club. There is not much more I can say about  that matter at this time, this is not the first occasion where we have sought to cancel  Mr Vella's visa there are two other occasions under the Howard government where  that was attempted and was unsuccessful. On this occasion we have taken this  action while Mr Vella was offshore and he will take whatever remedies he sees fit to  take in relation to the decision that I took last Friday using the character provisions of  the Migration Act. Mr Vella's visa was last renewed under the previous government  in 2012. We take these character issues very, very seriously as a government and  this government is not going to shirk its responsibility when it comes to making  decisions about these very serious character matters and to provide the police at  state and federal levels and the Australian Crime Commission and others who are 

 engaged in a very serious round of operations and activities which are designed to  keep the people of Australian safe and they will have the support of this government. 

 On the third matter though is the matter that will be raised in the caucus in the ALP  today and that is they are once again questioning the policy of offshore processing.  We already know that Labor oppose turning boats back where it is safe to do so, we  know they oppose temporary protection visas, now they are going to debate whether  they are going to oppose the third plank of the successful policies put in place by the  government which is offshore processing. And this has always been the problem  with Labor on this issue, their heart has never been in it when it comes to strong  border protection measures, the people smugglers have always known that and they  are always able to profit from the weakness of Labor and the Greens when they are  in alliance in government. They just don't believe in these stronger policies and  regardless of what their caucus decides today the Australian people will always know  that if Labor were ever to be in government again that they would wilt, that they  would weep, that they would roll over on offshore processing, they would turn back  on turn backs and they would continue to honour the promise of people smugglers of  permanent visas to this country. That is what is stopping the boats and the  opposition frankly still doesn't get it. 

 Journalist: Minister, do you think that the case being brought against by the asylum  seeker families has any chance of success? 

 Minister Morrison: Well I won't comment on what the likelihoods of success are,  those matters will be played out in the courts. I am just frankly shocked and stunned  that such a claim would be brought and I think all Australians, the vast majority at the  very least, but I am pretty confident the overwhelming majority of Australians will be  appalled by seeing that claim in the news today. 

 Journalist: Minister, what is your reaction to Peter O'Neill's problems in PNG,  obviously we have got a close relationship with them and does that put at risk Manus  Island in any way if his administration falls over? 

 Minister Morrison: No. 

 Journalist: Why not? 

 Minister Morrison: Well it doesn't, we have a memorandum of understanding with  the government of Papua New Guinea and that is the operation we are running  together in support of the government of Papua New Guinea who have control of  that centre. 

 Journalist: They will continue regardless? 

 Minister Morrison: The matters are unrelated. 

 Journalist: But it is unpopular in PNG. 

 Minister Morrison: The matters are unrelated. 

 Journalist: Are you at all concerned Minister though about these allegations put to  Peter O'Neill? 

 Minister Morrison: Well I will leave those matters to the Foreign Minister. 

 Journalist: Do they have any chance to risk or jeopardise the current offshore  processing arrangements in PNG? 

 Minister Morrison: We have a memorandum of understanding with the government  of Papua New Guinea that was concluded by the previous government and we are  acting in accordance with that memorandum of understanding. There are a whole  range of commitments and undertakings and investments that are made concurrent  with that memorandum of understanding and that is considered to be in the interests  of Papua New Guinea and the interests of Australia. 

 Journalist: Regarding SIEV 221 does the government maintain that there was no  chance of detecting that boat earlier before it crashed on the rocks? 

 Minister Morrison: Look those matters were all covered by the inquiry at the time  and I am not going to go over those again today, simply to say that our men and  women on that day served bravely, they served selflessly, and they served as a  credit to the tremendous services and organisations that they are a part of and we  should be very proud of them, I know I am, I know the government is, I know the  parliament is, and I am sure the vast and overwhelming majority of Australians are  as well. 

 Journalist: Minister Morrison, on the Labor motion today it is fair to say this is a very  minor portion of the Labor caucus that is questioning offshore processing just in the  same way a very minor part of the government is questioning the need to pass say  the PPL or the deficit levy. So what is wrong with having some opposing views if the  main policy stays the same? 

 Minister Morrison: They will have their debates and I don't think it is as minor as  you suggest but that will be understood perhaps later today. The issue here is that  the Labor party have had to be dragged kicking and screaming to the position they  are now quite pathetically defending. They said for years and years that offshore  processing would never work, it shouldn't be part of the solution. They had to be  dragged kicking and screaming to do it and what we see here is that they will always  fall back, they will always move away. 

 Journalist: Can I just ask you one more question. The Defence Minister yesterday  said that when it comes to Australia giving assistance to Iraq it will be mostly  humanitarian. Down the track will you consider maybe taking more refugees from  Iraq? 

 Minister Morrison: Well we will deal with those matters in good time, thank you. 

 

 

