---
title: "Abbott Government's response to the humanitarian crisis in Syria"
date: "2014-02-12"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404025
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2994771%22
---

 

 The Hon Tanya Plibersek MP  Deputy Leader of the Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Development   

 

 Abbott Government’s response to the humanitarian crisis in Syria   

 The Abbott Government’s response to the humanitarian crisis in Syria has been  woefully inadequate.   

 Despite the record $6.5 billion United Nations’ appeal for help, the Abbott  Government has contributed only $12 million.   

 I have written to the Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop, urging her to provide more  assistance from Australia as a matter of priority.   

 On my visit to Syria earlier this year, I saw first-hand the great extent of the  suffering in refugee camps in Jordan and Lebanon.   

 The UN says about half of Syria’s population, some 9.3 million people, are in urgent  need of assistance. Around 2.3 million people have left the country and 6.5 million  are internally displaced. More than half of those who have fled are children.   

 The Abbott Government’s $12 million contribution pales in comparison to other  countries. During the last round of pledges to the UN appeal, Britain gave an extra  $164 million, Norway gave $75 million, and Kuwait gave $500 million.   

 The Howard Government gave $1 billion to Indonesia after the Boxing Day tsunami  in 2004.    

 The $12 million pledged by the Abbott Government to UN relief efforts does not  reflect the scale of the humanitarian disaster facing Syrians or Australia’s generous  tradition. As a member of the UN Security Council, Australia has a responsibility to  show global leadership.   

 The fact a UN convoy was recently attacked in the Syrian city of Homs also  underscores the desperate need for protected humanitarian corridors to safely  deliver aid - as championed by former Labor Foreign Minister Bob Carr.   

 From 2011, the former Labor Government delivered around $100 million in  assistance for Syria.   

 Syrian peace talks have recently resumed in Geneva.   

 

 

 12 FEBRUARY 2014  CANBERRA   

 MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350 

 

