---
title: "Global action to stop sexual violence in conflict"
date: "2014-06-06"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211409332
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3216098%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP  6 June 2014

 

 GLOBAL ACTION TO STOP SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN CONFLICT 

 Australia will next week participate in the largest ever global event aimed at stopping  sexual violence in conflict. 

 Hosted by UK Foreign Secretary William Hague and Special Envoy of the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Angelina Jolie, the Global Summit to End  Sexual Violence in Conflict will take place in London from 10-13 June. 

 Rape, and other forms of sexual violence, are among the most devastating weapons  of war, even though sexual violence is prohibited under international law. And yet we  continue to see horrifying levels of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict  around the world. 

 The Summit is an opportunity to identify, and commit to, practical action to prevent  and respond to sexual violence.  Representatives of governments, including military  and judiciary, civil society, media and the public will participate in the  Summit.  Together, they will develop strategies to prevent crimes of sexual violence  in conflict and to provide more support to survivors.  

 Natasha Stott Despoja, AM, Australia’s Ambassador for Women and Girls, will lead  Australia’s delegation and will be joined by the Chief of the Australian Army,  Lieutenant General David Morrison, AO.  

 As an official champion of the UK’s Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict Initiative,  one of my key priorities is empowering women and promoting gender equality. 

 In support of this initiative, I recently announced funding of programs in Afghanistan,  Timor Leste, Liberia and Uganda to help end violence again women and to support  their participation in peacebuilding. 

 The Global Summit is a milestone in the international community’s determination to  end such crimes.   

 Foreign Minister’s Office:  Catherine McDonald 0478 488 874                                           Gabrielle Young 0408 275 340      

