---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Melbourne: 28 June 2014: asylum seekers"
date: "2014-06-28"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211410324
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3254267%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   PRESS CONFERENCE  MELBOURNE  SATURDAY, 28 JUNE 2014 

 

 RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & BORDER  PROTECTION: Thank you very much for joining me this afternoon ladies and  gentlemen.    

 There are reports today from a number of media outlets that there is an asylum  seeker vessel which is in difficulty. It has reportedly come from India and has on  board about 150-odd Tamil asylum seekers, many of whom are women and  children.     

 That report is based on actual conversations that have been had by the media  outlets and those on board. We also have in the last hour or so, further reports of  another asylum seeker vessel off the coast of Australia. Now if there is an asylum  seeker vessel which is in difficulty, then there is an obligation on the part of  Australia’s Customs and the Navy to provide assistance, and I have absolutely no  doubt that is actually what will occur.    

 But what we need to hear today from our Minister is what actions are actually being  undertaken by Australia’s Customs and by the Navy. It is simply not good enough to  cite an operational matter as being a reason not to answer legitimate questions  which are in the national interest.    

 But this is a Minister that has a woeful track record when it comes to transparency,  and today we have seen that reach new lows when this Minister refused to even  confirm the existence of the asylum seeker vessel because it is inconvenient for his  political scoreboard. This is a Minister who is very happy to beat his chest on the  good days but is silent on the bad, and that is not good enough.    

 Are there any questions? 

 

 JOURNALIST: Did you think the Minister’s press conference was a bit bazaar?    

 MARLES: I thought the Minister’s press conference this morning was a complete  farce. It is not good enough and it never has been good enough to cite operational  matters as being a reason not to answer legitimate questions, legitimate questions 

 which are obviously in the public interest. The Minister needs to be telling us exactly  what is occurring with our Customs and with the Navy in relation to any assistance  that might be provided to this vessel. But what we are seeing with this Minister is a  Minister who is appalling when it comes to transparency simply because it is  inconvenient for his political scoreboard.     

 JOURNALIST: What can you tell us about the second boat?   

 MARLES: Well look I have seen the reports; they are very sketchy at the moment.  Reportedly the vessel has come from Java. But again we need to be hearing from  our Minister exactly what is going on, on the high seas. And this constant reference  to operational matters is really just a basis that he uses for not talking to the  Australian people about matters which are clearly in the public interest. And that is  not good enough, we need to be hearing from him today. It is not good enough to  beat his chest on the good days but be silent on the bad. He has got some  explaining to do today, instead he has been utterly silent and it has been a farce.   

 JOURNALIST: The boat that is reportedly in distress, what should Australia do to  help?   

 MARLES: Well if there is a vessel that is in difficulty then there is an obligation on  the part of Australia’s Customs, on the part of Australia’s Navy to provide assistance  to that vessel. Now I’ve got no doubt that’s actually what will occur, I don’t think  that’s the issue. The real issue here though is that there is an expectation and a  reasonable one from the Australian people to hear from our Minister about what  actions are being undertaken by our Customs or by the Navy. That is what we need  to be hearing about from our Minister today and again we are not hearing that. All 

 we are hearing is farcical refusals to actually talk to the Australian people to even  confirm the existence of a vessel, which media outlets have themselves spoken to.  That shows the depths to which this Minister will go, and he is going there now  because to even talk about this vessel is inconvenient in the context of his political  scoreboard, and that is not good enough.   

 JOURNALIST: Given the Government’s policy, will this boat be sent back to India?   

 MARLES: Well there are a number of measures that could be taken in relation to  this vessel. Of course Labor put in place the PNG arrangement which has been  confirmed by the High Court in the last couple of weeks, which would be able to deal  with this circumstance. But before we even go there, what we need to hear from in  relation to our Minister is exactly what is happening out there and what actions are  being undertaken by our Navy and by our Customs.    

 JOURNALIST: You’re not concerned that it could cause a diplomatic rift with India? 

 

 MARLES: Well I’m not going to get ahead of ourselves in relation to this. There are  a whole lot of measures that could be taken. As I say, Labor put in place the PNG  arrangement which could deal with this circumstance. But what we actually need to 

 hear from our Minister right now is what is going on out there. Exactly what difficulty  is this vessel facing and what action, what support, what assistance is being  provided by the Australian Customs and by our Navy, and we need to be hearing  from our Minister on that.    

 To have a situation where he is simply refusing to answer questions because of an  operational matter is not good enough. Thank you.   

 ENDS   

