---
title: "Greens to move for Parliamentary Inquiry into Manus incident Monday"
date: "2014-03-01"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404718
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3030742%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Saturday, 1 March 2014   

 Greens to move for Parliamentary Inquiry into  Manus incident Monday   

 The Australian Greens have announced today that they will move for a Parliamentary Inquiry on  Monday into the Manus Island incident that ended in the death of 23 year old Iranian refugee, Reza  Berati. 

 “A proper parliamentary inquiry will have the independence that the Immigration Department’s  review into itself so clearly lacks," the Greens' immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.  

 “Senate inquiry hearings will give the workers who were in the centre on that night the legal  protection that they need to tell their stories freely. 

 “The Department’s review simply isn’t good enough, they’ve just contracted someone to write a  report. With narrow terms of reference and the fact that its findings will almost definitely be kept  secret, the Government’s review will fall well short of what is needed.  

 “The fact is that a young man who was in Australia’s care has been killed and we should have a  rigorous, independent inquiry to find out what happened.  

 “With the Senate’s support, the Greens can make that happen.” 

 The Terms of Reference for the inquiry are listed below. 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 Terms of Reference; 

 An inquiry into the incident at the Manus Island Detention Centre from 16 February to 18 February. 

 The committee must consider; 

 -          The chronology of events; 

 -          The sequence of events and factors that gave cause to the incident; 

 -          The sequence of events that led to, and the cause of, Reza Berati’s death;   

 -          Contractor, subcontractor and service provider involvement and response; 

 -          Department of Immigration and Border Protection involvement and response; 

 -          Papua New Guinean police, military and civilian involvement and response; 

 -          The Minister for Immigration and Border Protection’s conduct before, during and after the 

 incident; 

 -          Protocols and procedures observed by agencies in the detention centre; 

 -          Any documents including incident reports and emails as well as briefings involving staff, 

 employees, contractors and subcontractors involved in or responding to the incident; 

 -          Any communications between the Minister for Immigration and Border Protection and the 

 Government of Papua New Guinea regarding, the Department of immigration and Border 

 Protection, contractors, sub-contractors and service providers the incident; 

 -          The Australian governments duty of care obligations and responsibilities; 

 -          Refugee status determination processing and resettlement arrangements in Papua New 

 Guinea;  

 -          Any other related matters.  

 

