---
title: "Greens call for Royal Commission into offshore detention incidents and death"
date: "2014-02-20"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404376
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3011377%22
---

 Office of Senator Christine Milne  Leader of the Australian Greens | Senator for Tasmania   

 Media Release  20 February 2014   

 Greens call for Royal Commission into offshore  detention incidents and death    

 The Australian Greens have called on Tony Abbott to initiate a Royal Commission into  the conditions and management of Australia's offshore detention camps, which led to the  death of an Iranian refugee while in Australia's care on Manus Island.    

 “The tragedy of a refugee killed while in Australia’s care should be the final nail in the  coffin for Labor and the Abbott government’s morally bankrupt and cruel offshore  processing regime," Australian Greens Leader, Senator Christine Milne said.    

 "We have had far too many serious incidents in Australia's detention camps, all on  Australia's watch. The seriousness of what has taken place on Manus Island requires a  rigorous, independent investigation with full judicial powers and the government is able  to make sure that happens today.    

 "We are calling on Tony Abbott to establish a Royal Commission that will shine a great  big spotlight into the dark corners of exactly what happened on Manus Island, as well as  the systemic abuse and failure in duty of care in these gulags."    

 The Greens' immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young, said the Royal  Commission should look at the Manus Island and Nauru detention camps from the time  they were reopened by the Gillard government in 2012.    

 "This situation is unprecedented and it requires an unprecedented response," Senator  Hanson-Young said.    

 "An innocent young man has been killed. The truth may be uncomfortable for the  government to face but, as a robust and modern democracy, a Royal Commission is the  only appropriate action that can be taken.    

 "This isn't about partisan politics and it's not about scoring points. This is about doing  what's right by a young man who asked Australia for protection and was then let down in  the worst possible way."    

 Media contacts:  Senator Milne - Jennifer Faerber 0438 376 083   Senator Hanson-Young - Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

