---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra: 31 January 2014: Operation Sovereign Borders; Nauru"
date: "2014-01-31"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Operation Sovereign Borders"
  - "Nauru"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403639
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3083321%22
---

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 

 Operation Sovereign Borders, Nauru  Friday, 31 January 2014 

 Doorstop interview, Canberra 

 Question: Minister why have you decided all of a sudden to confirm turning boats  around? 

 Morrison: What I have confirmed today is what we have been confirming all along  which is the policy of this government and that is that any vessel that seeks to  illegally enter Australian waters will be intercepted and will be removed from our  waters and our contiguous zone. Now there is nothing new in that. That has been  our policy. It is the policy that has been implemented by our Customs and Border  Protection and Navy personnel who I must say do this with a high degree of  professionalism in accordance with their orders and in accordance with their training  and they do a great job and they are the reason that it has now been 43 days without  a boat and they are the reason that this month, this month of January, there have  been no boats and that is the first time that has happened in six years. This policy  together with all the other measures, because no single measure is responsible, is  getting the results the Australian people elected us to get. 

 Question: Mr Morrison can you shed some light on these new claims on the ABC  that asylum seekers claim that they have been blinded by navy personnel? 

 Morrison: Well it is standard issue to officers and others involved in these  operations to have personal defensive devices. They are used in accordance with  their training and in accordance with strict guidelines and any suggestion of  mistreatment or misuse of force or misuse of any of these devices that are available  to them is completely unsubstantiated, completely without basis and is rejected by  the government. I mean last week the claims and allegations of torture I think have  embarrassed those who sought to give that oxygen. This week they have changed  their story I read in the Australia today, this same group. So I believe the Navy and  Customs and Border Protection officers who are doing a great job to protect our  borders on behalf of us all. 

 Question: What will you be telling the Senate enquiry today? 

 Morrison: Well that is a matter for the Senate. I am appearing before the Senate at  my own initiative today. I mean this is just Greens and Labor coming together in  another stunt to try and attack the government for its border protection policies,  border protection policies that are working. I would have thought the Greens and the  Labor Party would be happy that boats are stopping and people are no longer dying 

 in these situations. They are the outcomes we are getting and I would have thought  they would want to support that. 

 Question: With the IOM contract Minister, how many people do you expect will be  transferred back to another country? 

 Morrison: That is a matter for how many choose to take that path. 

 Question: But it is a larger figure than the previous contract, it seems to hint at a  larger response… 

 Morrison: Well we are having a greater response to people wanting to go home. 

 Question: Are you concerned that confirmation of the turn back policy will further  inflame the situation with Indonesia? 

 Morrison: All I have simply said today is that Australia will respect our neighbour's  sovereignty, we will respect our sovereignty and that involves any vessel seeking to  illegally enter Australia being intercepted and removed from our waters. Now that is  about what is happening on our side and on our border and that is about our  sovereignty and I know for a fact that Indonesia respects Australia's sovereignty as  we do theirs. 

 Question: And can we just get an update on Nauru? Have you had any briefings on  the judicial problems in the country at the moment? 

 Morrison: Look of course I have and I have been monitoring it very closely. We  obviously want to see these issues sorted out as soon as possible. We have been in  close discussions with the New Zealand Government on these things. The New  Zealand Government has a particular interest here because of the aid programme  they run that supports the justice system in Nauru. We strongly support what the  New Zealand Government is doing to try and get this situation back on a level footing  again. There are clearly some internal issues within Nauru that need to be resolved.  They are unrelated to the operation of our processing centre and one of the things I  obviously have been keen to understand is how the cases that are on foot involving  those individuals who are facing charges for burning down detention centres and  things of that nature are being treated. I raised that the very day through my officers  with Nauru and we are working through those issues. So look it is a serious issue.  We all believe strongly in the rule of law and having a proper justice system and I am  encouraged by the good work that the New Zealand Government is doing. We are  strong partners with them and we support their efforts. 

 Question: Minister, just quickly, do you hope the Senate enquiry will silence some of  the critics? 

 Morrison: I don't think Labor and the Greens will ever be silent in attacking the  government, the Coalition, for our policies that are stopping the boats. Labor and the  Greens are joined at the hip when it comes to opposing this government's strong  border protection policies. They always have been and I think they probably always  will. That is why the Australian people trust this government to stop the boats. 

 

 See: Index of Speeches  

 URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm211347.htm   Last update: Friday, 31 January 2014 at 12:15 AEST 

 

