---
title: "Australia provides assistance to women and girls in Iraq"
date: "2014-09-20"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211414211
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3409284%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP  20 September 2014   

 

 AUSTRALIA PROVIDES ASSISTANCE TO WOMEN AND GIRLS IN  IRAQ   

 Today I announce that Australia will provide $2 million in assistance to support the  hundreds of thousands of women and girls affected by the ongoing violence in Iraq.   

 This is part of the Australian Government’s efforts to help Iraq protect its people from  the terror and brutality of ISIL.    

 Women and girls are bearing the brunt of this conflict as ISIL targets women, children  and minorities for sexual violence and expectant mothers are forced to flee their  homes.    

 Australian funding will support the United Nations Population Fund to address the  specific needs of displaced women and girls, as well as victims of gender-based  violence.    

 It will also scale up delivery of reproductive health care, including obstetric services for  around 250,000 pregnant women.   

 The crisis in Iraq has displaced 1.8 million people since the start of the year, while it  has affected many millions more across the country.   

 This funding is in addition to $5 million provided for emergency humanitarian  assistance to people fleeing violence in northern Iraq, and two air drops of relief items  for besieged communities on Mount Sinjar and in Amerli.    

 Australia has also provided around $130 million in humanitarian support for those in  dire need in Syria, as well as $20 million in funding to Lebanon and Jordan to support  refugees fleeing across their borders.   

 

 Foreign Minister’s Office:  Catherine McDonald 0478 488 874  Gabrielle Young 0408 275 340   

