---
title: "Family reunion blow will force women and children onto boats"
date: "2014-01-09"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403099
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2935222%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Thursday, 9 January 2014    

 Family reunion blow will force women and  children onto boats    

 The Immigration Minister’s decision to give family reunion visa applications sponsored by refugees  who arrived by boat the lowest possible priority will only force more women and children onto  boats, the Australian Greens have said.    

 “This is a spiteful, punitive move from the Coalition,” Senator Hanson-Young said.    

 “It’s cruel, it’s dangerous and it will force more women and children onto boats as they now have no  other way to be reunited with their families.    

 “Thousands of refugees who were close to being reunited with their loved ones after fleeing from  war and torture will be devastated by this senseless cruelty from the Coalition.    

 “This mean-spirited change is retroactive to 2001 and people who have invested up to $20,000 in  their family reunion claims will not be reimbursed.    

 “These are people who are already here. This move is not acting as a deterrent, it’s just cruelty for its  own sake.    

 “When people are running for their lives, the only way to stop them taking a dangerous boat journey  it to give them a safer option. Unfortunately this government seems to be intent on removing that  safer option at every possible turn.   

 “It’s shameful that, after cutting off the only official path that these vulnerable people had to reach  safety, Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison will then use that fact to incorrectly refer to them as  ‘illegal’.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

