---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Melbourne: 4 April 2014: Immigration Minister in Cambodia; asylum seekers; Australian Labor Party"
date: "2014-04-04"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Immigration Minister in Cambodia"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211406310
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3099027%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  FRIDAY, 4 APRIL 2014  MELBOURNE 

 SUBJECT / S:  Immigration Minister in Cambodia, Asylum Seekers,  Australian Labor Party    

 RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION: Thank you for  joining me today, it is very concerning that we hear from sources inside Cambodia  that the Australian Immigration Minister has turned up in Phnom Phen without  hearing it first from the Minister himself. It is troubling that this Government finds it  so difficult to be up front with the Australian people about what they are doing, we  have now had both the Immigration Minister and the Foreign Minister visit  Cambodia, apparently to discuss the issue of asylum seekers and yet we hear about  that not from the Government but from sources inside Cambodia. That ought to be a  concern to every Australian. This is a Government that has a woeful track record of  being clear and transparent and upfront with the Australian people. Now, if the  Australian Government is pursuing an arrangement with Cambodia, then the least  they can do is tell the Australian people what they are up to.   

 JOURNALIST: When Labor was in power and you were looking for regional  partners for potential resettlement deals did you consider Cambodia?   

 MARLES: I’m not aware of that, but I think what we need to hear from the  Government is that if they are pursuing an arrangement with Cambodia, then they  have got to be upfront with the Australian people about what they are doing. The  Australian people have a right to know what their Government is doing when it  comes to asylum seeker policy or for that matter any policy.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think Cambodia is a suitable location for Australian refugees?   

 MARLES: It is an impossible question to answer in circumstances where we don’t  even know the subject of the conversation between the Australian Government and 

 the Cambodian Government. I mean this is a very fair question to be asking  Australia’s Immigration Minister, but in circumstances where both the Minister for  Immigration and the Foreign Minister visit Cambodia without telling the Australian  people it is impossible for anyone to be able to comment on the appropriateness of  what they are doing.   

 JOURNALIST: Officials for the Department of Immigration and Border Protection  admitted education for children on Christmas Island is inadequate, what is your  response to this?   

 MARLES: Firstly, having children in detention is an undesirable state of affairs, but  where it is happening, it is really important that the appropriate facilities and  services are being provided. Firstly that is schooling and secondly it is counselling.  Counselling is really important for kids that have gone through the trauma that has  been experienced by those kids in detention facilities. It goes to a broader point -  our detention facilities need to be providing dignified, humane and safe conditions  for the people who are inside them. It is best that kids are not there, if they are  there that obviously applies to kids as well.   

 JOURNALIST: The Human Rights Commission is holding a public inquiry into  children in detention, are you proud of Labor’s record when it comes to this?   

 MARLES: Labor was always concerned to do everything we could to see as few  children in detention as possible, and to do everything we could to get kids out of  detention. That was very much our record in Government and what we sought to  do. Where kids are in detention, as I said it is very important that there are the  appropriate services provided to them, that means they do need to be getting the  appropriate schooling, and they need to be getting the appropriate counselling.   

 JOURNALIST: There is a small item on Crikey so read into that what you will, but it  says that Morrison has struck a deal to relocate 100 refugees into Cambodia and  that we will pay Cambodia $40 million to do that deal.   

 MARLES: We ought to be getting information about the activities of the Australian  Government not from Crikey nor from sources inside Cambodia but from Scott  Morrison and the Australian Government themselves, I mean that we are seeing  stories pop up on Crikey says everything about the lack of information which is being  provided by the Australian Government as to what they are up to and that is what  deeply concerns me.   

 JOURNALIST: If those figures are correct that would equate to around $400,000  per refugee, do you think that is a fair amount?   

 MARLES: I think it is impossible to comment in circumstances where we don’t have  any information from the Government itself about what it is doing in Cambodia, I  mean we have the Immigration and the Foreign Minister turn up in Phnom Penh and  we discover this from sources within Cambodia rather than the Australian  Government itself, I mean it is bizarre behaviour. The Australian Government just  needs to be upfront with the Australian people about what they are doing. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Should Joe Bullock be sacked?   

 MARLES: Joe Bullock is a first rate candidate, I have known Joe Bullock for many  years and he has represented amongst the lowest paid workers in our society and  done a fantastic job in improving their lot and advocating on their behalf, and if Joe  Bullock is successful in being elected to the Australian Parliament, he will be a first  rate representative for Western Australians and a first rate representative for  Western Australian workers.    

 JOURNALIST: So you are not concerned the effect his comments will have on the  Labor vote?   

 MARLES: As I say, I have known Joe Bullock for many years, he is a fantastic  candidate and has devoted his life to the service of working people. He is now  choosing to do that in a different way by being a representative of Western  Australians and Western Australian workers in our national Parliament and if he is  lucky enough to be elected he is going to do a first rate job in that capacity.   

 JOURNALIST: How can you condone his comments on gay marriage and abortion?   

 MARLES: In relation to those matters, they have within our movement consistently  been matters of conscience, that is a matter for Joe to speak of himself. My position  in relation to both abortion and gay marriage has been well known, I have been a  supporter of gay marriage and absolutely a supporter of women’s right to choose  what happens with their own bodies. But these have been consistently matters of  conscience as they have been dealt with within the Labor Party and Joe Bullock is  entitled to take whatever position he wants in relation to both those issues.   

 JOURNALIST: Just putting the secrecy issue to one side, does Labor support  resettling asylum seekers in Cambodia?   

 MARLES: Well as I say, it is impossible to go in to and answer that question in  circumstances where we don’t even know the very subject that is being discussed  between our Immigration Minister and the authorities in Cambodia. To give any  sensible commentary from the point of view of the Opposition about what the  Government’s actions are requires the Government to be actually upfront with the  Australian people about what they are actually doing.   

 ENDS 

