---
title: "99 days since last successful people smuggling venture"
date: "2014-03-28"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211405841
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3077354%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 99 days since last successful people smuggling venture 

 Friday, 28 March 2014 

 Operation Sovereign Borders is continuing to prevent illegal boat arrivals, with no  successful people smuggling ventures to Australia for 99 days, Minister for  Immigration and Border Protection the Hon. Scott Morrison said today. 

 The government's strong border protection policies, particularly maritime operations,  are working to frustrate people smugglers and prevent deaths at sea. 

 Over the same 99 day period in 2012/13 - 20 December 2012 to 28 March 2013 -  there were 66 illegal boat arrivals with a total of 3879 people on board. 

 99 days without a successful people smuggling venture to Australia is more than the  combined total of successive days without boats under Labor's four Immigration  ministers following Kevin Rudd's abolition of John Howard's border measures in  2008 (Chris Evans - 61 days,  Chris Bowen - 23 days, Brendan O'Connor - 6 days,  Tony Burke - 6 days). 

 Key contributors to the government's successes to date under Operation Sovereign  Borders - maritime operations and the denial of permanent visas for illegal boat  arrivals - have been refused support by the Labor Party. 

 Labor remains wedded to border protection policy failure and their partners in that  failure, the Greens. 

 The government will be maintaining its tempo of operations against people  smugglers, ensuring that our agencies respond effectively to deny anyone the  opportunity of arriving illegally in Australia by boat. 

 

 Australian Customs & Border Protection  

 Operation Sovereign Borders—Joint Agency Task Force update 

 28-03-2014  

 This statement provides an update on Operation Sovereign Borders (OSB) activities related to  the off-water reception and processing of illegal maritime arrivals.  

 The reporting period is from 9.00am 21 March 2014 to 9.00am 28 March 2014. 

 During this reporting period there were no illegal maritime arrivals transferred to Australian  Immigration authorities. 

 Twenty-one illegal maritime arrivals were transferred to offshore processing centres—all to  Nauru. 

 Fourteen illegal maritime arrival transferees were voluntarily returned to their country of  origin after electing to go home from an offshore processing centre—nine to Iran, four to Iraq  and one to Lebanon. 

 As at 9.00am 28 March 2014, there was a total of 1296 people on Manus Island, 1136 people  in Nauru and 1562 people in the Christmas Island facilities. 

 Media enquiries: 

 All enquiries should be directed to Customs and Border Protection Media: (02) 6275 6793 

 

 

 Fact Sheet: Operational Update 28 March 2014 

 28-03-2014 -  

 Current as at 9.00am, 28 March 2014 

 ILLEGAL MARITIME ARRIVALS 

 IMAs transferred to Australian immigration authorities 

 

 Date* 

 IMAs SIEVs 

 TOTAL 0 0 

 *Based on date of arrival in Australia. 

 Current transferee populations - Offshore Processing Centres 

   As at 28 March 2014 

 Manus Island 1296 

 Nauru 1136 

 TOTAL OPCs 2432 

 Christmas Island Facilities 1562 

 Transfers to Offshore Processing Centres of IMAs on or after 18 September 2013 

 Destination 21 March to 28 March Since OSB commenced (18 

 Sep 2013) to 28 March 

 Manus Island 0 769 

 Nauru 21 910 

 TOTAL 21 1679 

 Voluntary returns to country of origin from Offshore Processing Centres since OSB  commenced on 18 September 2013: 198* 

 *Includes those who transited via Australia. 

 

