---
title: "More progress on PNG resettlement arrangements as first refugee determinations handed down"
date: "2014-11-12"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211447459
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3504830%22
---

 Scott Morrison MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 More progress on PNG resettlement arrangement as first refugee  determinations handed down 

 Wednesday, 12 November 2014 

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon. Scott Morrison today  welcomed the Papua New Guinea Government's hand down of positive refugee  status determinations to ten transferees at the Manus Offshore Processing Centre as  a further sign of progress on the Regional Resettlement Arrangement left as a blank  page under Labor. 

 'These first refugee determinations represent a key milestone in both Papua New  Guinea's resettlement process and a regional solution in providing protection to  refugees,' Minister Morrison said. 

 'The first ten determinations will be followed by approximately 40 a month. 

 'I congratulate the PNG Foreign Affairs and Immigration Minister Rimbink Pato and  the PNG Government on the significant progress they have made to reach this  stage. 

 'Those who have been found to be refugees will receive a refugee visa and will then  be provided with initial services in Manus Province at an open facility at East  Lorengau built by the Australian Government which will play a key role in  transitioning people found to be refugees into the PNG community. 

 'Those issued visas will receive assistance with language and cultural orientation  and case managers will provide support. 

 'Refugees will be in the community and will be eligible to seek employment. 

 'Today's development again demonstrates the positive relationship that exists  between Australia and PNG on implementing the resettlement arrangement and the  progress that is being made. 

 'When we came to Government we said we would salvage all we could from the  regional resettlement arrangement announced by Labor prior to the election, and this  is what we have been doing. 

 'When Labor announced this agreement they had no understanding of the difficulties  involved in making this programme a reality. We effectively inherited a blank piece of  paper from Labor on the resettlement arrangements and it has been important to  allow the PNG Government to work through the many issues they need to resolve to  enable this programme to be successful. 

 'Today's announcement, together with the upcoming transition of the Nauru Offshore  Processing Centre to an open centre arrangement, represents a very positive  development in offshore processing. 

 'However without turn backs the processing centres would have been quickly  overwhelmed and resettlement in PNG would have been over before it even began.   That is why you need the full suite of measures to stop the boats. 

 'Labor's rejection of turn backs not only disables them from stopping the boats, but it  also effectively collapses the only other measure they are prepared to continue -  namely offshore processing,' Minister Morrison said. 

 

