---
title: "A message from the Prime Minister - Tasmanian and South Australian State Elections"
date: "2014-03-09"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211405015
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3045563%22
---

 

 www.pm.gov.au 

 

 

 

 

 

 PRIME MINISTER   

 

 A MESSAGE FROM THE PRIME MINISTER -   TASMANIAN AND SOUTH AUSTRALIAN STATE ELECTIONS   

 This weekend marks six months since the election.   

 I want to assure you that the Government is delivering the change that people voted for.   

 We’re stopping the boats - with no boats arriving in January and February.   

 We’re getting the nation’s finances under control - the Commission of Audit has delivered its interim report  and in the May Budget we will address Labor’s legacy of $123 billion in prospective Budget deficits and  $667 billion in accumulated debt.   

 We are strengthening the economy by getting the fundamentals right - that means scrapping the carbon tax  and the mining tax, cutting red and green tape, encouraging trade with our neighbours and building the roads  of the 21st century.    

 Confidence is returning because Australia is again open for business.   

 Now next week, two states can improve their governments with elections to be held in Tasmania and South  Australia.   

 Both have suffered economically under state governments that have mismanaged their local economies. I  regret to say that Tasmania and South Australia have our nation’s highest unemployment rates. But there is  hope; Stephen Marshall has a plan to strengthen the South Australian economy by spending more money on  roads and less on bureaucracy.   

 Will Hodgman knows that Tasmania can’t afford another four years of the Labor-Greens alliance -  Tasmania has to be an economy as well as a National Park.   

 So my hope is that the people of Tasmania and South Australia will elect new governments that are focused  on creating the jobs and building the prosperity that these states so desperately need.   

 

 9 March 2014 

