---
title: "Another week of failure for people smugglers"
date: "2014-02-14"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404150
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3004553%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison 

 Another Week Of Failure For People Smugglers 

 14-02-2014 -

 The latest weekly update for Operation Sovereign Borders reveals, once again, there has not  been a single successful people smuggling venture to Australia by boat, Minister for  Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison said today. 

 It has now been 57 days of consecutive failure for people smugglers. Over the same 57 days  in 2012/13 a total of 1,367 people arrived illegally on 23 boats, while in the same period in  2011/12, 528 people arrived on seven illegal boats. 

 The last people smuggling venture that made it to Australia and had all passengers handed  over to Australian immigration authorities was on December 19 last year. 

 The effectiveness of the Government’s policies in stopping more arrivals is also seeing the  pressure on detention facilities on Christmas Island also reduce, as those who turned up  illegally under Labor are also now being transferred to Nauru and Manus Island. 

 When Operation Sovereign Borders commenced there were over 2,500 detainees on  Christmas Island.  In this latest report, the number of detainees has fallen to 1,765. 

 In addition, more voluntary and involuntary returns of illegal arrivals are occurring. Nine  illegal arrivals were voluntarily returned to their country of origin from offshore processing  centres. A further ten were voluntarily removed from other facilities while two others were  involuntarily removed. 

 I also congratulate the Australian Federal Police on their arrest of an alleged people smuggler  facilitator in Queensland. This proves that the government will investigate and prosecute  those in Australia who have or may seek to organise people smuggling ventures. 

 The Government’s strong resolve and proven policies are ready to meet any possible  challenge to our borders from criminal people smugglers attempting to put people on  dangerous boat journeys to Australia.  

 Further information: Julian Leembruggen 0400 813 253,  

