---
title: "Government detention of pregnant refugees on bus is illegal"
date: "2014-12-01"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211415900
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3541669%22
---

 SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Monday, 1 December 2014   

 Government detention of pregnant refugees  on bus is illegal: Greens   

 The government’s decision to hold two pregnant refugees on a bus in the Northern Territory,  despite being given refugee status and resettlement on Nauru, is illegal the Australian Greens  have said.   

 “These women were brought to Australia after being resettled on Nauru and, by detaining them  like this, the government is acting illegally,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator  Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “This is an extreme abuse of the Immigration Minister’s power to detain people. Detention is  only allowed to prepare for the purpose of a person’s removal from Australia or to hold someone  while processing their claim for a visa.   

 “This cruel move from the Abbott government will likely end in a legal challenge that could be  avoided if the Minister didn’t abuse his power.   

 “These women were living freely on Nauru and were brought to Australia by the Immigration  Department because the necessary medical facilities don’t exist on the island. They are now  being held against their will by the Australian government.   

 “The fact that the government is holding pregnant women on a bus in temperatures above 30  degrees is extremely concerning. This is the Minister’s call and he’s choosing to hold these two  women, and a ten year old child, when there is no purpose for doing so.   

 “The Abbott government should be caring for these pregnant women, not illegally bullying them  back into detention.   

 “I call on the Immigration Minister to reverse his illegal decision to detain these vulnerable  women and guarantee that they will be cared for in the Australian community.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

