---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Werribee: 2 August 2014: Scott Morrison's backflip on asylum seekers"
date: "2014-08-02"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211411899
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3318944%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SATURDAY, 2 AUGUST 2014  WERRIBEE   

 SUBJECT/ S: Scott Morrison’s backflip on asylum seekers   

 RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION: Well  thank you for coming this afternoon. Another day, another Morrison backflip.  When this saga began back in June, the Minister’s first play was to pretend  that the asylum seeker vessel, containing 157 Tamils on board, did not even  exist. He then sought to hand these asylum seekers back to Sri Lanka at sea,  the High Court wouldn’t let him. He then sought to take these asylum seekers  back to India but his negotiations failed. He then took them to Cocos Island  and then the Curtin detention facility. And all week the Minister has been  heralding a break through agreement with India which is now over before it  even began, if in fact it ever existed. And this morning we learn that all these  asylum seekers have now been transferred to Nauru. This is Morrison’s merry-go-round and we should not forget there are 50 children on it and all the  while it is the Australian public who are paying for it. This should have been a  straightforward matter.    

 From the outset we called on the Minister to take all these asylum seekers to  Christmas Island and deal with them there. There was never any question  that any of these people would be given a permanent protection visa  in Australia. The only reason they have been put through this wretched roller  coaster has been to protect Scott Morrison's personal political scoreboard  which, for what it's worth, today is in tatters.    

 This is a serious and complicated area of policy. But we've got a cowboy in  charge who is treating people with contempt, causing misery along the way  and taking the Australian public for mugs. And I’m sick of all of this occurring 

 around Scott Morrison’s sneaky media strategy. Transferring people late on a  Friday evening after the news cycle. Giving really important information to  selected news organisations that he likes and all the while keeping  everyone else in the dark. And using operational matters as an excuse not to  answer legitimate questions which are in the public interest. This is a Minister  who has lost control of his portfolio and this is a Minister whose portfolio is  now completely in tatters and is operating quite literally making policy on the  run. Any questions?   

 JOURNALIST: The Government claims that the asylum seekers refused to  speak with Indian officials, do you believe that the Government's been honest  in telling us that?   

 MARLES: Well, the only people who the Government has to blame for the  shambolic state that this situation is in, is themselves. That's where the blame  rests here. I mean this is a self-congratulatory government who is really  happy to go out and beat their chests on the good days but runs and hides on  the difficult days. Do they take responsibility for this area of policy or not?  Today we have seen them point the finger at everyone else but themselves,  but the blame lands with them. Scott Morrison is not the big man of  Australia's borders, he is the minnow of Australia's dignity.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think these asylum seekers had enough time and a  chance to speak with their lawyers as well? Their lawyers claim that they  didn't have a chance to advise them.   

 MARLES: That is a matter for their lawyers to explain. All I know is that what  we've got here, is policy which is being made on the run by a Minister who  has lost control of his portfolio and who today, rather than accepting  responsibility, is out there trying to blame everybody else.   

 JOURNALIST: You say Scott Morrison has lost control, should he be  standing down?   

 MARLES: Who is a Minister in any particular area I'll leave up to the Prime  Minister. What I do know is that this is a Minister who has lost control. In the  last month we've seen the High Court have to step in on two occasions  and direct, in effect, the Minister what to do. This is a Minister who is now  making policy on the run and far from acting in the calm and methodical way  which he claims, instead what we have is a shambles.    

 JOURNALIST: What are your concerns for the 157 asylum seekers now  going to Nauru? As you said there are 50 children among them. Is it safe  there for them?   

 MARLES: I have real concerns about the state of Nauru. Nauru and Manus  play important roles in saving lives at sea. But it is, at the same time, really  critical that Nauru and Manus are run in a manner which is humane, safe and 

 dignified. We never hear the Minister use that phrase. And for the children  who are there we need to have a sense of confidence that they are being  provided all the services they need, schooling and counselling, and right now  I don't think we can have that confidence at all. Thank you. 

 

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563   

