---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Moonee Ponds: 29 June 2015: Abbott Government's cuts to the pension; national security; immigration; China FTA; workplace safety; climate change"
date: "2015-06-29"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Abbott Government's cuts to the pension"
  - "national security"
  - "immigration"
  - "China FTA"
  - "workplace safety"
  - "climate change"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/212531833
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3921904%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MOONEE PONDS   MONDAY, 29 JUNE 2015    

 SUBJECT/S: Abbott Government’s cuts to the pension; national security;  immigration; China FTA; workplace safety; climate change    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Welcome everyone to  Woolworths Moonee Ponds. Great opportunity this morning, first working day  after Parliament’s risen, to talk to people who work hard every day, either part-time or full-time, on reasonable but not excessive wages to see how they’re  making ends meet. And of course any supermarket in Australia can tell you about  the cost of living pressures of their customers - that is why again we call on Mr  Abbott to stop his broken promises and his attack on the conditions of working  Australians. What we see is changes still being proposed to cut payments to  families, putting incredible pressure on people with incomes of $50,000 and  $60,000 a year and there is great concern out in the community, especially  among prospective retirees, people in their 50s, late 50s early 60s who haven’t  got a lot of money saved, all of sudden face the prospect of not even being able  to access a part pension because Mr Abbott’s cutting pensions in Australia. So  there’s real issues out there on the high street of Australia. Labor remains  committed and determined to stand up to help relieve the pressures on cost of  living for Australians and that comes through not supporting Mr Abbott’s Budget  putting pressure on family budgets.             

 Happy to take any questions.    

 JOURNALIST: What can the Government do to help Khaled Sharrouf’s family?    

 SHORTEN: Well I think as a parent those scenes of one of Sharrouf's children  being part of a war scene and atrocities, these children have been through child  abuse. I cannot understand for the life of me what any self-respecting parent is  doing dragging their kids to the middle of this hell hole and subjecting them to 

 this sort of trauma. In terms of how these children are helped, I am going to leave  that to the security agencies and the people on the ground. We don't  need politicians sort of second guessing our defence and security experts but let  me be really unequivocal, no self-respecting parent who loves their kids, who  cares about their children growing up safely and securely would ever do what  Sharrouf has done to his children. They’re the victims of trauma but in terms of  how we best assist these children, I’m going to leave it to the experts and work  with them.    

 JOURNALIST: Will Labor adopt the Government’s boat turn back policy?    

 SHORTEN: Labor believes in a compassionate approach to refugees and a  constructive approach to asylum seekers. Labor are the people who started  regional resettlement to help break the people smugglers' model. I  am determined to make sure that never again do the seaways between Java and  Christmas Island become the opportunity for people smugglers to  put unsuspecting people into unsafe boats and drown at sea. That is our position.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you want a boat turn back policy as part of your policy?    

 SHORTEN: Part of the dilemma with boat turn back policy is that the  Government insists in shrouding it in secrecy. We want to see what the actual  policies are and how they are actually working. Our first priority is the safety of  refugees, genuine refugees but also discouraging the people smugglers, making  sure that we can put them out of business. The Government has too much  secrecy in the way it conducts its business.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you worried like the ETU is that the Chinese free trade  agreement would allow workers who don’t have the right skills to work on  Australian sites?    

 SHORTEN: There is no doubt that whilst there is some very good aspects of the  China Free Trade Agreement and the Government’s been enthusiastic to bring  out the pluses of the deal to the public scrutiny, that there appears to be a  disturbing lack of protection for Australian jobs and Australian labour standards. I  am most concerned, if it’s as the electricians are saying, that people could come  and work in Australia with lower training, that would make these jobs that they’re  prospectively doing unsafe for the guest workers and unsafe for Australian  consumers. It is most important that the proposed Free Trade Agreement has  the scrutiny of the Parliament, we’re seeing all the upside, I just want the  Government to come clean on potential downside for Australian jobs and  Australian safety and labour standards.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you accept Australian workers will be concerned that  electricians who speak another language aren’t going to be tested before they  work on Australian sites given the dangers and nature [inaudible]?     

 

 SHORTEN: I think you are exactly right. Occupational health and  safety standards require zero tolerance for failure. What that means is that  people need to be able to understand the safety systems that they’re working  on. They need to be able to communicate appropriately with their fellow workers  about safety and about the licensing standards. When people start doing  electrical work, it’s a highly skilled task. We need to make sure that whoever is  doing the work is capable of doing the work safely, not only for them, but for the  people who will end up using the electrical systems that are being worked on at  the time of the work.    

 JOURNALIST: And what would feasibly come out of an alliance between  environmental and business groups?      

 SHORTEN: I think with the announcement today of the Australian  climate change coalition, which includes everyone from environmental groups,  through to the Aluminium Council and everyone in between, there’s only one  person in Australia who doesn't seem to be part of the real action on  climate change, and that's Mr Abbott. Mr Abbott’s living in the past on climate  change, the rest of the world’s moving to act on climate change. Labor supports  real action on climate change. Australians don't want to pass on to the  next generation lower standards in terms of pollution and climate than what we  inherited from our parents. Mr Abbott has to stop living in the past and join with  millions of other Australians and the climate change coalition. What we need is  real action to make sure that our country has a sustainable climate and  energy system, not just burying our head in the sand and pretending it is not a  real issue.    

 Thanks everyone, see you a bit later.    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053   

