---
title: "Refugee week highlights Australia's refugee success"
date: "2015-06-18"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/212071390
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3901681%22
---

 Peter Dutton MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Refugee week highlights Australia's refugee success 

 Thursday, 18 June 2015 

 Australia’s important role in the successful international resettlement effort for refugees from  Bhutan is being highlighted this week as Australia unites to celebrate Refugee Week. 

 The 100,000th refugee from Bhutan will be resettled globally from camps in Nepal at the end of  2015 - this is the largest United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees-led international  resettlement effort of its kind.   

 The Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton and Assistant Minister for  Immigration and Border Protection Michaelia Cash hosted an event at Parliament House to  recognise Australia’s highly successful resettlement of almost 5,500 refugees from the Himalayan  Kingdom of Bhutan.  

 “The Government is very proud that Australia has resettled the third largest group of refugees from  Bhutan behind the United States of America and Canada. The Government continues to work  cooperatively with our international partners to assist the international effort to support displaced  and vulnerable people,” Mr Dutton said. 

 “The Bhutanese community particularly deserves recognition for building their own capacity and  supporting each other to quickly gain employment and independent living.” 

 “Refugee week is fantastic opportunity to congratulate refugees across Australia who have worked  hard to make Australia their new home and it is important we recognise how difficult it can be for  someone who is displaced to start a new life in a foreign environment,” Minister Cash said.  

 “Refugees from Bhutan are a testament to community strength, with most having spent many years  in refugee camps. In Australia, they have reached a balance of contributing to the Australian  community while maintaining their heritage.”   

 President of the Association of Bhutanese in Australia (ABA) Sydney, Mr Om Dhungel, said his  community’s independent settlement model had been crucial to delivering proportionately higher  levels of employment and home ownership compared to other new migrant communities and they  now want to share their experience.  

 “We feel blessed to have the opportunity to live with freedom and equality and our model allows  people to quickly settle into Australia with dignity and to avoid reliance on welfare. We also want to  share our cherished culture and expertise with the wider Australian community,” said Mr Dhungel. 

 The Government continues its commitment to the Humanitarian Programme, which offered 13,750  places in 2014-15 and will increase to 18,750 places by 2018-19.  

 Refugee Week is being celebrated around the country between Sunday 14 June and Saturday 20  June coincide with international events to mark World Refugee Day on 20 June.   

 

