---
title: "Case against Australia builds at the Hague"
date: "2015-10-20"
creators:
  - "Wilkie, Andrew"
source: "Office of WILKIE, ANDREW, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/217412326
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4145279%22
---

 

 20 October 2015

 

 Case against Australia builds at the Hague 

   

 

 The Independent Member for Denison, Andrew Wilkie, will discuss his latest submission to  the International Criminal Court regarding Australia’s mistreatment of asylum seekers. The  submission includes revelations about conditions in Nauru relevant to the current controversy  surrounding the Somali woman, Abyan.    

 WHEN: 11:30am TODAY (or immediately following the GetUp media event in the  same location which starts at 11:00am)  WHERE: Senate Courtyard, Parliament House CANBERRA    

 Mr Wilkie’s submission to the ICC forms part of his original request that the Prosecutor  initiate an Article 15 investigation into the Government for its contravention of Article 7  (Crimes Against Humanity) of the Rome Statute. Specifically, Mr Wilkie has detailed  offences by the Australian Government including indefinite detention without trial, forced  relocation to third countries and detention in inhuman conditions.    

 Whether or not the Nauru Government’s accelerated processing and open camp arrangements have improved the situation for any of the asylum seekers is unclear. In any case Mr Wilkie’s  submission remains relevant, not least because it includes detailed information regarding the  circumstances of asylum seekers in the broader Nauru community.    

 A copy of Mr Wilkie’s latest correspondence with the ICC is attached. Some information in  the letter has been redacted to protect the source of the information.    

 

 

 For more information: Tim Hurd 0428 528 673    

 

