---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: St Albans, Victoria: 22 May 2015: coding; Budget 2015; asylum seekers; Royal Commission Into Child Sexual Abuse; sacking of staff at Cadbury; B-1 bombers in Australia"
date: "2015-05-22"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "coding"
  - "Budget 2015"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Royal Commission Into Child Sexual Abuse"
  - "sacking of staff at Cadbury"
  - "B-1 bombers in Australia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211858047
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3846048%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  ST ALBANS  FRIDAY, 22 MAY 2015    

 SUBJECT/S: Coding; Budget 2015; Asylum seekers; Royal  Commission Into Child Sexual Abuse; Sacking of staff at Cadbury; B-1  Bombers in Australia    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everyone, it’s  fantastic to be at St Albans Primary School where they’re doing great work  making sure that our kids get the best start in life. What I’ve had the chance to do  is see a clever school with brilliant kids teaching their kids the language of the  computer future which is coding. Now we want to make sure that all Australian’s  in the future will be able to find jobs so the best thing that a Labor Government  could do, or indeed parents can do, is make sure that our children are well  equipped for the jobs of the future and that's going to involve understanding  computer language. So Labor has said last week that we want all children to do  just as they're doing here at St Albans and learning how to code. I think the  obligation of a government is to prepare its young people for the future and the  jobs of the future and where the jobs will be coming from. Happy to  take questions.    

 JOURNALIST: On another issue, if you were in government would Labor resettle  some of the asylum seekers who recently fled from Myanmar and Bangladesh in  recent weeks?    

 SHORTEN: What's happening in Myanmar with the Rohingya minorities  is terrible. We are seeing thousands of people being persecuted because of  their religion and we're seeing thousands of people make a terrible choice that  they realise they're not safe in their own homes and they have to leave. But Tony  Abbott is insulting the intelligence of the Australian people when he says on one 

 hand it's not Australia's problem at all and just leave it to the Government  of Myanmar to sort out. If the Government of Myanmar could sort these issues  out people wouldn't be fleeing. But on the other hand Tony Abbott says the only  alternative is to resettle all these people in Australia. That's not true and that's not  necessary.    

 What Australia should do is work with our neighbours in the region who are  getting these people and see what we can do to help. But Tony Abbott  shouldn't dumb the issue down to saying either we take these people here or we  do nothing. Australia's a smarter, more generous nation and I'm heartened by  what Julie Bishop said about talking to Myanmar about what's going on there.    

 JOURNALIST: When you talk about working with other places in the region, are  you talking about sending them to Nauru or Manus Island?    

 SHORTEN: No, I'm not. I'm saying that Tony Abbott shouldn't just present  what's happening to these poor people in a part of the world as not our problem,  but the answer doesn't mean that we take these people here. What it does mean  is we just do as we've done in the past with other humanitarian disasters, is we  provide some form of assistance. But no-one says when there's a disaster  in another part of the world that the only option to doing nothing is to take all the  survivors ourselves. There are other options and I think that it's the Foreign  Minister, Julie Bishop, who has shown perhaps a little more sympathy to  what's going on than Tony Abbott.    

 JOURNALIST: There have been questions about whether asylum seekers have  been tortured or suffered from trauma that's happened later in the  screening process. Is that of concern?    

 SHORTEN: Well, the reports are of concern. I haven't seen all the details of  them. Labor believes that people who are being processed in our  regional resettlement programs run by Australia should be afforded a high-level  of safety and care.    

 JOURNALIST: On the Royal Commission into child sexual abuse, do you think  that George Pell should be compelled to give evidence?    

 SHORTEN: I am shocked by the stories of the victims and survivors of decades  of institutional abuse. I was raised Catholic. I am ashamed when I hear the  reports on the radio of what survivors have had to put up with. I and  Labor supported setting up a Royal Commission. It's very difficult but the voices  of survivors, the voices of victims do deserve to be heard. They've put up with so  much, so much betrayal of trust and harm. This Royal Commission is  very important to sorts out all these issues which have gone for decades. The  pain is incredible.    

 So I do believe that George Pell should cooperate and help the  Royal Commission deal with these problems which have been going on for far  too long and if that means that he should come home to Australia to help the  Royal Commission, Cardinal Pell should do that.    

 JOURNALIST: The Catholic Church is considering interrogating abuse victims  who have given evidence, what do you think of that?    

 SHORTEN: I just think that this Royal Commission in large part was to give voice  to the survivors and the victims of decades of institutional abuse. The  whole Church isn't judged by the standards of some, the errant clergy who have  done this are terrible and wicked people. But it's how we deal with the harm once  we know it's happened, that's what judges an institution, that's what judges all of  us. That's why I believe that the victims and the survivors who well documented  their pain and their suffering and their families who entrusted young people to the  trust of institutions, who’ve been betrayed, and then the decades of cover up, it  is terrible. It is hard, but it is terrible. So I do believe that the victims and survivors  have to be treated with respect, not just legal strategy and I do believe that  George Pell should help the Royal Commission and if that means coming back  to Australia to cooperate with the Royal Commission he should. The pain has  gone on too long and we all have to stand up.    

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister's ahead in the opinion polls, do you think your  job's safe as Labor leader?    

 SHORTEN: I think what really matters here is the jobs of Australians, that's  why I'm here today. You know, the opinion polls come and go, the issue here is  are we doing enough to find the future jobs for the children today? Are we doing  enough to help the 43,000 people who have lost their jobs in the mining industry,  as the mining boom's eased up. 80 workers are being forcibly laid off today at  Holden, where’s the Government on any of these issues? We all know that  last week's Budget was a political hoax to save the jobs of Joe Hockey and Tony  Abbott. But there's no plan for the jobs of Australians who are losing their jobs  now and there's no plan to train up our young people so that they can grab the  jobs of the future. That's what really matters.    

 JOURNALIST: There's reports that Cadbury's sacking 20 per cent of its work  force in Tasmania. Do you think the Government should get behind that as well  [inaudible]    

 SHORTEN: Well, we all know that the Government's flipped and flopped on  supporting Cadbury in Tasmania. We all know that when it comes to standing up  for manufacturing jobs in Australia, Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey can't be  found. They’ll crawl over broken glass to save their own jobs but they're not lifting  a hand in their Budget to help the jobs of advanced manufacturing; of thousands  of people in Western Australia and regional Queensland have lost their jobs with 

 the decline in the mining boom. Now we've seen the Government carry on for a  week about a phantom iron ore inquiry, jeopardising the position and reputation  of Australian iron ore companies, but nowhere in this last week have I seen Tony  Abbott or Joe Hockey talk about the jobs of the actual miners who’ve lost their  jobs. This Government doesn't care about the jobs of Australians, they only  care about their own two jobs: Joe Hockey's, Tony Abbott’s.    

 JOURNALIST: There’s reports that the Government is in fact in discussion with  the US about stationing B-1 Bombers or having B-1 Bombers do tours through  Australia. Would Labor support a US strategic bomber commitment in Australia?    

 SHORTEN: We support the American alliance but this talk about B-1 bombers  is only press speculation. We're going to treat national security with the respect  it deserves and not react to headlines in newspapers. What matters here is  making sure we make decisions in the long-term best interest of Australia.    

 JOURNALIST: Are reports true that you appealed to Mark Scott to have  your Budget Reply speech played in prime time on the ABC?    

 SHORTEN: It was a great Budget Reply speech, I believe, and it was all about  the jobs of the future. I think it is important that Australians hear the policies of  the alternative government of Australia and just to reiterate, Labor believes  fundamentally in training our kids for the future. We want more kids  doing science and maths and engineering at university. We want more support  for the start-up, science businesses of the future.    

 By the same token we also said in the Budget Reply speech that we have a  massive problem in infrastructure. I said that last Thursday night. Today, the  Infrastructure Australia report shows that we have a $45 billion gridlock, a deficit  in terms of infrastructure.  And what infrastructure means is that it means that Mum and Dad don't have to  spend so long in their car and traffic jams. Australia's cities are choking because  of a lack of rail, lack of public transport, because of Tony Abbott's irrational dislike  of public transport, and also their lack of funding for the big projects.    

 We've got a $45 billion infrastructure black hole which is being dug by Tony  Abbott and Joe Hockey and what we need to see is more action on  infrastructure. So the Budget Reply speech is Labor's determination to put  better cities up on the front page of politics and to also make sure that we've got  the jobs for the future that our kids so desperately need.    

 Thanks, everyone.    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053   

