---
title: "Dutton dodges Manus Island in PNG visit"
date: "2015-02-03"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211423055
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3637994%22
---

 SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Tuesday, 3 February 2015   

 Dutton dodges Manus Island in PNG visit   

 Immigration Minister Peter Dutton’s should have gone to the Manus Island detention camp  when he was in Papua New Guinea yesterday, the Australian Greens have said.   

 “Despite going all the way to PNG, Peter Dutton has avoided the toxic Manus Island camp,” the  Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “It’s only by actually going into these camps, as I have, that you gain an understanding of the  living hell that refugees are forced to endure.   

 “Shaking hands with politicians in Port Moresby isn’t enough. There is no policy for resettlement  and more than a thousand people are living in a disturbing and dangerous limbo as a result.   

 “Two men have died in the Manus Island camp, under the direct care of the Australian  government.   

 “It’s extremely concerning that many refugees are being held, without charge, in PNG prisons  simply for protesting inside the centre. This is an extreme violation of their human rights and  they must be released from prison immediately.   

 “The situation on Manus Island is deteriorating rapidly and everyone being held there should be  brought back to Australia before we see another tragedy.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

