---
title: "Agreement reached in Senator Sarah Hanson-Young case against Bauer Media"
date: "2015-06-06"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211886830
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3881789%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Saturday 6 June 2015  

 AGREEMENT REACHED IN SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG CASE  AGAINST BAUER MEDIA  

 Senator Hanson-Young has won her defamation case against Bauer Media’s  publication, ZOO magazine for their article entitled “ZOO’s Asylum Seeker Bikini  Plan”, published in July 2012.  

 The Senator received a verdict and judgment in her favour in the Supreme Court of  New South Wales on Thursday 4 June 2015.   

 As part of the agreement Bauer Media’s publication, ZOO magazine, will publish an  apology to Senator Hanson-Young on their website.  

 “On 2 July 2012 we published an article about the Senator for South Australia,  Ms Sarah Hanson-Young, entitled ‘Zoo’s Asylum Seeker Bikini Plan’. The  article was accompanied by a photograph of the Senator’s face photo shopped  on a lingerie model’s body, posing at the entrance to a bedroom. We accept  that the article was in poor taste. Senator Hanson-Young has made a  significant contribution to asylum seeker policy in this country. We sincerely  apologise for any hurt we caused.” :  Bauer Media 

 Senator Hanson-Young said; 

 “I am pleased that this matter has now been resolved.  

 “Whether it is a smutty men's magazine or in pages of the daily newspapers, there is no  place for the degradation of women and the right of women to have views or opinions.  

 “Politicians regularly face adversity however, there comes a time when you have to  draw a line in the sand and take a stand against sexism and bigotry. 

 “Taking a stand against this issue was one of principle. To be objectified in such a  way for my stance on refugees was insulting and more than just ‘poor taste’. 

 “Women are too often victims of sexism and too often they stay silent on the issue. 

 “I believe that it is important that women see their political leaders stand up and call  out sexism when they see it. 

 “As a mother it is a huge concern that my own daughter can Google my name and  find images of my face photo shopped onto the body of a near naked women. 

 “Young women need to see their female leaders taking a stand against sexism.  My  daughter needs to know I did. 

  Media Contact : Stephen Henderson : 0427 604 760 

