---
title: "Nhill's Karen community deserve support says Broad"
date: "2015-09-17"
creators:
  - "Broad, Andrew"
source: "NATIONALS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/215998032
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4080346%22
---

 Media Release  Andrew Broad  Member for Mallee 

 Email     andrew.broad.mp@aph.gov.au    Media contact:  Kirsten Lloyd 

 Web       www.andrewbroad.com Email   kirsten.lloyd@aph.gov.au 

 Phone    1300 131 620 Phone   0418 445 233 

 Thursday, 17 September 2015 

 NHILL’S KAREN COMMUNITY DESERVE SUPPORT SAYS BROAD 

 The Member for Mallee, Andrew Broad, has continued to advocate for the Karen community 

 based in Nhill, recently speaking with the Minister for Employment, Senator the Hon Eric 

 Abetz. Mr. Broad has asked the Minister to consider providing further employment support to 

 the Karen people who have made the far north western Victorian town home. 

 “The Karen resettlement in Nhill is one of Australia’s great migration success stories and I 

 think it’s important to continue to support this success, not just for the Karen community but 

 for the town as a whole.” 

 Over the last 18 months Mr. Broad has lobbied the Government to commit further support to 

 the Karen refugees living in Nhill and recently secured a meeting with Minister Abetz, who 

 has visited Nhill. 

 “Minister Abetz has seen firsthand the excellent work that’s being undertaken in the 

 community, so I felt it was important to pursue a conversation with him, to discuss the 

 immense opportunities that are possible in Nhill and to gain his support.” 

 Since 2010, almost 200 Karen refugees have resettled in Nhill, securing employment in local 

 businesses, largely with Luv a Duck, becoming part of the town’s community and supporting 

 its growth and viability. 

 A recent Deloitte Access Economics report found the Karen resettlement in Nhill had helped 

 to redress the town’s population decline and had revitalised local services, whilst also adding 

 vibrancy to the regional community. 

 “I’d like to see the Government provide funding for a Migration Employment Coordinator, 

 which would be complemented by a contribution by the Hindmarsh Shire. 

 “Not only would this support a further 50 employees, it would also support the anticipated 

 growth of the local business, Luv a Duck.” 

 Mr. Broad said that initiatives such as the Karen resettlement, which have proven to be 

 successful, are worthy of continued support and he hoped his ‘constructive’ conversations 

 would lead to positive outcomes. 

 ”I want to ensure that we build on the good work that has already been done.” 

 ENDS 

