---
title: "$14.5 million to help temporary refugees gain better English language skills"
date: "2015-07-22"
creators:
  - "Laundy, Craig"
source: "Office of LAUNDY, CRAIG, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213483191
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3967124%22
---

 

 Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham   Assistant Minister for Education and Training   Liberal Senator for South Australia   

 Craig Laundy MP  Federal Member for Reid   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 22 July 2015    

 $14.5 million to help temporary refugees gain better  English language skills    

 The Coalition Government will invest an extra $14.5 million in 2015-16 to help refugees learn  English so they have a better chance of supporting themselves through work.    

 Assistant Minister for Education and Training Senator Simon Birmingham said the extra  funding will help up to 2700 people being provided with Temporary Protection Visas (TPV)  take part in the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP).    

 “The AMEP provides up to 510 hours of free English language tuition to eligible new arrivals  to learn basic English, Senator Birmingham said. 

 “It is important for those on TPVs to be able to support themselves and contribute to the  economy while living in Australia. 

 “English language proficiency is a core skill that employers require workers to have in just  about every workplace in the country. 

 “Helping these refugees to improve their English language skills will help them improve their  independence and well-being and increase their opportunities to support themselves through  work while they are here.” 

 Senator Birmingham said the AMEP represents a sound investment in ensuring new arrivals  have more opportunities to be self-sufficient rather than be dependent on income support. 

 “A recent longitudinal study by Macquarie University found that AMEP clients obtained  higher levels of employment or higher paying jobs when they were equipped with better  English language skills. 

 “While Australians are happy to help refugees we also expect those on TPVs to help  themselves through work wherever they can. 

 “This investment will help more people on TPVs to work and make a contribution to Australia  while they are here,” Senator Birmingham said.  

 Federal Member for Reid Craig Laundy MP said Reid is a diversely multicultural electorate  and home to many of Australia’s newest arrivals. The struggles of starting your life again in  another country can be tough enough on its own, but especially so when these troubles are  compounded with language barriers. It is very difficult for most of us to imagine how isolating  this must be.     

 “I am pleased we have been able to deliver this additional funding to better equip migrants  with the vital workplace skills they require in order to contribute to our country they so  desperately want to play a part in.       

 “The importance of this programme is not to be underestimated and there are AMEP service  providers throughout my electorate. I am delighted that Assistant Minister Birmingham was  able to join in visiting a number of them today,” he said.     

 For more information about the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP) visit:   http://www.education.gov.au/amep    

 Media contact:   Caitlin Keage 0427 729 987 - Office of Senator the Hon. Simon Birmingham  Marc Snape 0402 319 351 - Office of Craig Laundy MP   

