---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra: 7 September 2015: Abbott government; Syrian refugees"
date: "2015-09-07"
creators:
  - "Cameron, Doug"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "Abbott government"
  - "Syrian refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/215658253
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4060681%22
---

 

 SENATOR THE HON DOUG CAMERON  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES  SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  MONDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2015   

 SUBJECT/S: Abbott government; Syrian refugees   

 SENATOR DOUG CAMERON, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES:  Well  two years of the Abbott government, as I described it - shambolic, chaotic and  malevolent. This is a government that just doesn’t get it, it’s a government that doesn’t  understand the Australian public, doesn’t understand the key issues for this country.  They have demonstrated over the two years that they are economically incompetent,  they have demonstrated that they have got a hatred for people that want to try and  organise themselves and get decent wages and conditions.     This is a government whose time is up. I think we are seeing the death throes of this  terrible government, they are just tearing each other up every day so the sooner they go  the better. The sooner we can get an opportunity to deal with the key issues for the  economy, ensure that there are jobs in the economy, deal with the issue of climate  change, the key issues that are important to ordinary Australians, the better.     JOURNALIST: The Abbott government has agreed that we need to do more for the  Syrian refugee crisis. What do you think needs to be done here?   

 CAMERON: Well they should do more than send an incompetent Minister overseas.  They don’t need to send anyone overseas to understand the scale of the problem. They  should increase the amount of refugees that we bring in. We should certainly target the  Syrian refugees, that’s where the big problem is. We should play our part internationally.  This government again is dithering around this approach - they want the international  eyes when they want so called free trade agreements that destroy Australian jobs, but  when it comes to climate change, when it comes to playing a proper role internationally 

 on refugees, this Government is missing in action. But you can’t expect anything else  from an incompetent administration like the Abbott administration.     JOURNALIST: Just over 18000 refugees by 2018/19, do you think that is a sufficient  number, or what would you like to see the number increased to?   

 CAMERON: Well I don’t want to put a figure on it but what our spokesperson has said is  that we should increase the number of refugees, that’s been Labor’ s policy for a long  time and that we should increase that number significantly. That’s a number that will do  something to play a proper role in addressing this international crisis that we  have.            

 

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LUKE WHITINGTON 0422 265 775   

