---
title: "Broad asks Premier to sign off on Safe Haven Enterprise Visas"
date: "2015-08-20"
creators:
  - "Broad, Andrew"
source: "NATIONALS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214738026
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4024101%22
---

 Media Release  Andrew Broad  Member for Mallee 

 Email     andrew.broad.mp@aph.gov.au     Media contact:  Kirsten Lloyd 

 Web       www.andrewbroad.com  Email   kirsten.lloyd@aph.gov.au  

 Phone    1300 131 620   Phone   0418 445 233 

 

 Thursday, 20 August 2015  

 BROAD ASKS PREMIER TO SIGN OFF ON SAFE HAVEN ENTERPRISE 

 VISAS 

 The Member for Mallee, Andrew Broad, used his Adjournment Debate last 

 night to once again call on the Victoria Premier, Daniel Andrews, to sign off on 

 the Safe Haven Enterprise Visas (SHEV), saying they will give hope to 

 desperate people. 

 In an impassioned speech, Mr. Broad implored the Premier to reflect the 

 compassion and optimism of the people of the Mallee and sign off on the 

 visas that would see people who currently hold Temporary Protection Visas, 

 transferred to the SHEV, enabling them to work and contribute to the 

 community. 

 “Visa holders would be designated to regional areas, where the need for 

 workers is high. 

 “I have letters from the communities of Swan Hill, Nhill, Mildura, Horsham and 

 Stawell, all supporting the SHEV and explaining how they would benefit just 

 as much from the visas as the people awarded them. 

 “We have an urgent need for workers to fill job vacancies in horticulture, 

 agribusiness, abattoirs and food processing and there are thousands of 

 people desperate to fill these positions but without the Daniels’ Government 

 signing off, they cannot do so. 

 “A recent report by Deloittes looking at the Karen refugees who were 

 embraced by the Nhill community, revealed an incredible $40million dollar 

 boost to the local economy due to their contributions and yet the Premier 

 won’t give the go ahead. 

 “He is essentially holding innocent people to ransom, while he tries to get 

 more money from the Federal Government. 

 

 Media Release  Andrew Broad  Member for Mallee 

 Email     andrew.broad.mp@aph.gov.au     Media contact:  Kirsten Lloyd 

 Web       www.andrewbroad.com  Email   kirsten.lloyd@aph.gov.au  

 Phone    1300 131 620   Phone   0418 445 233 

 

 “I say to Premier Andrews, it’s time. It is time for you to sign off on the SHEV. 

 It will not only be a good thing for regional economies, it is the right thing to 

 do.” 

 Mr. Broad has been vocal in his frustrations with the Daniels Government’s 

 lack of response to the SHEV, labelling it as ‘cruel’. 

 “The people who could be on the SHEV are a blessing not a burden and the 

 sooner Mr. Daniels understands this and signs off, the better it will be for 

 everyone.” 

 ENDS 

