---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra: 23 March 2015: Government’s lack of budget strategy; Lee Kuan Yew; Homelessness funding; Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank"
date: "2015-03-23"
creators:
  - "Leigh, Andrew"
source: "SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "Government’s lack of budget strategy"
  - "Lee Kuan Yew"
  - "Homelessness funding"
  - "Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211425426
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3731600%22
---

 

 ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMPETITION  MEMBER FOR FRASER    

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  CANBERRA  MONDAY, 23 MARCH 2015    

 SUBJECT/S: Government’s lack of budget strategy; Lee Kuan Yew ;  Homelessness funding; Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.    

 ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER: Today the Parliament  will be honouring Malcolm Fraser, a prime minister whose record on  multiculturalism and on issues like apartheid is certainly to be admired. He was  somebody who helped thousands of Vietnamese refugees settle in Australia and  when other countries were fragile on questions of race, he took a very clear  stance on the moral issue of apartheid. We'll also be now just a few days away  from the next budget coming down. Extraordinarily, Australia is still talking about  the unfairness of the last budget. We've got Tony Abbott, who when debt was  one-seventh of national income, thought it was appropriate to drive debt trucks  around, now thinks it's ok when debt is heading to half of national income. To  my mind, that would require a debt aircraft carrier rather than a debt truck. This  is a government which has lost the confidence of the Australian people because  rather than being focused on the long-term future of 24 million Australians, it is  obsessed by the short-term political prospects of 20 Cabinet ministers. Happy to  take questions.  JOURNALIST: Are you happy that the government has given certainty to the  homelessness sector after it says Labor refused to provide that certainty?  LEIGH: I'm not going to give any medal to Scott Morrison for belatedly restoring  funding to a small number of agencies. We know that the homelessness sector is  hurting, they're having to lay people off. As the co-chair of the Parliamentary  Friends of Housing and Homelessness, I've heard firsthand about the damage  that the $44 million cut - which won't be restored - has done to that sector.  JOURNALIST: There's two years of certainty which the sector hasn't had before  - is that a good thing?  LEIGH: Let's be very clear: housing and homeless are sectors that have been  hurt, not helped, under this government. People who are assisting some of the  most vulnerable in Australia are having their funding ripped away and having to  stand down long-serving staff. 

 JOURNALIST: How should Lee Kuan Yew be remembered? Was he a dictator or  was he a great reformer?  LEIGH: He was somebody who certainly came to power in less-than-democratic  terms, and somebody whose clamp-down on civil liberties in Singapore meant  that many Singaporeans weren't able to express their political freedoms. But  under his watch, Singapore moved from a developing to a developed country in  the space of a generation. The boost in living standards that represents, the  children that don't go to bed hungry at night, is something to be admired.  JOURNALIST: There's some criticism in this morning's papers, suggesting that  the strategy Labor and Bill Shorten is running is far too small target; he hardly  does any interviews. Why do you think Bill Shorten is keeping low?  LEIGH: Bill Shorten is out in the press regularly, available for your questions.  Certainly on Friday, from memory, he was giving a doorstop and a number of  radio interviews and that's just the most recent workday. We're announcing new  policies too. We've put in place - in the first half of this parliamentary term - a  Labor plan for fair taxation of multinationals. I'm not aware of any opposition  having done that in the first half of a parliamentary term; grounded in OECD  work and costed by the Parliamentary Budget Office.  JOURNALIST: Is it true that the less that we see of him, the more the public  like of him?  LEIGH: Bill Shorten is a likable man who is accessible and available to the  community. The job of Opposition Leader is a busy one and Bill is out there  visiting many communities. I think I've got this figure right: in the last  Queensland Election he visited over 30 of the Queensland seats. In the New  South Wales election certainly you've seen plenty more of Bill Shorten in Western  Sydney than you're ever going to see of Tony Abbott, who at the Liberal Party  campaign launch looked a little bit like the embarrassing uncle at a wedding that  you've just got to invite along and have at one of the tables.  JOURNALIST: Tony Burke yesterday seemed to suggest that Labor would be  willing to work with the government on a 10-year economic plan to try and fix  the budget. The government is saying that that's simply rhetoric and talk from  you guys.  LEIGH: We're very serious about budget savings and very concerned that the  government has blown out debt by $80 billion since coming to office. This  government has made decisions to say no to additional revenue sources, and  they've been unwilling to do things like look at superannuation tax concessions -  which now exceed the total value of the pension. So we need a little bit more  governing for all Australians, and a willingness from the government to recognise  that if there needs to be budget pain, it ought to be fairly shared. After a  generation of rising inequality, you can't force the most vulnerable to do all the  heavy lifting.  JOURNALIST: So you do accept there's a need for some budget pain?  LEIGH: Certainly there's a need to continue making responsible savings. There's  a need not to be making arbitrary tax cuts, such as the government did when 

 they got rid of reasonable revenue measures that Labor put in place to fairly tax  multinationals. They give $1 billion back to multinationals, while at the same time  stripping money out of the homelessness sector. That's not the egalitarian  Australia that I know and love.  JOURNALIST: What conditions would you like to see attached to Australia  signing up to the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank?  LEIGH: I think it's important that we get governance arrangements right, that  we make sure the governance arrangements are equal to or better than the  other multilateral banks, and that issues around social, environmental and labour  standards are addressed. But let's be clear: Labor has been urging the  government to sign up for nearly six months now. This belated announcement  that the government is willing to participate in the Asian Infrastructure  Investment Bank puts us at the back of the queue, behind nearly a dozen  developed countries.   No more questions? Thanks everyone.  ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: JENNIFER RAYNER 0428 214 856   

