---
title: "Nauru demonstrations will not alter Australia's position"
date: "2015-03-04"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211424499
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3697461%22
---

 Nauru demonstrations will not alter Australia's position 

 Wednesday, 04 March 2015 

 The Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton said today that refugee  demonstrations on Nauru would have no influence on the Australian Government’s  policies. 

 Mr Dutton said the Government remained absolutely determined to ensure that illegal  maritime arrivals (IMAs) would not be settled in Australia. 

 “If people who have been resettled on Nauru believe that these activities will change  Australia’s position - they are wrong,” Mr Dutton said. 

 “I note that Nauru’s President has stated that his Government believes Australian  refugee activists are trying to provoke violence to achieve a political agenda. 

 “I say clearly to those who have been settled on Nauru that they should disregard any  advice by so-called advocates that this behavior will change outcomes - it will not. 

 “I believe Nauru’s authorities have acted with restraint in the face of some days of these  provocative actions and understandably Nauru’s police will deal with any breaches of  Nauruan law. 

 “If people breach the law then they should expect to face the consequences of their  actions.” 

 Mr Dutton said the Nauruan Government and the people of Nauru had generously  accepted and helped people to settle within their community and in turn they deserved  gratitude and respect. 

 “My message to those who protest is that it will not change the Australian Government’s  commitment to the processing and resettlement arrangements in place on Nauru. 

 “We are committed to supporting the Government of Nauru in hosting the Regional  Processing Centre. 

 “Let me reiterate - those who come illegally by boat will never be settled in Australia.”  

 See: Index of Media Releases  URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/peterdutton/2015/Pages/Nauru-demonstrations-will-not-alter-position.aspx  Last update: Wednesday, 04 March 2015 

 

