---
title: "Greens denounce Bill Shorten's move to back Abbott's turn-back policy"
date: "2015-07-23"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213483166
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3969074%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Thursday 23 July 2015    

 Greens denounce Bill Shorten's move to back Abbott's turn-back policy    

 The Greens have today denounced Bill Shorten's move to back the Abbott  Government's "turn-back" policy for refugees seeking asylum in Australia.    

 "Labor's move to adopt Tony Abbott's turn-back policy is short-sighted and will only  make things harder for refugees to find safety," Greens Immigration spokesperson Sarah  Hanson-Young said today.    

 "Turn-backs are dangerous. They have never been about saving lives, they are about  pushing people away, often to die in someone else's waters or trapped, unable to  escape harm.    

 "Rather than pushing refugees over the horizon to die somewhere else, Australia needs  to engage in our region to help provide safer passage and options for refugees.    

 "If every country turned boats away, thousands of refugees would die every week and  the entire refugee system would collapse. Australia must stop being so arrogant and  instead help our neighbours offer safety to refugees through humanitarian assistance,  resettlement and search and rescue.    

 "Many Labor supporters will be heartbroken to see the ALP fail to stand up to Tony  Abbott's anti-refugee rhetoric.    

 "Back-flipping on turn-backs is a big mistake for Labor and will only accelerate the race  to the bottom.    

 "History has shown that every time Labor backs the Coalition on refugee policy the LNP  come up with the next cruel policy, making life worse for refugees, not better.    

 "Leadership requires more than kowtowing to the fear campaigns of others. Many people  will be upset that the Labor Party has vacated the field on human rights and common-sense.”    

 Note: Previous release had audio from Senator Hanson-Young’s doorstop in Adelaide  this morning attached, this has now been removed      

 Media Contact: Rachel Ryan 0427 604 760   

