---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Parliament House: 10 September 2015: unemployment rate; Syrian refugee crisis"
date: "2015-09-10"
creators:
  - "Abetz, Eric"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT"
subjects:
  - "unemployment rate"
  - "Syrian refugee crisis"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/215717102
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4066407%22
---

 

 

 SENATOR THE HON ERIC ABETZ  Leader of the Government in the Senate  Minister for Employment  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service 

 Liberal Senator for Tasmania   

 TRANSCRIPT 

 

 

 

 10 September 2015 

 

 Minister for Employment Senator Eric Abetz press conference -   Labour Force figures 

 Australian Parliament House 

 ***Check against delivery*** 

 

 Subjects: Unemployment rate, Syrian refugee crisis 

 MINISTER ABETZ: The Government has always been focused on job creation. We  said we would be focused on job creation during the campaign and the Government's  endeavours since election have been about creating job opportunities for our fellow  Australians.    

 Today's unemployment figure suggesting a 0.1 decrease is of course welcome, but I'm  sure everybody would agree that more needs to be done. The employment growth that  we have seen in Australia since the change of government is four times the rate than  Australia experienced in the last year of the Labor Government, so that is a significant  shift.   

 We believe that there is a new confidence in the economy that is allowing this  employment growth to occur. We believe that if the Australian Labor Party are  concerned about unemployment with a six in front of it, as we are, and indeed as I've  said on occasions such as this, on many occasions, a six, a five, a four, a three, a two  or a one in front of the unemployment figure is unacceptable because we need to do  more because every one of those figures is an individual Australian or indeed  thousands of Australians without employment and employment is important for all of our  fellow Australians.   

 So we have a plan that we've been implementing, to get rid of the carbon and mining  taxes, get rid of red and green tape, implementing the free trade agreements. Now, if  the Labor Party want to assist in that regard, in creating employment, come on board 

 and support the China Free Trade Agreement, no ifs or buts, just come out and say this  is a good thing, we will support it. Get rid of any of the uncertainty and allow business to  capitalise on the opportunities that are now available in the biggest market in our region,  namely China.    

 I would also call on Mr Shorten to abandon the ridiculous notion of re-introducing a  carbon tax which was so destructive of job creation when it was introduced. We have  got rid of it and the Labor Party should say it is no longer on their agenda because of  the job destruction that it caused in the past and will undoubtedly cause again in the  future.    

 I will take questions.    

 JOURNALIST: With the unemployment rate, we've seen it start to come down in places  like Tasmania, your home state, and Western Australia. That’s obviously something that  you welcome as well?   

 MINISTER ABETZ: Well, thank you very much for asking about my home state of  Tasmania. Yes, very encouraging and as a Tasmanian, can I pay a great compliment to  the Prime Minister and the Premier of Tasmania who have worked together to ensure  that there is a new sense of optimism which has seen jobs growth where the  unemployment rate, where we used to be on the top of the league table, we are now  slipping down close to the national average, so substantial improvements there.  Similarly in Western Australia, there have been some tough periods, especially with the  resources sector, and to see their unemployment figure coming down and stabilising, I  think is something that West Australians will be welcoming as well.   

 JOURNALIST: Senator what of the under-employment rate, that is still quite high. What  are you doing to get people more work?   

 MINISTER ABETZ: Look, under-employment is a very good question and indicates that  you understand, if I might say, the real issues, and I've said this in the past and I don't  know why it is, but the economists tell me that if you are employed for one hour per  week, you are considered to be in employment. I think we would all be agreed that that  is insufficient period of employment to be considered employed. So, under-employment  is a huge issue as well.    

 How do you overcome that? By creating more sustainable jobs, by creating free trade  agreements, by getting rid of carbon and mining taxes, by getting rid of red and green  tape. They are the sort of initiatives that we have been pursuing. Getting the Australian  Building and Construction Commission back on track. They are the sort of things that  we need to do to grow jobs and put the economy front and centre. That is what we have  sought to do as a government and we will continue to do so.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister, you were in South Australia recently. First-hand, what do you  think is going on there? The unemployment rate is far above any other state.   

 MINISTER ABETZ: Look, unemployment in South Australia is a problem. Can I tell you  if the China Free Trade Agreement were to be achieved, the wine industry in that state,  which is so important to it, would see a substantial growth. The 14 per cent tariff  currently on wine would be removed and, as I understand it, the wine export market to  China now is our third largest export destination with a capacity to grow like you would  not believe. Further, and on top of that, of course, the Government has made an 

 announcement in relation to ship-building, to get rid of the Valley of Death in the ship-building industry for South Australia which will provide an anchor, an anchor for their  economy and for their manufacturing sector.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister the Senate crossbench doesn't think you're doing enough as a  Government on youth unemployment measures. Would you consider working with them  on job creation measures in order to pass legislation like the four-week freeze on dole  payments?   

 MINISTER ABETZ: The youth unemployment problem is a matter of genuine concern  and that is why earlier this week the Assistant Minister and myself announced the  Transition to Work, the $331 million program that we announced in the Budget, ready to  go out for tender in the various employment regions around Australia, to help young  unemployed people to get job-ready. So very focused on it and just this week we  announced the programme and the draft tender for that to go ahead to be rolling out by  the beginning of next year.   

 JOURNALIST: Is there scope for negotiation when this comes to those sort of dole  freeze payment kind of issues and taking into account other measures like job creation?    

 MINISTER ABETZ: Always room for negotiation and discussion and I'm always willing  to listen to what anybody is willing to put forward on the basis that we know that it's not  destructive of jobs and that it actually will help create jobs, so if people have positive  ideas, we are all ears. If it is the suggestion of another carbon tax like Labor, no,  because we know that destroys jobs. If it's trying to delay the China Free Trade  Agreement, we say no, because that will delay the creation of jobs, but if there are  positive suggestions, then of course more than willing to look at them.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister, the focus of the refugee intake is on persecuted minorities.  Would you still like to see Christians make up the majority of those taken to Australia?   

 MINISTER ABETZ: Well be very careful. What I said was and I re-read the transcript of  what I said yesterday, and I make no apologies for saying that it is important that there  be a focus on Christians- a focus, not the only focus, or the focus, but a focus on  Christians. There is no doubt that in the Middle East area, a lot of the Christian groups  are substantial minority groups that even in the event peace were to be restored, they  basically have nowhere to return to in the event of peace. They will be displaced people  and therefore I think if we can assist them, we should.   

 Having said that, are there other minorities such as the Yazidis, et cetera? Yes, of  course and that is why I also said that it should be based on need and I of course repeat  that again.   

 JOURNALIST: The Grand Mufti on Australia says focusing on Christians is  discriminatory. Do you think there is a danger of isolating this community when they’re  so important for measures like de-radicalisation?   

 MINISTER ABETZ: Well that is, with respect, either a misunderstanding or something  else of what was said. It is, I believe, quite clear that Christians are a persecuted  minority in these- in this particular region, and the advice I have at least is that they  won't have anywhere else to go, even if peace is restored, and therefore to make them  a focus- not the only focus, but a focus- what I said the other day is I think perfectly 

 reasonable, and I would invite anybody who wants to take issue with what I said to  actually have a look at what I said.   

 JOURNALIST: [Indistinct] Muslims from the region to be welcomed to Australia?   

 MINISTER ABETZ: Look, as I said, it's got to be on the basis of need, and if the need  can be made out and that there would be no other place for them to be re-settled or  would be very difficult for them to re-settle in the event of peace, then of course in those  circumstances they would fit into the category of being in need.   

 I will take one more question.   

 JOURNALIST: Is Mr Andrews mistaken to say that Australia would be at war for two to  three years this morning?   

 MINISTER ABETZ: Oh, look, these are the sort of games that, with respect, journalists  play. We will be there until such time as the task is undertaken. We all hope and pray  that it will be as short as possible because what we want to do is to defeat the evil and  let's keep in mind, you know, why do we concentrate on whether somebody said two  years or might it be a little bit longer or a bit shorter, do we put a time limit on it? The  issue here is that there is a death cult beheading people, raping women and killing them  because of their religious beliefs, and we want to have a national debate about times?  Excuse me, the issue here is to root out this evil once and for all for the protection of  men, women and children in the region so that they can live peaceably and that is what  we as a government are committed to doing, along with our allies in the United Kingdom  and the United States to restore peace in an area and to protect people from these  barbaric operations. Let's concentrate on that and let's not talk about timetables, but  let's concentrate on getting rid of that evil.    

 Thanks a lot.   

 

 ENDS 

 

 

 

