---
title: "Children in detention - it has to end now"
date: "2015-02-11"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211423408
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3654654%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Wednesday, 11 February 2015   

 Children in detention - it has to end now   

 The shocking Australian Human Rights Commission report into children in detention must be the  turning point that ends the cruel practice of locking children in detention camps, the Australian  Greens have said.   

 “This vile, institutionalised child abuse has to end,” The Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator  Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “No longer can we turn a blind eye to the sexual, physical and psychological abuse that these policies  of indefinite detention are inflicting on children.   

 “This isn't about political parties or a particular government, this about us in the Parliament doing  what’s right for vulnerable children. MPs must exercise their conscience and bring an end to the  indefinite incarceration of children.   

 “The government has done its best to bury this report and discredit the commission and its  president. We now know why.   

 “The Human Rights Commission is right. There needs to be a Royal Commission into the decades of  abuse that have taken place in immigration detention.   

 “Under questioning in this inquiry, Labor and Liberal Immigration Ministers admitted that locking up  children has no deterrence effect at all. There is no justification for subjecting children to the mental  torture of being locked up in Australia or on Nauru.   

 “All of the children on Nauru and in mainland detention need to be released into the Australian  community so that they can actually have a childhood.   

 “I’m moving in the Parliament to establish a genuine and independent guardian for unaccompanied  refugee children. The horrors of this inquiry have shown that an independent legal guardian for all  refugee children is well and truly overdue.”   

 

 

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

