---
title: "Regional partnership enhanced"
date: "2015-10-15"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/217097190
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4135048%22
---

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 15 October 2015   

 REGIONAL PARTNERSHIP ENHANCED   

 The partnership between Australia and Cambodia on immigration issues was  strengthened yesterday following a series of high-level meetings.   

 The Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton met with the   Director General of the General Department of Immigration H.E. General Sok Phal and  other Cambodian officials in Canberra.    

 Mr Dutton said the meeting reaffirmed the close working relationship between Australia  and Cambodia on a variety of immigration issues.   

 “Since the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding last year our two nations have  been working very closely together,” Mr Dutton said.   

 “Our meetings yesterday have reinforced our nations’ commitment to successfully  resettle refugees from Nauru and tackle people smuggling and other global immigration  matters.”   

 During the meeting Mr Dutton acknowledged the methodical approach that the  Government of Cambodia had applied to integrate the first group of refugees into the  community.    

 This was highlighted by the recent movement of the refugees from the initial transit  accommodation to their own accommodation in Cambodia.   

 Director General Sok Phal is visiting Australia to co-host the fifth Australia-Cambodia  Immigration Forum alongside officials from the Department of Immigration and Border  Protection.    

 The forum provides senior officials from both countries an opportunity to discuss  cooperation on vital immigration issues such as people smuggling and human  trafficking.    

 Further information: John Wiseman or Merryn Royle - 02 6277 7860  

