---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 30 June 2015: Abbott Government's cuts to healthcare; immigration; political donations; Australian Labor Party; de-radicalisation programs"
date: "2015-06-30"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Abbott Government's cuts to healthcare"
  - "immigration"
  - "political donations"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
  - "de-radicalisation programs"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/212531819
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3923583%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE  TUESDAY, 30 JUNE 2015    

 SUBJECT/S: Abbott Government’s cuts to healthcare; immigration;  political donations; Australian Labor Party; de-radicalisation programs   

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: It's great to be here at the  Monee Ponds Paramedic Centre, talking to hard working paramedics to help  keep us safe. The reason why I'm visiting, talking to paramedics is because  they're at the front line on the health service and there is great concern that Mr  Abbott and Mr Hockey with their $57 billion worth of cuts to the health system,  $57 billion worth of cuts to hospitals, will put greater pressure on our front  line health services. On one hand, while state governments administer the health  system and it's great to be here with Danny Pearson, the State Member for  Essendon, the truth is that the Commonwealth Government are the people who  help fund healthcare in Australia. If you take $57 billion out of the system and  indeed if the Government goes ahead with their recently exposed plans in the  Federation Green Paper to not fund public hospitals at all, it's going to create  an intolerable strain on our paramedics, on our emergency departments, on our  waiting lists, on elective surgery. It's going to lead to a real decrease in the health  of Australians. That's why Labor will keep opposing the ruthless cuts of Mr Abbott  to the health system and hospitals of Australia. Happy to take any questions.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, what would you propose to do with health funding?   

 SHORTEN: There's no doubt in my mind the Commonwealth does play a big role  in the health of Australians. We will announce our policies closer to the election  but we will keep opposing the Government's GP tax by stealth. We will keep  opposing some of the measures in their current Budget which are going to see a  cut to the provision of healthcare to Australians. Labor will always, always,  always better fund healthcare and hospitals in Australia. We will always, always 

 be the champions of Medicare because we are determined, we recognise in  Australia that the health of any one of us affects all of us and that healthcare in  this country shouldn't be decided in that American style by your credit card,  instead by your Medicare card.    

 JOURNALIST: By opposing these cuts should you not also be proposing an  alternative?    

 SHORTEN: And we will. The point about it is this Government has broken a lot of  promises from the last election. People remember famously that Mr Abbott on  several occasions, including the last night before the election to get everyone's  vote, said that there would be no cuts to health, no cuts to education, no cuts to  the pension and indeed no cuts even to the ABC or SBS. He's broken all these  promises. What we want to do is make Mr Abbott keep his promises. The health  of Australians is too important to be just cut up by Mr Abbott and we want to  make sure that our paramedics' job isn't made harder by the Commonwealth  Government.    

 JOURNALIST: Will you wait for Labor's National Conference to decide your  position on boat turn backs?    

 SHORTEN: Well Labor's got a strong position already in terms of defeating the  people smugglers. Our policy, which we will take to the next election, will be  constructive for asylum seekers and compassionate for refugees. With are  determined to maintain regional processing. We want to defeat the people  smugglers who say that if they can take people to Australia then once you get  here then you can stay here. The dilemma with that is that it created the most  dangerous seaway in the world between Java and Christmas Island. We do not  want people drowning on their way to Australia. We don't want people smugglers  to be able to put people into unsafe boats and then run the risk of drowning. For  me it's all about safety and it's about the humane treatment of genuine refugees.  Labor will get this balance right and we'll have more to say at National  Conference and beyond.    

 JOURNALIST: Given the revelations about the mafia and political donations, do  we need to have another look at political donations?    

 SHORTEN: Yes, we do. I think all of us are concerned by the revelations of the  mafia trying to infiltrate and influence decisions. Labor has supported greater  transparency for political parties. I believe the time is again where the political  parties of Australia need to look at how we can further improve transparency.  There are questions for the Liberals to answer, I'm sure they will over time. But  what we all know is that we need to learn lessons, we need to make sure that we  have the most transparent form of funding. Labor is up for reform of political  donation laws. We ask Mr Abbott and the Liberal Party to join with us to further  improve confidence in our democratic system.  

 

 JOURNALIST: Just back to the asylum seekers matter, will the turn back policy -  sorry will Labor's policy be locked in at the National Conference ?   

 SHORTEN: Well, Labor's policy is by and large well set already. We supported  the Government recently in amendments to the Migration Act, but in speaking on  that matter I reminded Australians that it was Labor who proposed regional  resettlement so we could stop people smugglers seeking $10,000 a pop to put  people in unsafe boats and potentially and in some cases actually drowning, and  what we want to do is destroy the people smugglers' model. We also want to  make sure that we are a generous nation and we do our thing when it comes to  helping genuine refugees around the world.    

 JOURNALIST: Is it true that rules that would protect you from being removed as  Labor leader before an election haven't been incorporated into the party's  national constitution?    

 SHORTEN: The assumption of that question goes to: has the Labor Party learnt  its lesson from the disunity of the Rudd/Gillard/Rudd period, and the answer  is yes we have learnt our lesson. My colleagues and I are determined to be  united and for the last two years we've been very united and we will continue in  that vein. I think the real challenge here is back in February Mr Abbott nearly lost  to an empty chair. In other words, 39 of his party voted to spill the position  without even having a candidate. The disunity of Labor's past is now the current  problem of Mr Abbott and his Government.    

 JOURNALIST: But has that been incorporated into the constitution as it had  been decided on?    

 SHORTEN: I have to say when it comes to the Labor Party and its rules that's a  matter for the Labor Party. But what I can assure Australians is that the Labor  Party's learnt its lesson about disunity. We regard the disunity of the past as a  matter of history and I think the record's clear that since I was elected leader, the  Federal Parliamentary Labor Party has been more united than at any time in  decades.    

 JOURNALIST: So does that mean you're not aware whether it has been  incorporated or not?    

 SHORTEN: What it means is I'm not worried about the issue and the party's  united and I'm very grateful for the support I get from my Federal Parliamentary  party. What Australians want to see is they want to see a political party that is  united because if you're not united yourself how can you help govern the nation?  We are united, we passed that first test. I don't think anyone seriously thinks that  Mr Abbott's party is fully behind Mr Abbott.    

 JOURNALIST: Sorry, just a simple question whether it has been incorporated or  not?    

 SHORTEN: You'd have to ask the Federal Labor Party for that. But what I would  say is that in terms of the assumption underpinning it is there unity in the party,  yes, there is.    

 JOURNALIST: Strategic policy Institute is reporting to young radicals says only  42 per cent are dual nationals so do you accept that more needs to be  done about those that are sole Australian citizens such as suspending certain  Australian rights, that sort of thing?    

 SHORTEN: Well there's a fair bit in your question so if I might go to the various  parts of it. There is a great importance in making sure that we don't have  disaffected young people - a very, very small minority I hasten to add - who  could be radicalised by some of these predators on the internet or other people  trying to pervert and poison the minds of young Australians to convince them to  engage in terrorist activities in the Middle East. De-radicalisation is as an  important a part of making sure that we protect and keep Australians safe as any  other military contribution we send to the Middle East. So there is appropriate  discussion about what's the best form of de-radicalisation. There are different  programs, what I say though, is the best frontline we have to help make sure the  disaffected youth are not being radicalised by a few predators and evil people is  to work with the Australian Muslim community not to demonise it. I've had many  great meetings with Australian Muslim leaders and many members of the  Australian Muslim community. They love our country as much as all other  Australians. I think what is really necessary is that we say to all Australians,  Muslim, Christian or of any faith, you are a welcome member of our society and  that we work with you to make sure if there's a few youth in any of the  communities, that we're looking after them. In terms of the specific measures  you're asking me, we haven't seen a proposal from Mr Abbott. As ever, Labor's  approach on terrorism is to work with the Government in a constructive fashion,  not an uncritical fashion but a constructive fashion. Terrorists need to understand  that they will not divide Australian society and they will not divide Australian  politics. Thanks, everyone.   

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053   

