---
title: "Tony Abbot must finally stand up to Christensen's mindless bile"
date: "2015-09-09"
creators:
  - "Rowland, Michelle"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURALISM"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/215717112
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4064380%22
---

 

 MICHELLE ROWLAND MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND  MULTICULTURALISM  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS 

 MEMBER FOR GREENWAY 

     TONY ABBOTT MUST FINALLY STAND UP TO CHRISTENSEN'S MINDLESS BILE   

 Tony Abbott must show some leadership and finally stand up to Coalition MP, George  Christensen.   

 Christensen's incessant rantings are divisive, offensive and discriminatory.    

 In recent days alone Christensen has displayed that he is unfit to to engage in sensible  and serious policy discussion and the Prime Minister should pull him into line. 

 

 GEORGE CHRISTENSEN'S RECENT RANTINGS    

 Mr Christensen criticised Labor’s proposal to bring in “tens of thousands of refugees”.  “They either take a job an Australian can do or they go on the dole.’’    

 The Australian - 9 September 2015 

 

 But Mr Christensen hit back at Mr [Ewen] Jones and said Australia should increase the  number of Syrian refugees within the existing refugee intake. "People who are talking  about bringing tens of thousands of them into the country, that's just a crazy argument,"  he said. "Those people will go straight into the jobs market or going on the dole."    

 Courier Mail - 9 September 2015 

 

 GEORGE CHRISTENSEN, NATIONALS MP: People don't want a whole heap of other  people coming here, importing their problems into Australia.   

 JASON OM: And what type of people would they be? 

 

 GEORGE CHRISTENSEN: Well, people with problems in other countries that want to  bring those problems here to our shores. And we've seen that time and again.  Unfortunately, you do get radical Muslims that come into the country with radical Islamic  views.    

 Lateline - 8 September 2015 

 

 

 Twitter - 8 September 2015 

 

 

 This kind of language would make Pauline Hanson proud.    

 At a time when the global community is responding to a humanitarian crisis, this kind of  mindless bile would be offensive if it came from an anonymous troll - from a member of  the Australian Government it is simply despicable.    

 

 WEDNESDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2015    

 MEDIA CONTACT: NICK TRAINOR 0407078138   

