---
title: "Geneva based human rights organisation urges Australia to remove excessive restrictions on the rights to freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly"
date: "2015-02-02"
creators:
source: "HUMAN RIGHTS LAW CENTRE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211423033
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3636105%22
---

 

 

 Media Release 

 Embargoed until: Monday 2 February 2015 

 Geneva based human rights organisation urges Australia to  remove excessive restrictions on the rights to freedom of  expression, association and peaceful assembly 

 Australia should repeal excessive restrictions on the fundamental rights to freedom of expression, 

 association and peaceful assembly, according to a new report to be considered by the UN Human Rights 

 Council in Geneva. 

 The report prepared by the International Service for Human Rights, with input from Australia’s Human Rights 

 Law Centre, documents a worsening trend of laws, policies and funding arrangements being used by federal 

 and state governments to restrict free speech and peaceful protest, censor and criminalise the work of 

 journalists, and impede the independence and effectiveness of non-governmental organisations and the 

 national human rights institution. 

 "There is a growing disconnect between Australia’s support on the world stage for vibrant civil society, strong 

 national human rights institutions, and the protection of journalists, and its apparent disdain for the vital work 

 of these actors at home," said ISHR Director Phil Lynch. 

 According to ISHR, Australia’s inadequate legal protection of human rights has enabled the enactment of 

 regressive laws restricting the right to peaceful protest and to freedom of the press, contrary to international 

 human rights law. As examples, the report cites the Tasmanian Workplaces (Protection from Protesters) Act, 

 which criminalises protests which ‘hinder or obstruct’ business operations, and 2014 amendments to the 

 Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act which criminalise the disclosure of information on so-called 

 ‘special intelligence operations’, including by journalists, even where those operations violate fundamental 

 rights. 

 "There is a disturbing trend in Australia of governments eroding basic democratic freedoms - such as 

 freedom of expression, association and access to information - which are the basic ingredients of good 

 government and accountability," said Emily Howie , Director of Advocacy and Research at the Human Rights 

 Law Centre. 

 In addition to calling for repeal of restrictive legislation, the submission recommends that Australia strengthen 

 the legal protection of rights, such as by amending the Public Interest Disclosure Act to provide protection to 

 whistleblowers where the disclosure reveals or promotes accountability for alleged human rights abuses. 

 "Recent revelations in the Guardian newspaper that the Australian Government has asked the Australian 

 Federal Police to investigate journalists to uncover their confidential sources for reports on asylum seekers 

 are yet another illustration of the need for stronger laws to protect freedom of expression and access to 

 information in this country," Ms Howie said. 

 The report highlights that Australia has failed to incorporate the International Covenant on Civil and Political 

 Rights into national law, despite the expert recommendations of United Nations treaty bodies and Special 

 Rapporteurs, together with a major public consultation undertaken in Australia in 2009. 

 "Building on the positive experiences of the Charter of Human Rights in the state of Victoria and the Human 

 Rights Act in the Australian Capital Territory, the Australian Government and other state and territory 

 governments should enact laws giving full domestic force and effect to the International Covenant on Civil 

 and Political Rights," Ms Howie said. 

 The ISHR report also documents policies and arrangements that Australian governments are increasingly 

 putting in place to restrict advocacy and silence dissent, including by defunding organisations and through 

 contractual requirements which prohibit or restrict advocacy and law reform work. Organisations working in 

 areas such as indigenous and refugee rights, like the Refugee Council and the National Congress of 

 Australia’s First Peoples, have been hit particularly hard. 

 "A vibrant and critical civil society is essential to democracy and development. In accordance with its 

 obligations under the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, Australia should reinstate funding to these 

 vital civil society organisations. It should also repudiate contractual provisions which purport to restrict the 

 right and ability of non-governmental organisations to advocate for progress and reform," Mr Lynch said. 

 ISHR is particularly concerned at government steps to defund and delegitimise the Australian Human Rights 

 Commission, contrary pledges Australia has made on the international stage. 

 "Substantial funding cuts, the appointment of commissioners without proper processes, and persistent 

 political attacks on the President of the Australian Human Rights Commission are all flagrantly incompatible 

 with Australia’s international position and promises," Mr Lynch said. 

 Australia leads a bi-annual resolution on strengthening national human rights institutions at the UN Human 

 Rights Council which calls on all States to safeguard the independence of human rights commissions, ensure 

 that they are not subjected to unreasonable budgetary limitations, and are protected from all forms of 

 pressure or reprisal in connection with their work on individual cases, inquiries and reports. 

 "Australia should heed the advice it frequently dispenses to other nations at the UN  by restoring funding to 

 the Commission and by defending the independence and integrity of the Commission’s highly qualified 

 President," Mr Lynch said. 

 The ISHR report will be formally considered by the UN Human Rights Council when it meets to review 

 Australia’s human rights record again through the Universal Periodic Review in Geneva in November. 

 A major coalition of Australian NGOs, coordinated by the Human Rights Law Centre, the National 

 Association of Community Legal Centres and Kingsford Legal Centre, is also expected to submit a report to 

 the UN in the coming weeks. 

 For further information or comments, please contact: 

 Phil Lynch, Director, International Service for Human Rights, on + 41 76 708 4738 or p.lynch@ishr.ch 

 Emily Howie, Director of Advocacy and Research, Human Rights Law Centre on + 61 421 370 997 or 

 emily.howie@hrlc.org.au 

  www.hrlc.org.au 

 

