---
title: "Minister - Nauru visit reaffirms regional processing partnership"
date: "2015-02-19"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211423800
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3676172%22
---

 Peter Dutton MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Minister - Nauru visit reaffirms regional processing partnership 

 Thursday, 19 February 2015 

 The Australian Government and the Government of Nauru have reaffirmed their commitment to  regional processing and resettlement during a series of meetings in Nauru this week. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, Peter Dutton, met with the President of Nauru,  Baron Waqa, Minister for Justice and Border Control David Adeang, and Minister for Education  Charmaine Scotty along with other key Nauruan officials during the visit. 

 Mr Dutton said the purpose of the trip - his first to the island nation - was to personally thank the  Nauru Government for its contribution to a regional solution and further strengthen ties between  the two countries. 

 "The partnership between Nauru and Australia has been an invaluable component in our successful  campaign against people smuggling," Mr Dutton said. 

 "The Nauru Government's ongoing efforts to achieve positive settlement outcomes for refugees in  the areas of employment, education and community engagement have been commendable. 

 "In particular, I would like to applaud the willingness and generosity Nauruans have displayed in  welcoming refugees into local schools. This helps to break down social barriers and build the positive  experiences that are vital to the success of the settlement strategy." 

 Since May 2014, 512 asylum seekers have received a refugee status determination from the  Government of Nauru and over 400 refugees have been successfully settled into the community. 

 Mr Dutton confirmed further developments are on track, including a move to an open centre model. 

 "An open centre will give transferees more opportunities to engage with the Nauruan community  before their refugee processing has been completed, allowing genuine refugees to ultimately  integrate seamlessly into the community. 

 I expect open centre arrangements to be finalised very soon." 

 

