---
title: "Abbott Government must increase humanitarian intake in wake of Mediterranean tragedy"
date: "2015-04-20"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211567025
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3783627%22
---

 The Australian Greens   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Monday, 20 April 2015   

 Abbott Government must increase humanitarian intake in wake of Mediterranean tragedy    

 The Australian Greens are today calling on the government to immediately increase the humanitarian  intake following the tragic sinking of an asylum seeker boat in the Mediterranean.    

 “It is truly tragic to learn that hundreds of asylum seekers have lost their lives whilst trying to reach  safety in Europe. That is why today I am calling on the Minister for Immigration to urgently increase the  humanitarian intake,” Greens spokesperson for immigration, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.     

 “The UNHCR has called for the global community to unite and share the burden, Australia must step up  and do its part.    

 “Tony Abbott might want to trumpet stopping boats in Australian waters but the truth is men, women  and children are still drowning over the horizon.    

 "With war and conflict devastating many parts of the world right now the numbers of refugees taking to  boats to escape brutality is at its highest in decades.    

 “Australia must extend a helping hand and assist those in need immediately.    

 “Turning our backs and cutting off safe avenues for resettlement, as Tony Abbott has done, gives  refugees fewer options and pushes women and children into further danger.    

 “Australians have big hearts and we can and should do more to help share the refugee burden. Cutting  foreign aid and refugee numbers helps no one.”    

 Media Contact: Ali Neyle 0427 604 760    

