---
title: "Roundtable looks at family violence in diverse communities"
date: "2015-08-04"
creators:
  - "Payne, Marise"
source: "MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214292671
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3994244%22
---

 

 MEDIA RELEASE  SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Human Services    

 

 Tuesday 4 August 2015 

 

 ROUNDTABLE LOOKS AT FAMILY VIOLENCE IN DIVERSE COMMUNITIES    

 Minister for Human Services Senator the Hon Marise Payne was a special guest today at a  roundtable discussion on how the Department of Human Services supports people from  diverse communities experiencing family domestic violence.    

 Hosted by the Immigrant Women’s Health Service in Fairfield, participants of the roundtable  spoke about the significant additional barriers facing women and children from culturally and  linguistically diverse communities experiencing family violence.   

 Minister Payne listened to the views presented by the participants of the Immigrant and  Refugee Women’s Network and commended their effort in establishing the important forum.    

 “I appreciated the opportunity to meet with the Network and hear their suggestions for how  my department can help CALD customers experiencing family and domestic violence.   Family violence is the leading preventable cause of injury and death in women under 45, and  women and children from culturally and linguistically diverse communities are particularly  vulnerable,” Minister Payne said.    

 Minister Payne reinforced her commitment to progressing the national conversation on family  and domestic violence, including the recently announced Family and Domestic Violence Risk  Identification and Referral model which is currently being rolled out to frontline staff at the  Department of Human Services.    

 “In particular, staff in the Multilingual Phone Service will be trained in the new Risk  Identification and Referral model so they are better able to support customers facing family  violence concerns, and to offer appropriate assistance,” Minister Payne said.    

 Immigrant Women's Health Service chief executive officer Dr Eman Sharobeem said frontline  staff at the Department of Human Services are often the first point of contact for people from  culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds experiencing family violence.   

 “It is vital they can quickly identify customers at risk and offer them information, resources  and support,’’ Dr Harobeem said.   

 “Women from multicultural communities who experience family violence face significant  additional challenges in accessing support services due to language barriers, lack of support  networks and a limited understanding of the Australian law system and related Government  and community support services.   

 “Nobody should have to live in fear. If you or someone you know is experiencing family  violence I urge you to call the national family and domestic counselling service on  1800RESPECT or visit humanservices.gov.au/enough.”   

 For more information on support services for people from culturally and linguistically  diverse backgrounds visit humanservices/multicultural   

 Media contact: Henry Budd, 0429 531 143. 

