---
title: "Additional $20 million support for Syrian crisis"
date: "2015-03-31"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211425794
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3747050%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP 

 

 31 March 2015 

 

 ADDITIONAL $20 MILLION SUPPORT FOR SYRIAN CRISIS     

 The Australian Government has today announced it will provide ongoing support for  life-saving assistance to help people impacted by the continuing violence in Syria.   

 Australia will provide an additional $20 million for food, medical assistance, shelter and  protection to people in need inside Syria, as well as refugees and their host  communities in Lebanon.    

 The Syrian conflict has entered its fifth year and an estimated 12.2 million people are  now in need of humanitarian assistance inside Syria - more than half the country’s  pre-war population.   

 A further 3.9 million Syrians have fled to neighbouring countries. Lebanon is the most  affected, hosting almost 1.2 million Syrian refugees, comprising 25 per cent of its  population.    

 Australian funding will support the World Food Programme and the International  Committee of the Red Cross to deliver much-needed food and medical assistance in  Syria.    

 Our assistance will help the UN Refugee Agency provide protection and shelter to  Syrian refugees and support vulnerable Lebanese communities. Funding will also  allow Australian non-government organisations to address the specific needs of  women, girls and survivors of gender-based violence.   

 This contribution at the Third International Humanitarian Pledging Conference for Syria  in Kuwait City will bring Australia’s total humanitarian assistance in response to the  Syria crisis to $155.8 million since 2011.   

 Foreign Minister’s Office:  Rachel Obradovic  0478 488 874  Jenna Hand  0402 899 632 

