---
title: "Australia to take more Syrian refugees"
date: "2015-09-10"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
source: "Office of STONE, SHARMAN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/215717088
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4066356%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP  Federal Member for Murray   

 

 Thursday 10 th  September 2015  

 

 Australia to take More Syrian Refugees    

 The Australian Government will accept 12,000 Syrian refugees who have sought safety from the  worn torn countries of Syria and Iraq. The government will focus on persecuted minorities who are  currently seeking refuge in Jordan, Turkey and Lebanon.   

  “Australia will also be contributing more funds, some $44 million to help Syrian and Iraqi refugees.  This funding will provide much needed humanitarian support for more 240,000 displaced people  with needs such as food, water, healthcare, education, emergency supplies and protection,”  Sharman Stone said.   

 “Every Syrian refugee will undergo the usual processes including security, health and character  checks before coming to Australia and receiving permanent protection. The 12,000 places that have  been made available are on top of the current Australian humanitarian program of 13,750 people.   

 “Locations where the refugees will be settled are still to be determined. The Federal Government  will consult with State and Territory governments to identify places where the refugees can quickly  move to employment,” Sharman Stone said.            

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Media contact: Callum Whitehead 0437 096 982          

 M E D I A     R E L E A S E       

