---
title: "Abbott Government must come clean on Cambodia deal"
date: "2015-01-20"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211421443
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3612510%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Tuesday, 20 January 2015    

 Abbott Government must come clean on  Cambodia deal    

 The Australian government must release the full details of the dodgy deal with Cambodia, the  Australian Greens have said.    

 “Australia’s dodgy deal to dump refugees in Cambodia is inhumane and will cost Australian  taxpayers millions of dollars”, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.    

 “Minister Dutton’s comments today that the Cambodian government are “credible to deal with”  are naive and misinformed.    

 “The Cambodian government is one of the most corrupt in the world and this money will only  serve to line the pockets of officials.    

 “The government has already paid a $40 million bribe to Cambodia, with more to follow.    

 “The Abbott Government must be honest about how much this is really costing the Australian  taxpayer.    

 “The conditions of the agreement between the IOM and the governments of Australia and  Cambodia must be disclosed.    

 “I have been to Cambodia and seen the conditions in which people live. There is no safety net  for the Cambodian people, let alone for the hundreds of refugees that Australia wants to dump  on its doorstep.    

  “This is burden shifting not burden sharing.  Dumping families back into the system of  displacement.    

 “Permanent resettlement is not an option in Cambodia and all the experts on the ground know  that.      

 “The government wants the specifics of this deal kept secret, but the Australian people have a  right to know what is being done in their names and with their money.”    

 Contact: Ali Neyle 0427 604 760   

