---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Geelong: 31 March 2015: Abbott Government leaking personal information of world leaders"
date: "2015-03-31"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211425824
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3748868%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  GEELONG  TUESDAY 31 MARCH 2015   

 SUBJECT/S:  Abbott Government leaking personal information of w orld  leaders 

 RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION:  Reports today that the White House are investigating exactly how the  personal information of the President has been leaked by our Department of  Immigration are both deeply concerning and profoundly embarrassing. This is the  second major data breach which has occurred by the Department of Immigration under  the Abbott Government’s watch - remember it was just over a year ago that the  personal details of more than 9,000 asylum seekers were published online by the  Department of Immigration. What is even more breathtaking is that the then-Minister,  Scott Morrison has regarded this as not being important enough to notify the world  leaders themselves. He seems to have been operating under the basis of what they  don’t know won’t hurt them, the problem is that it may well. Now this is a Government  that has been running immigration under a shroud of secrecy from the moment it came  to office, what is in the public interest they keep secret - what ought to be confidential  they leak. When it comes to immigration they have been treating the Australian people  on a-needs-to-know basis, it would now appear they are treating the world’s most  powerful leaders on exactly the same terms - that has taken our national  embarrassment to a global stage. 

 REPORTER: What kind of effect do you think it would have on Australia’s reputation  not just with the United States but elsewhere?  

 MARLES:   I think this has a profoundly negative effect on Australia’s international  reputation, the world leaders of the 20 most powerful countries on the planet came to  Brisbane expecting their heads of state would be treated in the most secure way  possible, what they have now learnt and it appears learnt through the media, is that  detailed personal information of these leaders has been leaked. 

 REPORTER: What kind of ramifications could there be in terms of the way Australia is  trusted in future meetings like the G20? 

 MARLES:   Well I think that is a very good question and I think there are obviously  concerns about that, which is why we need to hear from the Government today about  what steps it is taking to ensure that this kind of breach never occurs again. We need  to get a guarantee from the Government that no other further information was leaked  by them, and we need to know what steps they have taken to notify the world leaders  themselves, particularly given that it would appear that these world leaders have had to  discover this through the media.   

 REPORTER: Is there anything else the Government can do to make up for this?  

 MARLES:   Well I think the first thing we need to do is hear from the Government right  now about what their explanation of this actually is, we have not yet heard from the  Government as to how they explain how the personal details of the most powerful  people on earth have been leaked by our Department of Immigration. 

 REPORTER: And then what could they do to make it better? 

 MARLES:   Well as I say we need to have a clear statement from the Government  about what steps they have taken to make sure this could not happen again. We need  to get a guarantee from the Government that no further information has been leaked  but we also need to have a sense of confidence in understanding from the Government 

 about what steps they have now taken to talk this through with those countries given  that it would appear that those countries have learnt about it from the media, given  that the Government did not regard this as serious enough at the time to the time to  notify world leaders themselves. 

 REPORTER: Anything else you would like to add? 

 MARLES: No, that’s it. 

 ENDS 

 

 MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563   

