---
title: "Abbott Government's response to The Moss Review a disgrace"
date: "2015-03-23"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211425408
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3731521%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 ABBOTT GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE TO THE MOSS REVIEW A DISGRACE   

 Today’s response from the Abbott Government following the release of the review  into recent allegations relating to the Regional Processing Centre in Nauru is  disgraceful.   

 Comments by the Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton in  releasing the report this afternoon that “We have a great story to tell”  shows just  how delusional the Abbott Government has become.   

 This report addresses serious issues within the Australian-funded facility on Nauru  and the Australian people deserve to know that the Abbott Government is treating  the findings properly.   

 Based on Mr Dutton’s brief response, and the timing of the release of this report that  has been sitting on his desk since at least early February we can have no such  confidence.   

 Labor will carefully work through the findings of the report and its recommendations.  It is a detailed report that goes into the operation of the centre as well as allegations  of abuse. It is critical that where the system is failing people or needs to be  improved, that we work with the Nauruan Government to ensure those  improvements are made.   

 Regional processing plays a critical role in preventing asylum seekers from risking  their lives in the dangerous sea journey to Australia and it is vital Australian funded  facilities are safe and provide proper care.   

 FRIDAY, 20 MARCH 2015   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563  

