---
title: "Government must release report into Children in Immigration Detention"
date: "2015-01-15"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211418703
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3605190%22
---

 Australian Greens 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Thursday, 15 January 2015 

 Government must release report into Children in Immigration  Detention: Greens 

 The Abbott Government is on an ideological witch hunt against the Australian Human Rights  Commission ahead of the release of its report into children in immigration detention, the  Australian Greens have said.     

 “This is a dirty attempt by the Government to discredit Professor Gillian Triggs before releasing  the Commission’s report, which will no doubt uncover the systematic abuse of refugee children”,  Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.    

 “The constant harassment from Government members of Professor Triggs and the Australian  Human Rights Commission is nothing more a tactic to distract from the serious findings in the  Report.    

 “Evidence provided to the Commission revealed the sad truth of life for children in detention.  Skyrocketing mental health concerns, abuse and children self harming are the daily experience  of these kids.    

 “The Government have been sitting on this report for months; it’s about time it was released.     

 “I am calling on the government to release the Commission’s Report immediately and let the  Australian public make up their own mind.     

 “There is no excuse for the Government’s secrecy. The government must stop their attack on  the Commission and get on with releasing findings.”   

 Contact: Ali Neyle 0427 604 760 

 

 

