---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Gladstone: 20 January 2015: Queensland election; Tony Abbott's unfair Budget; asylum seekers; cost of living"
date: "2015-01-20"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Queensland election"
  - "Tony Abbott's unfair Budget"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "cost of living"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211421441
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3614158%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  GLADSTONE  TUESDAY, 20 JANUARY 2015    

 SUBJECTS/ S: Queensland election; Tony Abbott’s unfair Budget;  asylum seekers; cost of living.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: It’s great to be here in  Gladstone with Labor’s candidate, Glenn Butcher. We’ve had a good opportunity  to talk to shoppers here about cost of living, return to school, there’s real  concern among parents that Tony Abbott’s cutting billions of dollars out of the  Queensland school budget, and we haven’t heard so much as a peep from  Campbell Newman. And of course, talking to parents, they are worried about the  health care costs, Tony Abbott just won’t give up on trying to introduce new  taxes on the sick and the vulnerable. But Labor has an answer - we’ve got Glenn  Butcher, standing up for people living in Gladstone and the region, to make sure  that we’ve got a strong voice in Brisbane, in Queensland politics, because  Queenslanders more than ever need people who are determined to stand up to  Tony Abbott’s outrageous cuts to health care, to jobs and to education. Happy to  take questions.    

 JOURNALIST: Why is the seat of Gladstone so important?     

 SHORTEN: Well anyone who knows anything about Queensland knows that it  doesn’t just stop in South East Queensland or in Brisbane. The great regional  towns of Queensland are remarkable in the nation of Australia. Queensland is on  the most decentralised - or is the most decentralised population across the  nation. When you think of Queensland you’ve got think of Central Queensland,  you’ve got to think of northern Queensland. Be it Gladstone, Rockhampton, 

 Cairns, Mackay or Townsville, or indeed inland, there is a lot happening in  Queensland outside of Brisbane and South East Queensland. That’s why I’ve  been travelling all around, from Cairns to Townsville, today in Gladstone,  tomorrow in Rockhampton, of course I’ve visited Mackay and Toowoomba,  because the story of Queensland is the story of the entire state, the regions.  That’s why I’m here.    

 JOURNALIST: Just on federal issues, can we expect a federal Labor  government to raise taxes and cut services?    

 SHORTEN: Well first of all let’s put some markers down here. We do not  support the way in which Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey - the invisible twins of  national politics, who are not coming to Queensland at all during the state  election, a remarkable accomplishment, they are not even going to come to  Queensland because there is a state election underway - we don’t support them  raising a GP Tax. We don’t support them putting a tax on fresh food by  increasing the GST. We don’t support them increasing the price for young people  to go to university and decreasing the number of people who are going to get a  university education.      

 When it comes to taxes, I think the Government has got some opportunities here  which they are not sufficiently exploring. On one hand they are going soft on the  multinationals and I think they can do more there to make sure people pay - big  business pays its fair share just like small business does. Also they’ve got this  ridiculously expensive paid parental leave scheme which no one wants, which no  one supports, except for the Prime Minister of Australia. So these are things that  the Government could do on taxes. When it comes to our policies on taxes and  indeed on all matters, we’ll release them in good time before the next election,  we certainly will do that.    

 But what I also know is that when it comes to policies, I think it would be great if  Tony Abbott came to Queensland to answer the hard questions. Why is he  cutting money to Queensland schools? Why is he cutting money to Queensland  hospitals? Why won’t he come to Queensland? Why does he want a GST on  items currently which don’t have that 10 per cent tax?         

 JOURNALIST: Would Federal Labor close down Manus Island if re-elected in  2015?    

 SHORTEN: Labor supports regional re-settlement. We have been very frustrated  at the culture of secrecy that the Abbott Government is practicing with its  immigration policies, and care of people directly or indirectly in the responsibility  of Australia. The first step that Australians deserve - it doesn’t matter what your  politics - is to be treated as adults, and the Abbott Government needs to come 

 clean. We’ve now got the failed Health Minister in Immigration, he doesn’t need  to botch up Immigration like he botched up Health, he just needs to be straight  with the Australian people. What’s happening there? We find out more reading  the newspapers from Cambodia to Papua New Guinea than we can from our own  Government and it’s not good enough.    

 JOURNALIST: How would Labor solve [inaudible]    

 SHORTEN: Well first of all we’ve got to find out what’s going on, that’s the very  first step. It’s asking us to talk about how we can fix an issue which the  Government hasn’t even come clean and told us about, very difficult. But just ask  the Abbott Government. Immigration should [inaudible] tell Australians what’s  going on. Everyone knows they’ve got a culture of secrecy. You’ve got the  Immigration Minister, the hapless former Health Minister, [inaudible] you’ll get  more respect that way.    

 JOURNALIST: You’re criticising the Coalition’s secrecy surrounding immigration  matters, will you guarantee you’ll allow journalists access to detention centres  [inaudible].    

 SHORTEN: First of all - sorry I’ll just wait til that plane goes by.    

 JOURNALIST: Thanks, very courteous of you.    

 SHORTEN: Your question is a generous one because it assumes there will be a  change of government at the next election. I don’t want to count my chickens  before they hatch. What I will say on immigration policy right here, right now, is  that the Government needs to come clean.    

 JOURNALIST: What was your response to some of the shoppers in there who  were worried about the cost of living [inaudible]    

 SHORTEN: Well it is ridiculous that a town like Gladstone, petrol is 30 cents  over the odds compared to what you can get in the suburbs of the big cities.  That’s unacceptable. The Federal Government has been belated in getting the  ACCC here, but I know that with Glenn Butcher, he is not going to rest until he  makes sure that Gladstone gets treated the same as South East Queensland.  We’ve seen the unedifying spectacle of the Premier of Queensland, Campbell  Newman, forking out hundreds of millions to save his own seat, and yet he  would seem to need a Satnav to find himself outside South East Queensland.  Glenn Butcher is a local lad, he has raised his family here, he has worked here  for a long time, and he is the sort of chap you need to stand up for Gladstone.  You don’t need Campbell Newman spending all his money in his own electorate,  you need real local patriots like Glenn Butcher. 

 

 Last question? All done?    

 JOURNALIST: Done.    

 SHORTEN: Thank you everyone, lovely to see you.    

 

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053   

