---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Heidelberg: 7 May 2015: Abbott Government's cuts to the aged pension; Abbott Government's broken promise on pensions; Labor's plan for fair, sustainable superannuation; Greens leadership; Asylum seekers; RET."
date: "2015-05-07"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Abbott Government's cuts to the aged pension"
  - "Abbott Government's broken promise on pensions"
  - "Labor's plan for fair, sustainable superannuation"
  - "Greens leadership"
  - "Asylum seekers"
  - "RET."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211734580
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3825723%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 THE HON JENNY MACKLIN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES & PAYMENTS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISABILITY REFORM  ACTING SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD 

 MEMBER FOR JAGAJAGA 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  THURSDAY, 7 MAY 2015  HEIDELBERG    

 SUBJECT/ S: Abbott Government’s cuts to the aged pension; Abbott  Government’s broken promise on pensions; Labor’s plan for fair,  sustainable superannuation; Greens leadership; Asylum seekers; RET.      

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon everyone.  It’s great to be at one of the best research centres in Australia, the Brain Centre  at the Austin Hospital which has indeed been proudly supported by Labor and  my colleague Jenny Macklin. We’re here today to talk about more chaos and  confusion out of the Abbott Government with their upcoming 2015 Budget, more  chaos and confusion. Since the last Budget of 2014, 360 days ago, Tony Abbott  and Joe Hockey have been defending the cuts to the pension as fair and  reasonable and they’ve been standing up for them.    

 Now we see that they’re looking at reconsidering what they’ve been telling  Australians for the last 360 days, more chaos and confusion. If Tony Abbott  really is going to drop his pension cuts, he needs to confirm that what he said to  Australians for the last 360 days has been a lie. Because if he won’t come out 

 and admit that he’s been lying to Australians about pension cuts, that means  that these pension cuts may be off the table but they’re still in the draw waiting  to be re-emerged. Tony Abbott needs to come clean with 2.5 million pensioners  who he’s been scaring up hill and down dale with his pension cuts. Either Tony  Abbott was right and he said these pension cuts are fair or he’s been lying and  they’re wrong, but he can’t have it both ways.       

 But what’s also more chaos and confusion today is that 320,000 recipients of  part-pensions have discovered they’re going to be the big losers from Tony  Abbott’s Budget. Tens of thousands of part-pensioners are finding out that Tony  Abbott and Scott Morrison want to take their part-pension off them all together  and many more are finding out that Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison want to cut  the part-pensioners. Why is it that part-pensioners are an endangered species in  the Abbott Government’s Budget? They’ve worked hard to amass some level of  comfort and now we see the Abbott Government going after their health  concessions and their pensions with an axe.    

 I think the final point about chaos and confusion with this Budget isn’t just the  Governments unwillingness to admit the pension cuts are wrong, isn’t just  320,000 pensioners are on the hit list to be losers under Tony Abbott’s 2015  Budget, it’s that Scott Morrison is announcing Joe Hockey’s Budget. What we see  here is that when it comes to the dignity of pensioners none of the Abbott  Government are interested in that. Scott Morrison just wants to put Joe Hockey  on an early pension and Tony Abbott, well he just wants to keep his job until  Christmas. It isn’t good enough, and I’m going to get Jenny Macklin to talk a  little more about some of the other threats to Australia’s aged pensioners.     

 JENNY MACKLIN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES &  PAYMENTS: Thanks very much Bill and thank you for coming here to  Heidelberg and I want to thank everyone at this outstanding Brain Research  Centre here in Heidelberg for having us here today and for the really first class  work that they do on neurological science. It really is cutting edge research  internationally and we’re very, very proud to have you right in the heart of  Heidelberg.    

 We heard from Tony Abbott before the last election that there would be no  changes to pensions, he didn’t say maybe ‘maybe not to part-pensioners’ or  ‘maybe not until after the next election’. Tony Abbott said there would be no  changes to pensions. He broke that promise in last year’s Budget. He wanted to  introduce a major cut to pension indexation, they’re now saying that that’s off  the table, but what we know is that that’s really what they want to introduce.    

 They also have legislation in the parliament to cut the deeming rate thresholds  and there’s no suggestion today that that is going to be taken off the table. In 

 last year’s Budget Tony Abbott cut $1.3 billion from pensioner concessions.  These are concessions that go to pensioners to help them with their rates, their  water bills, their electricity bills, all of that money just taken out of pensioners  Budgets. All of these changes made by Tony Abbott in last year’s Budget and I  am today calling on Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison and Joe Hockey to return all  of that money to pensioners. That money belongs to pensioners, it was promised  to them at the last election and it should be put back into pensioner’s budgets,  not taken off them.    

 The other major change that Tony Abbott announced in last year’s Budget was  to increase the age pension age to 70. Now today we haven’t heard anything  about getting rid of that change, so unfair to so many younger workers who are  very worried that they’re going to have to work until their 70 until they’re eligible  for an aged pension. Tony Abbot should get rid of that change if he’s going to be  fair to those who are worried about their retirement.    

 SHORTEN: Thanks Jenny. Are there any questions?    

 JOURNALIST: The Government’s back down on changes to slow the rate of  pension indexation, is this a good thing?    

 SHORTEN: I just want to look at the question you asked. The Government, you  say, has backdown to slow the rate of pension indexation; that’s a cut. For 360  days all that stood between Tony Abbott going after pensioners has been the  Labor Party. Day after day in Parliament, the Labor Party stood up for aged  pensioners in Australia and said don't cut the pension. Day after day, the Prime  Minister and the Treasurer have abused us and said we're scaring people. When  will Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey apologise to Australians for lying to them? They  lied before the last election when they said no change to pensions, they’ve  lied at the Budget when they said that they weren't cutting pensions, now  they're lying about the fact that they even ever had a plan to cut the pension.  They know they were wrong and today 320,000 part-pensioners have discovered  that they’re the next victims of an Abbott Government Budget. Why doesn't  Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey and Scott Morrison ask foreign multinationals to pay  their fair share? Why is it that when it comes to a beauty parade in politics  between part-pensioners and a few multimillionaires who are getting tax  concessions from their superannuation of an exorbitant nature, why is it that  Tony Abbott will always back the very, very, very well off against part-pensioners  in this country? It's not good enough.    

 JOURNALIST: Will you support the Government’s plans for a tighter assets test  to access the aged pension?    

 SHORTEN: Let’s see the detail, the fine detail, but this is a government who  when they talk pensions I get very worried for pensioners. For the last 360 days,  Tony Abbott at innumerable press conferences, hand on heart with  that trademark grin has said, "I will not, I will not cut pensions," and in  fact that’s what he has been doing. And if the rumours are right in today's  newspapers, Tony Abbott’s recognised Australians don't want his cuts to  pensions, but the problem is Tony Abbott says that the only way he can run this  country is by going after 320,000 part-pensioners who are Tony Abbott's losers.  And also he’s still increasing the retirement age to 70, he’s still decreasing the  deeming thresholds, he’s still going after the health concessions of hundreds  of thousands of pensioners. When it comes to pensioners in Australia, you just  can't trust Tony Abbott.    

 JOURNALIST: Can you support any part of the pension package on details  provided so far?    

 SHORTEN: We’d need to see more details. I think though what makes it easier  for us to support an improvement for pensioners the test that I spelt out on  Monday about the Budget. What I said on Monday is, is the Budget good for the  future, is it honest and responsible and is it fair. They’re the tests that we will  apply to the Budget, but I’ve got to say the bad news hasn’t just stopped with  the attack on 320,000 part pensioners today, what we’ve also seen is  unemployment’s gone up. North of 47,000 full time jobs for men have gone in  the last month. This is a Government who’s got no plan for the future except  cutting and harming people - this is cutting the pensions and making it harder  for kids to go to university, they’ve got no plan for jobs. This a Government  who’s focused on their own job. Let’s be really true, although 47,000 men, have  lost their full time jobs in the last month has been recorded by the ABS. The  truth of the matter is, there’s only two jobs which seem to matter: Scott  Morrison wants Joe Hockey’s job and Tony Abbott just wants to keep his job by  Christmas. This is not a Budget for the future, it’s a Budget all about politics.      

 JOURNALIST: The Greens and the cross bench have indicated that the change  in the taper rate could be something that they support, are you at risk of locking  Labor out of this entire debate if you don’t negotiate on that?    

 SHORTEN: I would not be standing up for the pensioners of Australia if I gave  Tony Abbott a blank cheque. What people expect from the Labor Party is to  stand up for the less well-off in this community and we will. Pensioners in  Australia, age pensioners are not paid a lot of money. There is a whole lot of  political games going on here, we all know that the Government called the  economy wrong last year, they went in with that horror Budget of cuts and  broken promises, it has stalled confidence. Even today the latest business  confidence survey showed that confidence is still down, so this Government, the 

 Abbott Government got the economy wrong last year. So this year in this  Budget, all they're trying to do is play politics. I am not going to give them a  blank cheque. If the Government wants to do something about helping the  Budget bottom line, take on large foreign multinationals, pick on someone your  own size, don't pick on part-pensioners and those who are less well-off in our  community.      

 JOURNALIST: Does Labor have any plans to tighten eligibility for the age  pension to contain the increase in expense beyond the forward estimates?    

 SHORTEN: I’ll ask my colleagues to supplement this answer, but I don’t accept  that the age pension is in some sort of crisis which requires just treating a whole  lot of people who’ve worked hard their whole life harshly. I don’t buy for one  second this argument about a crisis in the pension which would be a justification  for this Government’s terrible cuts. These are the facts - last year Tony Abbott  proposed cutting the pension, for 360 days he has denied it, he said that’s not  true, now he appears to recognise that people are found out that he’s been lying  about the cuts and they’re real cuts. So now his plan B is to go after 320,000  part pensioners, it’s to make all Australians work longer, it’s to take hundreds  and thousands of people off health concessions, and goodness only knows what  other nasties will be in his Budget. This Government needs to focus on the  future; it needs to be honest, it needs to make sure it keeps its promises and it  needs to be fair.        

 

 JOURNALIST: Given that seniors will be kicked off the pension, thousands of  them, do you need to reconsider your plan to scale back superannuation tax  concessions?    

 SHORTEN: Labor is the party of superannuation. In the whole history of  universal, compulsory superannuation in Australia, it’s only ever been the Labor  Party who’s proposed introducing it and increasing it, and the Liberal Party and  Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey always vote against it. We believe in a retirement  income policy which has a strong safety net of the age pension, and we believe  in encouraging people to save for their own retirement. But what we don’t  believe is that superannuation should become a tax haven for a few thousand  people who are really well off. It’s not the function of people who go to work  every day to pay their taxes so that tax concessions can be redistributed  upwards to a few thousands of people who already have millions of dollars in  their accounts. The big difference between Tony Abbott, Scott Morrison, Liberal  Party on one side and the Labor Party and myself on the other side is we want to  see all Australians get to a reasonable level of comfort, but once you’ve reached  a reasonable level of comfort, we don’t see it as our job to turn superannuation  into a tax haven for a very few fortunate people.       

 JOURNALIST: Do you believe that Labor’s at risk of losing inner city seats to  The Greens given that Richard Di Natale is promising more of a mainstream  approach?    

 SHORTEN: I congratulated Richard Di Natale in that surprise turn of events  yesterday, he’s come through and emerged as the new leader, I congratulate  him for that. The Labor Party I lead though has different policies to The Greens.  We believe fundamentally in an economy which is strong but doesn’t leave  people behind. We do fundamentally believe in representing all people and not  just some people on some issues. We are a party who’s dedicated to making  sure for instance, that we have good infrastructure, we have good roads and  public transport. We look forward to strong policy arguments and debates with  The Greens and with all other political parties in Australia, but the Labor Party is  the only other party along with the Liberals who are seeking to form a majority  in this country to lead us to the future.        

 JOURNALIST: Would you be putting more into those inner city seats now with  Richard Di Natale leading and [inaudible]?    

 SHORTEN: My focus to be blunt in not The Greens, my focus is Tony Abbott  and his unfair Budget. The political issue at this moment is cost of living. The  political issue at this moment is the future of our economy and future jobs. The  Labor Party I lead understands that if we are to help Australia successfully  transition from the mining boom to a non-mining based economy - although  mining is relevant and important to it. That means that we need to position our  cities and our towns to be able to take up the slack. We need to make sure that  our young people are getting the best education possible, we need to make sure  that our small businesses and the start-ups get that degree of support which  sees them become successful. The future is what matters at this Budget, not  Tony Abbott’s job at the end of this year.    

 JOURNALIST: Does Labor maintain its opposition to asylum seeker boat turn-backs?         

 SHORTEN: What we believe is in a humane treatment of refugees. Refugees  make an important part of our immigration mix, always have and always should.  Labor is also committed to making sure that we best do this through a regional  processing plan, which sees the people smugglers model put out of business.  There can be no humane policy which sees thousands of people drown at sea  through the negligence of people smugglers, so we’re determined to maintain  safety at sea, we’re determined to maintain the strong contribution that  immigration makes to this country and part of that immigration of course is  being welcoming to refugees.    

 JOURNALIST: And how close is Labor in striking a deal with the Government on  the Renewable Energy Target?        

 SHORTEN: Everyone is Australia is committed to a renewable energy deal  except Tony Abbott. This is just the triumph of stubbornness over evidence. Both  political parties at the last election went to the people and said we would have a  renewable energy target at a certain level. Tony Abbott clearly never meant that,  he’s been trying to wreck it. At the request of industry and environmental groups  we have compromised, even though we believe there should be a bright future  for solar energy in this country. Tony Abbott is still stubbornly determined to  wreck millions of dollars and thousands of jobs and undermine the future of solar  energy and efficiency in this country. It’s now the time of Tony Abbott, the  clock’s run out, Tony Abbott should just do a deal which is what everyone in  Australia wants him to do. Thanks everyone.    

 MACKLIN: Thank you.     

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

