---
title: "Minister must act now to allow Nauru rape victim access to safe and legal abortion"
date: "2015-10-07"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/216857402
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4121200%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Wednesday, 7 October 2015   

 Minister must act now to allow Nauru rape victim access to safe and legal abortion   

 The Australian Greens have urged the Prime Minister and his Immigration Minister to act  urgently to bring a young refugee woman allegedly raped on Nauru to Australia so she can  terminate her unwanted pregnancy.    

 "Mr Turnbull needs to pull his Immigration Minister into line and get this woman they help  and care she urgently needs," Greens Immigration spokesperson Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said today.   

 "Abortion is illegal on Nauru and the only option this young woman has for a safe and legal  termination is to be brought to Australia.    

 "I have written to the Minister today requesting that he act urgently. Here we have a 23 year  old refugee, left stranded on Nauru by the Australian Government, and after allegedly being  raped and assaulted by a local man, she need needs assistance and care.   

 "Minister Dutton and his department have known for weeks that this young woman needs to  be transferred to Australia to terminate this unwanted pregnancy.    

 "She has been pleading with Australian authorities for weeks and they have done nothing.  Sadly their lack of action has meant she will now need a late-term abortion.    

 "She is scared, distressed and physically unwell. Leaving her in Nauru is simply  unacceptable.    

 "Sadly, her case is another example of just how unsafe and unsustainable Nauru is for refugee  women and families. The truth is they are not safe inside or outside the camps.    

 "If Malcolm Turnbull wants to end the suffering of the refugees on Nauru he must bring them  to Australia and get them off the prison island."   

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

