---
title: "Questions for Dutton following embarrassing leak of G20 leaders personal details"
date: "2015-03-31"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211425793
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3747111%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO 

 

 MEDIA STATEMENT   

 QUESTIONS FOR DUTTON FOLLOWING EMBARRASSING LEAK OF G20  LEADERS PERSONAL DETAILS   

 Revelations that the personal details of world leaders including US President Barack  Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping were leaked by the Immigration Department is  a huge embarrassment for the Abbott Government.    

 Along with President Obama, the personal details including passport numbers of world  leaders at the G20 were accidentally emailed to an external recipient in a major security  breach.    

 The Immigration Minister Peter Dutton has so far refused to answer questions since this  startling breach was reported.      

 Minister Dutton must explain how a mistake of this magnitude was allowed to occur.      

 Minister Dutton must also guarantee that no other confidential information was leaked  to third parties by the Government.    

 Concerningly, Minister Dutton must also explain why it appears he - nor anyone in the  Government - chose to not notify any of the world leaders involved at the time of the  breach.    

 This is a clear breach of the guidelines set down by the Office of the Australian  Information Commission, who makes clear:    

 In general, if a data breach creates a real risk of serious harm to the individual, the  affected individuals should be notified.    

 Common sense would dictate that inadvertently releasing the passport numbers of Mr  Obama, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Chinese President Xi Jinping by email  might be an issue worth raising with our international counterparts.    

 The White House confirmed overnight it is now examining the data breach.     

 This is the second significant data breach within the Department of Immigration to  occur on the Abbott Government’s watch - the first involved the publishing of personal  information of nearly 10,000 asylum seekers in February 2014.    

 TUESDAY, 31 MARCH 2015   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563   

