---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne, Maribyrnong: 11 April 2015: Opposition Leader Bill Shorten discusses pensions, Iranian asylum seekers"
date: "2015-04-11"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Opposition Leader Bill Shorten discusses pensions"
  - "Iranian asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211535939
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3770277%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MARIBYRNONG  SATURDAY, 11 APRIL 2015   

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Today, the Abbott-Liberal  Government is at it again. Another day, another idea floating out about the future of  pensions. There is only one thing certain about pensions, the Abbott-Liberal  Government want to cut the pension.   

 Happy to take questions.   

 JOURNALIST: When you say they want to cut pensions - why don’t they just come  out and say they aren’t going to cut the pension? Wouldn’t that just nip-it-in-bud?   

 SHORTEN: For 10 and a half months, since the last budget, Australia’s millions of  pensioners have had the daily anxiety of the Liberal Government intending to cut  pensions. I think, for the sake of the pensioners of Australia, the Abbott Government  should just say they aren’t going to touch people’s pensions. Enough is enough.   

 JOURNALIST: I was going to say, is it something they should have had a plan on  before this? It seems there is a different idea every couple of weeks or so. Does that  mean there is no plan at all?   

 SHORTEN: The Abbott Government have got the economy wrong, they have got  the job security wrong of Australians and they have the pensions wrong. They  should just stick to their election promises. Tony Abbott should just take his hands  off the pensions - that is the best news that this Budget could bring for millions of  pensioners.   

 JOURNALIST: Should the seniors heath card be de-coupled from the aged  pension?   

 SHORTEN: No there they go again. The Abbott Government trying to take away  health concessions for pensioners. I think the Abbott Government needs to be very  careful about reducing people’s access to affordable medicine. They want to cut  people’s pensions and now they are talking about taking away pensioner’s ability  access most effective medications. This is a government with no plan for Australia’s  pensioners. They just want to cut, cut and cut.   

 JOURNALIST: Are wealthy Australians rorting the seniors health card?    

 SHORTEN: First of all, let’s establish what this government is really on about. They  said there would be no change to pensions, no cuts to health, no cuts to education.  This government has broken its election promises time and time again. The first  thing that the Abbott Government should do, in the lead up to this Budget is just  promise Australians that Tony Abbott won’t be touching people’s pensions.     

 JOURNALIST: Just on Iranian asylum seekers, should they be sent back home?   

 SHORTEN: In terms of asylum seekers, it is appropriate that once people have had  their case properly assessed, and in the event that they are found not to be  refugees, that they are supported to go home as soon as possible. But, this must be  consistent with our international obligations.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think there is any serious chance that Iran will accept those  people?   

 SHORTEN: We will wait and see what Julie Bishop produces in her talks with Iran.  We would want to see the detail. Labor believes that we need to make sure that  whatever arrangements are struck, are consistent with international obligations, that  people are afforded due process, their claims are properly assessed but in the event  they are found not to be refugees, then they should be supported to go home as  soon as possible.    

 JOURNALIST: If they return to the country, then are they at risk of being subject  to persecution should they go back?   

 SHORTEN: This goes to the international obligations I was referring to. Again, I  think we need to wait and see the detail of what the Abbott Government produces in  its discussions with Iran.   

 JOURNALIST: The Greens believe it is a death sentence if they were to go back to  Iran. What do you make of that?   

 SHORTEN: Again, all these matters go to individual circumstances. It could be very  serious, as your question suggests, or it may not be. We need to see a lot more  detail on the table and I just caution people against people leaping to conclusions,  either one way or the other. What Labor believes is that people should have their  claims properly accessed as to whether or not they are refugees or not. If they are  found, after proper assessment and due-process, not to be refugees then it is 

 appropriate they are supported to return home. But this has to be consistent with  international obligations. We need to see a lot more detail before we have a  definitive view on his matter.    

 JOURNALIST: A question without notice, this is a retail area, a strong retail area, it  is a beautiful day here in Melbourne, it isn’t exactly thriving. Is that a sign that  economy isn’t going well?   

 SHORTEN: Ever since about three weeks before the last budget, in 2014, when the  Abbott Government released its harsh Commission of Audit Report, confidence has  taken a nose dive and never recovered. Australians are concerned with their  economic well-being. Unemployment is up, the iron ore prices are well down, and  indeed the Australian dollar is heading lower than the New Zealand dollar. No  wonder why Australians are worried about their economic confidence.   

 Thanks everyone.   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

