---
title: "Statement on the third anniversary of Julian Assange's claim for political asylum"
date: "2015-06-19"
creators:
  - "Ludlam, Scott"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/212071347
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3901705%22
---

 EMBARGOED UNTIL 5.00am EST FRIDAY 19/06/15   

 Media Statement  Senator Scott Ludlam   Australian Greens Deputy Leader   

 Statement on the third anniversary of Julian Assange's claim for political asylum   

 On the third anniversary of Mr Assange’s entry into the Ecuadorian Embassy in  London, Senator Scott Ludlam joins with many millions of WikiLeaks supporters  around the world to acknowledge the continuing value of the organisation, even as we  condemn the hostility with which its staff and volunteers have been treated by Western  governments including our own.   

 Three years ago today, Julian Assange entered the embassy seeking political asylum  under the 1951 Refugee Convention.    

 Persuaded by the likelihood of Assange’s extradition to the United States on the basis of  a Department of Justice investigation into his work as the publisher of WikiLeaks, the  Ecuadorian Government granted the asylum claim. Mr Assange has remained in the  embassy ever since.   

 Since WikiLeaks’ first publication of damning primary evidence of war crimes and  corruption, the Liberal, National and Labor Parties have maintained their hostility to  the work of Assange and his colleagues.    

 Australian politicians maintained their silence as WikiLeaks was subjected to a financial  blockade by Visa, Mastercard, Paypal and others, and did nothing to contest pre-emptive declarations of guilt by senior politicians in the US, UK and Sweden.   

 No Australian officials have sought to query or contest the increasingly erratic and  indefensible behaviour of Swedish prosecutors who have again delayed questioning Mr  Assange over serious, unrelated allegations dating back more than five years.     

 Despite the extraordinary pressure brought to bear by some of the most powerful  institutions on earth, WikiLeaks has continued to publish: leaked texts of the secret  Trans Pacific Partnership corporate rights agreement, safety risks of the UK Trident  nuclear weapons systems, SpyFiles documents relating to surveillance malware 

 marketed by Western security vendors, and details of an Australia-wide censorship  order for a serious corruption case involving Malaysia, Indonesia and Vietnam.   

 In mid-2013, WikiLeaks helped coordinate the safe passage of NSA contractor Edward  Snowden following his extraordinary revelations of illegal mass surveillance programs  in the US and allied countries including Australia.    

 Publishers, journalists and sources sometimes pay a high price for public interest  disclosures of truths that powerful people would prefer remain secret. The current  government has continued the former Government’s practice of excruciating  subservience to the US Government’s policy of vilification, intimidation and eventually  it is assumed, grand jury indictments brought against WikiLeaks staff.    

 EMBARGOED UNTIL 5.00am EST FRIDAY 19/06/15  Media Contact - Chris Redman on 0408 533 877    

 Chris Redman  Media Adviser & Digital Campaigner  Senator Scott Ludlam - Co Deputy Leader of the Australian Greens  P: (08) 9335 7477 | M: 0408 533 877 | www.greensmps.org.au   

