---
title: "The Senate must act after Government refuses to produce documents explaining bribe claims"
date: "2015-06-17"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211925484
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3899760%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Wednesday, 17 June 2015    

 The Senate must act after Government refuses to produce documents explaining bribe claims    

 Twenty-four hours after the Senate had passed the Order to Produce Documents, the Abbott  Government has tabled its response, refusing to reveal whether taxpayer funds were spent paying  off the crews of asylum seeker boats out on the high seas.   

 The Government has claimed public interest immunity on the grounds of national security.   

 "It is disappointing that the Government has continued to play the secrecy card. The Government is  treating the public with contempt and now too the Parliament,” Greens Immigration Spokesperson  Sarah Hanson-Young said today.   

 “It’s hard to believe that answering a straightforward question as to whether people traffickers were  paid cash to turn a boatload of asylum seekers back to Indonesia is a matter of national security - of  course it's not, and everyone knows it.   

 "The Senate will now have to decide what it will do in response to the Government’s refusal to  comply.   

 "Why should the Senate deal with any other issues from the Immigration Minister if he can't be  upfront with the Parliament or the public over such a serious matter?    

 "The Governments contempt for the public, the Parliament and truth must not go unchallenged.    

 "Australians have a right to know if their tax dollars are being used to fund potentially highly illegal  activities which could be breaching both national and international laws, not be continually  subjected to tricky weasel words.    

 “The refusal to answer this important question is telling. There is no low that they won’t stoop to  fulfil their ‘stop the boats’ mantra, even if it means breaking the law or trashing Australia's  relationship with Indonesia.”     

 

 Media Contact: Rachel Ryan 0427 604 760   

