---
title: "Transcript of press conference: private sector engagement launch, Sydney: 31 August 2015: private sector engagement in the aid program; air strikes in Syria; Cambodia refugee resettlement; the Treasurer; Dyson Heydon; Canning by-election"
date: "2015-08-31"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "private sector engagement in the aid program"
  - "air strikes in Syria"
  - "Cambodia refugee resettlement"
  - "the Treasurer"
  - "Dyson Heydon"
  - "Canning by-election"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/215658386
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4060692%22
---

  foreignminister.gov.au  http://foreignminister.gov.au/transcripts/Pages/2015/jb_tr_150831.aspx?w=tb1CaGpkPX%2FlS0K%2Bg9ZKEg%3D%3D



 Press conference - private sector engagement launch



 Subjects: Private sector engagement in the aid program, air strikes in Syria, Cambodia refugee resettlement, the



 Treasurer, Dyson Heydon, Canning by-election.



 Transcript, E&OE



 Sydney



 31 August 2015



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 Good morning. Thank you for being 



 here. I have just launched a Ministerial statement called



 Creating 



 Shared Value through Partnership which reflects the Australian 



 Government's commitment to working in



 partnership with the private sector 



 in the delivery of our foreign aid program. We know that the private 



 sector is



 essential to driving economic growth and economic growth 



 is the key to lifting standards of living and lifting people



 out of poverty in our region. So this partnership 



 between government, NGOs and the private sector will be part 



 of



 what we call the new aid paradigm - a new and creative and 



 innovative way of ensuring more effective aid delivery



 in our region.



 JOURNALIST 



 So this is 



 essentially pushing the responsibility for the aid budget onto the 



 private sector?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 Not at all. This is harnessing 



 the skills, the expertise, the understanding of supply chains, of the



 delivery of goods and services in our region - with the 



 government. Our aid program will continue, but what we will



 do is 



 leverage the skills and funding and resources of the private 



 sector with the Australian Government's



 substantial commitment 



 so that we can get better outcomes. The private sector is already 



 doing a lot in the



 development space. By partnering together we 



 can align our objectives and get better outcomes and so it's 



 a



 win/win for government, for NGOs, for the private sector, but 



 most importantly for the developing countries and the



 people within 



 those countries who have an opportunity to be lifted out 



 of poverty, to be living in a country with a



 sustainable economy 



 rather than relying on hand-outs. And the fact is foreign aid is 



 dwarfed by foreign direct



 investment, remittances and private 



 sector input and investment in countries. This is using our aid 



 budget in a



 much smarter and more creative way.



 JOURNALIST 



 Minister, why 



 should more European countries carry out air strikes against ISIL in 



 Iraq and Syria?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 Over 40 per cent of the people 



 currently seeking asylum in Europe are from Syria and we need a



 united front to defeat the terrorist organisations that are 



 driving the displacement of so many people. It's



 absolutely essential that ISIL or Daesh, Al Nusrah and other 



 terrorist organisations are contained and then



 defeated. They 



 are currently operating in Syria, in Iraq. They are 



 responsible for driving the majority of people out



 of this region 



 and people are seeking asylum in Europe. So it's quite 



 obvious that we need to work together in a



 global coalition to 



 defeat terrorism that is causing so much misery around the world.



 JOURNALIST 



 Which countries in 



 particular do you think could play a larger role?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 All countries that have an 



 interest in ensuring that people are not displaced and not persecuted



 and not subject to war and conflict would of course be welcome 



 to join the Coalition. Already there are about 60



 countries that 



 are providing support in one way or another to the US-led Coalition. 



 But there's more countries can



 do in terms of supporting the air 



 strikes which are proving effective in stopping Da’esh from 



 claiming territory off



 sovereign governments and from 



 inflicting so much barbaric violence on the populations.



 JOURNALIST 



 Today's announcement 



 is about using foreign aid more efficiently and yet today we're 



 hearing



 about Cambodia saying it's not going to take more than four 



 of the people who've been moved from Nauru and



 the 



 government has spent $4 million on that. Is that now a 



 collapsing deal?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 That is not correct. You are 



 relying on an alleged statement of one official. I had a very 



 positive



 meeting with Foreign Minister Hor Namhong in Kuala Lumpur 



 recently, on the sidelines of the East Asia Summit.



 We had a very 



 productive, constructive discussion about how Cambodia can continue 



 to work in partnership with



 the Australian Government 



 and others. Cambodia is part of the Bali Process. Cambodia 



 is committed to a



 regional solution and has committed through a 



 Memorandum of Understanding with the Australian Government 



 to



 resettle some asylum seekers who are found to be 



 genuine refugees. Cambodia is an aspiring country, it wishes



 to 



 increase its GDP, it wishes to harness the skills of foreign workers 



 and in this way they can resettle people into



 Cambodia and help boost 



 their GDP.



 JOURNALIST 



 And yet the human 



 rights organisations say that the human rights there are 



 being trammelled and



 that we shouldn't be supporting it?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 Human rights organisations are 



 very quick to continue to condemn countries for their past.



 Cambodia 



 is determined to put its past behind it, and to build its capacity to 



 be a developed country and just as



 other countries in South 



 East Asia have gone from developing to developed countries, and 



 they can be very



 difficult and painful journeys, so Cambodia and 



 other countries wish to become a developed country and we



 should give them 



 every support.



 JOURNALIST 



 How fast do you 



 think Cambodians will take on asylum seekers?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 Obviously Cambodia is determined 



 to ensure that the people they do take are integrated well into



 their society, into their communities and so that's what they 



 have done with the first four but we're working closely



 with them. As I said I had a very productive meeting with the Foreign 



 Minister in Kuala Lumpur recently.



 JOURNALIST 



 Joe Hockey still 



 seems to be a drag on the Government. Is it time to cut him loose?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 I think that instead of 



 criticising Joe Hockey, people should recognise the enormous task he 



 has



 in repairing the Budget that was so trashed by Labor in its 



 six years in office. Labor inherited in 2007 the very best



 set 



 of national financial accounts of any incoming government and yet Joe 



 Hockey as Treasurer inherited from



 Labor the very worst - 



 record debt, record deficits. Not only does Joe have to deal 



 with repairing the Budget, we're



 also dealing with 



 irresponsible Labor senators who are refusing to pass measures in the 



 Senate, including their



 own savings that they had identified. So Labor 



 should try and be part of the solution, accept the responsibility 



 that



 comes with having trashed the Budget and work with Joe Hockey 



 and with the government to find solutions.



 JOURNALIST 



 How would you 



 rate his performance out of 10?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 That's a ridiculous question. I 



 don't go around rating performances of journalists, I don't rate



 performances of actors. I'm not going to rate performances of my Cabinet 



 colleagues. That's nonsense.



 JOURNALIST 



 Is an early 



 federal election being considered for March next year?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 I don't believe so.



 JOURNALIST 



 Minister, 



 you've been very successful with the first roll-out in this 



 aid program. I just spoke with



 Westpac and for an initial investment 



 of $500,000 it's obviously providing dividends in aid support and for



 Westpac now as a commercial prospect. Do you think that's the 



 model you will use around the Asia Pacific to roll



 out a new 



 form of aid that is commercially viable and should 



 other countries follow suit?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 Well, that's a matter for 



 other countries. We work closely with aid agencies and 



 governments



 around the world to ensure that we get the most effective 



 and the most innovative ways of achieving development



 outcomes.



 We've had some 



 very successful partnerships - with Westpac, with ANZ, with Carnival 



 Cruises and with other



 companies who are operating in the areas where 



 we deliver aid, and together we've been able to maximise 



 our



 efforts to deliver better outcomes for the people in those 



 countries. So the Westpac example is a great one where



 we have helped 



 Westpac with its financial literacy operations. Westpac are bringing 



 more people into the banking



 system - about 80 per cent of the Pacific 



 are not involved in the formal banking system, they've never had 



 a bank



 account or credit or been able to borrow or expand businesses 



 on loans. So in this way, working with financial



 institutions such as 



 Westpac, we're able to introduce a whole new level of economic 



 activity that will underpin



 economic growth in these countries.



 JOURNALIST 



 Who would you 



 like to see replace Dyson Heydon if he stands down as Royal 



 Commissioner this



 afternoon?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 Those leading the charge against 



 Dyson Heydon have one motivation and that is to protect union



 officials who are guilty of corrupt behaviour at the expense of the 



 honest union members they were meant to be



 representing. Those who 



 are leading the charge against Dyson Heydon are determined to stop 



 an investigation



 into systemic corruption and bad behaviour on the 



 part of corrupt union bosses. The work of the Royal



 Commission must 



 go on already about 26 union bosses have been referred 



 for further investigation and



 prosecution. So the work is designed 



 to support honest union workers who've had their interests and their 



 funds



 ripped off by corrupt union bosses and no amount 



 of posturing on the part of Labor should prevent this 



 important



 work continuing.



 JOURNALIST 



 Does 



 Jeremy Stoljar have a case to answer as unions claim for 



 withholding correspondence he



 had with Dyson Heydon?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 I take no notice of the unions' 



 protestations in this regard. It's quite obvious that their sole



 motivation is to derail an investigation into corrupt, illegal union behaviour. 



 And Labor can express all the outrage



 they like, but until such time 



 as they focus on cleaning up the union movement from 



 the activities of corrupt union



 bosses they have no 



 credibility on this subject at all.



 JOURNALIST 



 You earlier gave 



 a good example of Coke in the distribution link. Would you be able to 



 repeat that?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 What I was saying is that by 



 harnessing the skills and expertise of the private sector, we may 



 well



 be able to get much more effective and efficient delivery 



 of fundamentals like pharmaceuticals into the more



 remote areas 



 of the Pacific, including in Papua New Guinea. Already I gave 



 that example and one of the



 companies operating in PNG has come 



 up to me and said that they take half empty trucks up into the remote



 areas of PNG and they would be able to work with us and with the 



 PNG Government to deliver basic supplies into



 these regions. 



 So it's this idea of partnering with the private sector who are 



 able to do things very effectively.



 Government doesn't have all the 



 answers, the private sector doesn't have all the answers but together 



 we can



 come up with solutions that work.



 JOURNALIST 



 Should Scott Morrison 



 take over as Treasurer if there is a swing against the Government 



 in the



 Canning by-election?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 These are all hypotheticals. 



 I'm working very hard with our outstanding candidate in Canning,



 Andrew Hastie, and I believe that the people of Canning will see in 



 him the kind of representative that will best



 serve their interests. 



 He has the character, the calibre of personality, he has 



 the temperament, he has the life



 experience to make him 



 an outstanding representative for the people of Canning.



 JOURNALIST 



 Is 



 that something being discussed by Cabinet Ministers?



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 No. Winning in Canning? Yes the 



 Canning matter is discussed in Cabinet. But is that what you



 were referring to?



 JOURNALIST 



 No I'm 



 talking about the possibility of Scott Morrison ...



 JULIE 



 BISHOP 



 Of course not.



 Media enquiries



 Minister's office: (02) 6277 7500



 DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



