---
title: "Minister Dutton unfit to make decisions relating to sexual assault victims"
date: "2015-10-17"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/217412427
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4143391%22
---

 Saturday, 17 October 2015 

 Minister Dutton unfit to make decisions relating to sexual assault victims 

 The Australian Greens have called on the Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull to intervene in the  treatment given to refugee women on Nauru who have been raped and assaulted following the  secret deportation of a young refugee woman 'Abyan' who was raped on Nauru and is now  pregnant.  

 "There needs to be an independent investigation into the treatment of this young woman - including  whether Minister Dutton is fit to make decisions relating to the needs and treatment of sexual  assault victims," Greens spokesperson for Immigration Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said today.  

 "It is hard to fathom a more brutal way of treating a scared young woman who has been raped and  is struggling with the decision to terminate the pregnancy. 

 "It is clear that Minister Dutton is incapable of understanding the complexities facing a young  woman in this circumstance.  

 "It is time for the Prime Minister to intervene. I urge Mr Turnbull to require Minister Dutton to  undergo intensive training on the needs and medical care of sexual assault victims and termination  issues, or alternatively to relinquish his personal powers to someone who does. 

 "We have to remember this young woman fled the abuse and torture of warlords in Somalia. Now,  under Australia's care she's been raped on Nauru and has been denied the appropriate medical care  and denied access to legal help. It is nothing short of shameful.  

 "The only explanation for treating her so callously is to make an example of her, so that no other  women on Nauru dare speak out or ask for help.  

 "Minister Dutton is the remaining festering sore of the Abbott days. Mr Turnbull has to decide  whether he wants that type of brutality toward women and children in his Government, and if not,  Peter Dutton must go.” 

