---
title: "Speech at the launch of Australia's candidacy for membership of the United Nation's Human Rights Council"
date: "2015-10-19"
creators:
  - "Brandis, George"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/217412382
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4143462%22
---

 

 

 SENATOR THE HON GEORGE BRANDIS QC  ATTORNEY-GENERAL   

 

 Monday 19 October 2015 

 SPEECH AT THE LAUNCH OF AUSTRALIA’S CANDIDACY FOR MEMBERSHIP  OF THE UNITED NATION’S HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL   DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE, CANBERRA 

 Can I begin by acknowledging the traditional custodians of the land on which we meet and  pay my respects to their elders past and present. Can I acknowledge my friend and  parliamentary colleague, Julie Bishop, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and other members of  Parliament, in particular members of the Parliament’s Human Rights Committee and Foreign  Affairs, Defence and Trade Committee who join us this morning. May I acknowledge the  Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, His Excellency Pedro Villagra, Ambassador of Argentina, and  the many other members from the Diplomatic Corps who are assembled here this morning.  Can I acknowledge Professor Gillian Triggs, the President of the Australian Human Rights  Commission and Mr Tim Wilson, Australia’s Human Rights Commissioner. May I  acknowledge the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr  Peter Varghese and the Secretary of my own Department, Mr Chris Moraitis.  And last but  not least can I acknowledge the many officers of the International Law and Human Rights  Division of my Department, the Attorney-General’s Department, who will have a vital role in  prosecuting Australia’s candidacy for the Human Rights Council in 2018-2020. 

 So much of what I wanted to say has already been said by my colleague, Julie Bishop, so it  merely falls to me to support and add to her remarks. Australia has always been a liberal  democracy. In fact, Australia is one of the few nations in the world which has only ever been  a liberal democracy. We have been a liberal democracy for as long as we have been a nation.  And, therefore, certain assumptions about, and a commitment to, human rights is essential to  the very nature of what it means to be an Australian.  

 In this, the year in which we commemorate the 800th Anniversary of the Magna Carta, we, in  particular, celebrate those liberal democratic values - the freedom of speech; of freely elected  parliaments; representative and responsible government; the social, political, economic rights  of the individual; the right to be free from unlawful discrimination.  

 

 Across the entire panoply of human rights Australia has not only been an activist, but those  rights are integral to what we Australians regard as our sense of nationhood. And not only is  Australia one of the world’s great liberal democracies, we are also, as the Foreign Minister  has said, one of the world’s most successful multicultural societies.  And we are also, it  should never be forgotten, one of the world’s most generous societies to displaced people  who seek to come to Australia under humanitarian and refugee programs. We take in more  people in need as a proportion of our population than almost any other nation in the world.  Occasionally, and Minister Bishop alluded to this, there may be domestic political debate  about human rights, and that is a good thing that there should be such debate, but that debate  takes place against the background of Australia being one of the world’s most rights  respecting, one of the world’s most tolerant and one of the world’s most generous nations. 

 Since the election of the Coalition Government in 2013 we have pursued an ambitious human  rights agenda. We have, I believe with success, enlarged the scope and focus of the  Australian Human Rights Commission so that it is no longer merely an anti-discrimination  commission, but a commission whose role is to be the trustee of all human rights, including  importantly, but not exclusively, the right to freedom from discrimination. We have  encouraged renewed debate in Australia about the civil and political rights. Only last month I  received a report from the Australian Law Reform Commission which reviewed the entire  Commonwealth statutes against a benchmark of compliance with traditional common law  rights and liberties. We have, as Minister Bishop has said, been active in the international  arena in relation to many human rights causes, in particular our campaign against the death  penalty and the promotion of the economic and social rights of women and girls. 

 Domestically we have pursued a busy agenda, led by the Human Rights Commissioner, Tim  Wilson, to identify and eliminate any remaining forms of discrimination against gay people.  Led by Mick Gooda, we have engaged constructively with the Indigenous community, in  particular to ensure that Australia’s Indigenous people are empowered, not only socially and  politically, but also economically so that the rights that they have in their land and in their  property are real, realisable rights, not merely theoretical, legal rights, and that of course in  advance of the national referendum on the constitutional recognition of Indigenous peoples  that will take place in the next term of the Parliament. 

 As a Liberal, I am proud that Australia has been so active, both domestically and  internationally in the promotion of a vigorous, ambitious human rights agenda. Australia’s  candidacy to become a member of the United Nation’s Human Rights Council for the 2018-2020 term is the most natural thing in the world for a country which, at its core, is a nation  built on a belief in, and a commitment to, the human rights of all, the human rights of all  Australians and the human rights of all the peoples of the world. 

 It is with great pleasure that I join my colleague Julie Bishop in co-launching this important  campaign. 

 [ENDS] 

