---
title: "Queensland kick starts Refugee Week celebrations"
date: "2015-06-14"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211913394
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3894347%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton 

 Queensland kick starts Refugee Week celebrations 

 Sunday, 14 June 2015 

 To kick start Refugee Week today, 51 people who arrived through the Humanitarian Programme  have been welcomed by Australia and become Australian citizens.   

 The Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton presided over the citizenship  ceremony at WELCOMEfest in Brisbane today.   

 Mr Dutton said Refugee Week is an opportunity to acknowledge Australia’s successful settlement of  about 825,000 refugees through the Humanitarian Programme.   

 “Our newest citizens come from 16 different countries including Somalia, Myanmar, the Democratic  Republic of Congo and Afghanistan,” Mr Dutton said.    

 “WELCOMEfest is an opportunity for Brisbane to celebrate the different cultures that make Australia  who we are and enrich every community.   

 “I am proud that Australia’s Humanitarian Programme is on track to offer 13,750 places, which  includes a minimum of 11,000 places for the offshore component for people in humanitarian need  overseas.”   

 The Government has increased the Woman at Risk programme to 1,000 places. This programme is a  very important component of the Humanitarian Programme as it protects refugee women and their  children who are at risk, and have been victims of gender-based violence, exploitation and abuse.   

 The Government has also responded to the call from the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees (UNHCR) for a coordinated resettlement response to the Syrian refugee crisis, with a multi-year commitment for Syrian refugees of a minimum of 4,500 places over three years from 2014-15.   

 This year will mark the resettlement of 100,000 refugees from the Himalayan Kingdom of Bhutan  living in refugee camps in Nepal as part of the largest UNHCR-led international resettlement of its  kind.   

 Australia celebrates its part by successfully resettling almost 5,500 refugees from Bhutan - making  Australia the third largest resettlement country.   

 Refugee Week is being celebrated around the country between Sunday 14 June and Saturday 20  June to coincide with international events marking World Refugee Day on 20 June.   

 

