---
title: "Government must act ethically on PNG"
date: "2016-04-28"
creators:
  - "Madigan, John"
source: "Office of MADIGAN, SEN JOHN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/227194200
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4527426%22
---

 Senator John Madigan  Independent Senator for Victoria 

 --- Media Release ---  GOVERNMENT MUST ACT ETHICALLY ON PNG 

 28 April 2016  

 Independent Senator for Victoria John Madigan today called on the government to take 

 responsibility and immediately address the decision of the Papua New Guinea Supreme Court.  

 

 Senator Madigan said the government needed to “man up” and called for the immediate release 

 of the 850 men to Australia.  

 

 “The government’s policy on asylum seekers has always rested on the idea that we must treat 

 those who arrive on our shores as harshly as possibly as a deterrent to others. Whether or not this 

 is effective, it is immoral.  

 

 “Let’s not prevaricate with the lives of 850 men. The government needs to get on the ground in 

 PNG and they need to face up to the reality that these men need to be resettled in Australia. This 

 needs to happen now. Not in a couple of days, not in a week. Now.  

 

 “These men are facing harsh conditions and great uncertainty. We’re talking about the lives of 850 

 people. We’re talking about a decision that can have devastating effects on each of those lives.  

 

 “The decision of the PNG Supreme Court has presented the government with an opportunity to 

 act ethically and do what is right. What is right is to address this gross injustice. Bring these 850 

 men to our shores and use this opportunity as a first step to ending off-shore processing for good.  

 

 “I seriously hope that the government is not considering dragging PNG down the muddy 

 international law path. Let us not do what we did to Timor Leste, to another of our small 

 neighbours.  

 

 “We have seen so many political games already played this year. The government needs to act 

 now.”  

 

 Senator Madigan said he would be watching the government’s next step very closely.  

 

 Media inquiries: Brendan Gullifer 0428 340 755 

