---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Queenstown, Tasmania: 12 November 2016: Tasmanian Labor conference; asylum seeker resettlement"
date: "2016-11-12"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Tasmanian Labor conference"
  - "asylum seeker resettlement"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/237228392
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4934720%22
---

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  QUEENSTOWN, TAS  SATURDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2016  

 SUBJECTS: Tasmanian Labor conference; asylum seeker resettlement 

 JUSTINE KEAY, MEMBER FOR BRADDON: Well good morning everyone and  welcome to my electorate of Braddon here in Queenstown. And I think as all the  delegates drove into Queenstown yesterday and this morning, I think they were all  quite amazed - particularly those who hadn't been here before - the natural beauty  that we have here on the West Coast. The West Coast has been an area that has  had some challenges in recent times and I think it's fantastic that we can as a Labor  Party descend on Queenstown and talk about all those issues that matter to  Tasmanians. And I'm really pleased to be joined by our State Labor  Parliamentarians, led by our Leader, Bryan Green, and our federal colleagues here,  with the new Member for Bass and the new Member for Lyons and also Julie Collins  from Franklin, our Senators, our wonderful Labor Senators here, and of course,  Tanya Plibersek, the Deputy Leader of our Party. It is absolutely thrilling that we can  have a group of fantastic, talented people, our delegates, our trade union movement,  our rank and file members come here to Queenstown to an area where we will be  listening, we will be debating some important issues, and certainly in the lead up to  the state election, be taking forward some amazing policies because we consult with  people, unlike the Liberal Party. We're here consulting and talking and debating  these issues out, and I'm very pleased to hand over to Tanya to talk further. Thank  you.  

 BRYAN GREEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION TASMANIA: Well thank you so  much to Justine for welcoming me. Obviously we're all very proud of Justine  representing Braddon as a Labor Member, as we are all of the Labor people or  personnel representing the other electorates. Who would have thought last year that  there wouldn't be a Liberal representing a seat in Tasmania, it's quite amazing. And  that's why it's important that we get the message across to the Tasmanian people  that the Labor Party at a state and federal level are wanting to listen to and 

 understand what the Tasmanian people want. And there's no better opportunity to do  that than in a region like Queenstown - the West Coast which has done it tough in  recent times. There is no doubt that this economy has struggled and it's important, I  think, in the context of global change that's going on that the Labor Party be at a  point where we are in a position to listen to the regional voice of our state and make  sure that we take policies forward that give effect to meaningful employment and  opportunity for our regions. So we're genuinely very pleased to be here - this was my  call to come to Queenstown, I'm very happy that the Labor Party has supported me  in that. And already the feedback from Queenstown and the West Coast has been  fantastic. We've just had the Mountain Heights School sing for us this morning, now  the Mayor will welcome us to the town. The Labor Party is effectively "back in town",  and I'm looking forward to this conference, so that we can go forward to 2018 with a  positive sense of achievement when it comes to our policy development. Thank you.  

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well thanks so  much Justine, and thank you so much Bryan for those words. I want to say how  fantastic it is to be here with such a strong Labor team. A strong team at a state  level, and a very strong team at a federal level. At the last federal election the team  behind me made a clean sweep of the seats here in Tasmania. As Bryan said, not a  single Liberal left in the House of Representatives in Canberra. And the reason is a  very clear one: the people who were going to Canberra, from the North of Tasmania  in particular, were going to Canberra and forgetting about the lives of the people that  they represent here in Tasmania. We've got three fantastic new MPs to join our team  in Canberra. Three people who will listen, who understand the communities that sent  them to Canberra. We're here in Queenstown with Justine - she knows this area so  well, and she is so determined to make sure that we tackle the things that matter to  the people of Queenstown, to the people of the West Coast, to the people right  across Tasmania: jobs, decent quality, secure employment. Jobs. The sort of jobs  that can mean that you can support a family, that you can live in the community you  love with confidence, to know that there is a future for you and for your kids, knowing  that there will be secure employment for years to come. And of course the services  that people rely on: health and education. The Liberals in Canberra cut $1.2 billion  from the Tasmanian health system. The Liberals in Canberra cut $60 million from the  school system down here in Tasmania. People rely on the health and education  system to have decent quality of life. When I was down here campaigning with our  new federal team I met Tasmanians right across the state who told me how they rely  on the health and education systems, and the difference that those cuts were  making. With Justine I met a young mum who wanted to get a TAFE certificate so  that she could support her and her daughter better. She couldn't afford to go to  TAFE, so she was locked out of work because she couldn't get a basic qualification  that would have helped her better support her daughter, not just in the short term,  but throughout the course of both of their lives. It is an appalling thing when you're  locking a young mum out of the workforce because TAFE has become too  expensive. Or healthcare: I met another woman, actually with Bryan, who had been  diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis when she was about 21 years old. She was in  her 40s now, she had two teenage children, and she was skipping doctors  appointments; she was choosing between the different medicines that her doctors  were prescribing because she couldn't afford to buy them all on her disability support  pension. And what was the response of the Federal Liberals to this? More cuts. More  pressure on these families. Well Labor understands. We get it. We know that the first 

 and most important thing that we need to do in Tasmania: make sure that people  have decent, secure employment so they can support themselves and their families.  But they also need that strong safety net: an education system that educates their  kids for the jobs of the future; a health system that is there for them when they need  it. Thanks. Any questions? 

 JOURNALIST: So Bryan, state election in the not-too-distant future. What are you  going to be doing today to rally the troops ahead of that?  

 GREEN: In the first place I think the important message is that we are in regional  Tasmania listening to the Tasmanian people, formulating policies that connect with  our state overall. Our message will be a strong one around employment, the  development of policies that provide for long term employment opportunities for our  state. We'll also be concentrating on making sure that we consolidate the important  issues, like health and education.  

 JOURNALIST: Ok, so we're on the West Coast. Do you see Braddon as an  electorate where you can pick up seats at the state election?  

 GREEN: Absolutely. There's no doubt that we can pick up seats at the state election  here in Braddon, and in fact right across the state. I think that the federal election  was a good pointer to the fact that people are prepared to vote Labor if you put  forward good, solid policies, and there is no doubt that Tasmania always does better  under a Labor government. We have in the past developed our state in a way that  provides great opportunity - you've only got to look at the hydro systems that we've  developed, the wind energy that was developed, the irrigation systems that were  developed, working in partnership with the Commonwealth, the NBN rollout that has  stalled under the Liberals. Labor thinks about the future, and we put policies in place  that actually allow for the development of our state in a sensible and sustainable  way. And tomorrow I'll be making some announcements about how we will work  constructively with the West Coast to fulfil our obligation to them, and that is to  provide the best opportunity possible for them. 

 JOURNALIST: Is it realistic though to think that you will pick up enough seats, given  the current division? 

 GREEN: Well of course we're positive about the opportunity and we'll go into the  election, whenever is it, with a strong policy base that allows the Tasmanian people  to make a decision based on what we're offering. And you can see by the Liberal's  performance in Tasmania effectively they do nothing; they've been good at cutting  ribbons for projects that were put in place in the past, but they've got no idea of  providing for a sensible and sustainable future for our state - their policy agenda  effectively is to get as close as they possibly can to the Labor Party, the centre, they  said. They want to out-Labor Labor. Well I'll be standing in front of the Labor  conference today and tomorrow, and I'll be standing proudly as a Labor member  wanting to put forward policies that will take our state forward.  

 JOURNALIST: Have any of your current team in the lower house communicated to  you that they're not going to be running in 2018? 

 GREEN: Look, in the end we will have a strong team of candidates for the next state  election, without any doubt.   

 JOURNALIST: So that's a yes, then?  

 GREEN: You already know that, so people discussed it openly in the past. But I will  allow people to make their own decisions in their own time around those issues.  

 JOURNALIST:  When will you be announcing new blood that will be coming  through? 

 GREEN:  Well already we've got people who are being talked about as potential  candidates for the Labor Party. The pre-selection process is an important one for us  to get on with. We will be doing obviously that next year for the State Election - but  importantly this year we will be concentrating on the Upper House seats that will be  contested in May next year and we see the Labor Party putting forward strong  candidates and give ourselves the best opportunity to win more Upper House seats. 

 JOURNALIST:   On the motion on onshore processing will you be supporting that  given the sale of Pontville? 

 GREEN:  Look our position with respect to bringing people to Tasmania has been  clear. That is that we want more refugees to come to Tasmania. Our doors should be  open to assist people to settle here.  We know that there is terrible conflict around  the world and from our perspective Tasmania is an open place where we welcome  refugees. You can see that the multicultural nature of Tasmania is improving the way  that we all live so from my perspective I support people coming here and I will do  what I can as a leader to make sure that people agree with that on into the future. 

 PLIBERSEK:  OK any Federal questions? 

 JOURNALIST :  So Shayne Neumann has said that Labor would support the  resettlement deal with the US, I suppose contingent on the arrangements. What  arrangements would Labor be looking for to support that?  

 PLIBERSEK: Well we very much hope that the reports we've read in the media, that  there is an arrangement to get people of Manus Island and Nauru are actually  true.  These people have been on Manus Island and Nauru much too long and we're  coming up to over three years now and it is (inaudible) so slow in finding third  country resettlement countries for the people on Manus Island and Nauru.  You can  see the human misery that has been caused by the very long time that these people  have had this uncertainty in their lives.  As far as details of arrangements go, we  don't know. I mean this is another classic Peter Dutton special where we asked him  last week is their an arrangement with a third country and he said I'm not going to tell  you. So we read about it in the newspaper, we don't know any details, we don't know  when it's likely to happen, we don't know what any of the conditions are. We'll look at  that, as we always do with anything proposed by the Government, in a sober, proper  way. We have processes within the Labor Party, those processes have served us  well. We take things through our Shadow Cabinet and through our Caucus, we make  sensible decisions because we take our time and look at them properly. 

 JOURNALIST:  Are their any specific resettlement arrangements that you're hoping  to see there or that you would like to see there? 

 PLIBERSEK:  Well we want to see people off Manus Island and Nauru because they  have been there for too long, so that is at the top of our list. As for any other  conditions or arrangements we will look at that when they're proposed.  One thing I  would say about this is, it is pretty extraordinary - we are hearing suggestions that it  might be the US, it might be countries in our region. It's about time that Peter Dutton  and Malcolm Turnbull explained why they voted against what looks like exactly the  same arrangement that Labor proposed with Malaysia. The Government continues  to talk about the number of people who drowned at sea - it was a tragedy that  occurred while we were in Government, around half of those people actually  drowned at sea after the Liberals rejected the Malaysia arrangement. Tony Abbott  has apologised for that, he has admitted that he was wrong to do that. It would be  about time that Peter Dutton admitted he was wrong to do that, that it would have  been much better if he had accepted the Malaysia arrangement much earlier than,  well if he had accepted it rather than vote against it. 

 JOURNALIST:  What will you be telling Tasmanian Labor members today about  Labor's position in the State? 

 PLIBERSEK:  Well I think Tasmania is a fantastic state. I love coming here. I love  coming here for my family holidays, I loved coming here as a Minister, when I was  the Housing Minister we worked on homelessness projects, rebuilding public  housing.  As Health Minister we invested in the upgrade of the Royal Hobart Hospital  and the Northern Comprehensive Cancer Centre and a range of other health  facilities across the state. It is a state that is a great place to live as long as you've  got a job and as long as we continue to invest in those services that people rely  on.  And I'll be sending a very strong message that it is only Labor that gets that.  It's  only Labor that's prepared to work on where the jobs are coming from in the future  and it's only Labor that is prepared to continue to support decent health and  education services - proper infrastructure investment for the people of Tasmania.  

 JOURNALIST:  Would Labor be willing to support the Government's changes to  visas for asylum seekers now that the USA deal is on the table? 

 PLIBERSEK:  Well they still haven't explained why this is necessary. I mean it just  seems like a nonsense proposition.  There is no indication from the Government of  why such an arrangement would be necessary. It really is ridiculous. Say it is true  that this arrangement with the US exists; say it's true that someone that's on Nauru  at the moment ends up a US citizen - the idea that they can't come here in forty  years time as a tourist is just nonsense. And impossible to imagine how that would  be policed or ensured by our two Governments, it is just another knuckle-headed  proposal from Peter Dutton. 

 JOURNALIST:  If asylum seekers think that by trying to get to Australia by boat they  could actually end up in the US, do you think that could potentially incentivise them  and make them want to do that? 

 PLIBERSEK:  We are absolutely committed to stopping people coming to Australia  by boat. It is a dangerous journey. It's a dangerous journey that is supported by  criminal syndicates that profit from the misery of desperate people.  So there is no  scenario that we allow the boats to restart, for that exploitation to restart.  Just a few  months ago Peter Dutton was claiming that he had stopped the boats. If he has  stopped the boats then he really doesn't need this latest piece of nonsense  legislation.  

 JOURNALIST:  What did you think about the motion in relation to Tasmania  adopting onshore processing, do you think that is something realistic given that we  don't have Pontville anymore? 

 PLIBERSEK:  Look that is a matter for the Tasmanian Labor Party, I'm not going to  make comments on the motions here at Conference. But I know that what matters  here are jobs, services, and I also know that Tasmanians are very welcoming  people.  You have got great examples of refugees who have settled in Tasmania and  made a fantastic contribution to local society and the local economy.  

 JOURNALIST:  Why was Bill Shorten unable to make it to Queenstown today? 

 PLIBERSEK:  Well he's a Victorian and the Victorian's have their State Conference  this weekend so he'll be at his own State Conference this weekend.  And actually I  would have fought him to come here, I do really like Queenstown and I do love  coming to Tasmania.  Thank you. 

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350    

 

