---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra, ACT: 18 May 2016: Port Botany announcement; comments by Peter Dutton; David Feeney; negative gearing; PEFO; safe schools"
date: "2016-05-18"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE"
subjects:
  - "Port Botany announcement"
  - "comments by Peter Dutton"
  - "David Feeney"
  - "negative gearing"
  - "PEFO"
  - "safe schools"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/228179007
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4571576%22
---

 

 

 THE HON TONY BURKE MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR WATSON 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 18 MAY 2016   

 SUBJECT/S: Port Botany Announcement; Comments by Peter Dutton; David Feeney; Negative Gearing;  PEFO; Safe Schools.   

 TONY BURKE: Later today Bill Shorten will shortly be making an announcement about Port Botany. I know very well,  as someone who's lived in Sydney all my life, the significance of Port Botany and the significance of heavy vehicles  clogging up the M5, simply because we've had bottlenecks there, where we needed the rail line to be duplicated. Bill  Shorten will be making the announcement later today. But be clear: investing in this sort of infrastructure creates jobs.  It eases bottlenecks, and it puts Australia in a better position to be able to trade with the world.   

 This morning, as I've been watching the news. Over and over again I've been seeing the comments from Peter  Dutton. I've got to say, every time I watch them, I learn nothing about refugees, but I learn a lot about the Turnbull  Government.   

 There's been a conversation almost every day of this campaign about each leader being questioned about  candidates they might have and about comments that might have been made. This bloke's just not some new  candidate, he's a member of Malcolm Turnbull's Cabinet. He is the person who's meant to be responsible for this  Government's attitude towards refugees.   

 Malcolm Turnbull can't get out of today without being very clear whether or not the Minister for Immigration speaks on  behalf of the Turnbull Government on immigration policy. Whether or not the Minister for Immigration is the person  who provides the views of the Government on immigrants. Malcolm Turnbull cannot dodge this.   

 What we saw last night, and what's been replaying this morning from Peter Dutton, is something which runs against  the data, runs against the lived experience, plays into some sort of strange crazy political strategy the Liberal Party  might think is clever. But ultimately on this, all roads lead back to Malcolm Turnbull.   

 Malcolm Turnbull decided Peter Dutton would be the person who would be in charge of enunciating to the Australian  people and the world what the Turnbull Government thinks of refugees who make a home in Australia. Refugees who  have a new life in Australia. Malcolm Turnbull needs to make clear today whether or not his own Immigration Minister  speaks for him.   

 JOURNALIST: In regard to Peter Dutton's comment, he was talking and referring to cost of increasing Australia's  humanitarian intake, saying it would put pressure on Medicare services and on Centrelink. Isn't that a fair comment to  make, given the cost of increasing the intake to 12,000 Syrians - that would come with a cost figure wouldn’t it?   

 BURKE: Peter Dutton didn't only refer to the fact anybody who becomes an Australian citizen relies on Medicare. Of  course anyone who becomes an Australian citizen relies on Medicare. I don't think the alarm that's been across the  airwaves this morning has anything to do with a statement about Medicare. What it does have a lot to do with, is a  statement about the education levels of refugees, statements that go completely against the grain of the data the  Government would carry on its own figures.   

 An underlying attitude - If Malcolm Turnbull wants to back in Peter Dutton today, then let him do that. If this does  reflect the attitude of the Turnbull Government, then Malcolm Turnbull should be upfront today and own last night's  comments by Peter Dutton. Peter Dutton has made the comments, this isn't a time when he wasn't sure whether or  not there was a boom mic overhead, this time he knew he was on air. He's made the comments in the full gaze of the 

 national media. Malcolm Turnbull needs to answer the simple question: were those the views of the Turnbull  Government?   

 JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed David Feeney couldn't remember the $2 million-odd house he bought?   

 BURKE: Everybody should declare anything that's meant to be put on the register within the timeframe, which is a  month. That's what's meant to happen. That's what everybody should do. David Feeney didn't do that. It's been  brought to his attention. He's acted immediately. David Feeney himself has said this is something that should've been  put on the record immediately in terms of the Register of Members' Interests.   

 JOURNALIST: He also said he was negative gearing that $2.3 million property. That goes against what you guys  have been talking about for a couple of months now about some of the excesses of negative gearing.   

 BURKE: The argument you put there is an argument put this morning by Mathias Cormann. I find Mathias Cormann  putting that argument this morning extraordinary. Effectively, what he was arguing, was our negative gearing policy  should be retrospective. Effectively this morning, Mathias Cormann was arguing, for Labor to be consistent, we  should have a retrospective policy on negative gearing. We should do with negative gearing what they are doing with  superannuation.   

 Note to Mathias Cormann, note to the Turnbull Government: we don't believe in retrospective taxes. We think when  people set up their investments under the law of the day, then you don't change the rules from under them in that  way. It's also the case people can negative gear into the future, but we want any of that in the future to be channelled  towards the part of the housing industry that creates jobs. The part of the housing industry that delivers new supply.  That is the part of the housing industry where negative gearing would still apply to, which is new build.   

 JOURNALIST: So why would David Feeney not declare this then? What would be not declare a $2.3 million house?   

 BURKE: It was an error, it was an omission.   

 JOURNALIST: I know it was an error, but why?   

 BURKE: David Feeney dealt with that this morning on the interview I heard, where he said he neglected to do it. It  should've been done. The moment it's been brought to his attention, he's acted.   

 JOURNALIST: It’s a marginal seat as well. The Greens are snapping at his heels. This could play badly in that seat  in Melbourne?   

 BURKE: He should've put it on the register. He says that, everybody says that. It should've happened. The moment  it's been brought to his attention, he's acted.   

 JOURNALIST: Mathias Cormann conceded this morning no-one knows what the iron ore price will be in four years'  time. Fair enough. But how can both sides of politics make promise expanding 10 years when you don't know what  the Budget's going to be in four years?   

 BURKE: On the 10 year projections, the pre-election forecasts last [election], when they were released by Treasury  and Finance, was the first time we'd started to have serious 10 year projections being included. You have to  acknowledge, there is a limit to 10 year projections. Some of the fluctuations and some of the underlying assumptions  of a Budget, like you have referred to in your question, go to that point. It's also the case if you don't do long-term  planning, you would never deal with the structural deficit.   

 Negative gearing is a perfect example. If you do as Labor has done and you have a commitment, different to how the  Liberals approach these issues, but you have a commitment we're not going to have retrospective taxation. That  means, on the change, you don't make a whole lot of money for the Budget in the first four years. It's only as new  properties come on-line you start to see the shift because you've grandfathered all existing properties. The change in  Government revenue takes time to flow through. But over 10 years, you can see you've made a significant structural  improvement to the Budget. Similarly, the superannuation changes Labor put forward, which have been out there for  more than a year and which no one had laid a glove on. Over the first few years, not large amounts of revenue. But  when you look at it over 10 years, you see you've made a structural improvement to the Budget.   

 So the significance of the 10 year forecasts always has to take into account and always has to be read with the  knowledge underlying assumptions will change. But it's also the case, if you only ever take a short-term view, you  won't have the courage to make the structural changes we need to have for the Budget.   

 Added to that, as a final part of that answer, if I may, it is also the case from the moment the Budget was brought  down, Labor viewed a number of assumptions, including the iron ore assumption, as nothing short of heroic. Chris  Bowen went into this in some detail at the National Press Club. The fact the Government is now dealing with this is  only, and is having to come to terms with this, is only because of the Charter of Budget Honesty, not because they 

 were being realistic in their assumptions in the Budget.   

 JOURNALIST: Just about that - you're saying Chris Bowen is taking that into account in terms of the promises the  Federal Opposition is making? The iron ore price was projected to be around $40 it’s now around $30 a tonne. Has  that been taken into account now in terms of the Federal Opposition's costings?   

 BURKE: We've said we would do two things: In the first instance, we will soon have, independent of Government, the  assumptions brought down in the pre-election forecasts, where the Minister can't influence it. It comes down, brought  down jointly by the secretaries of the departments of Treasury and Finance, that will come out on Friday we've been  advised. So that will be when we see those numbers free from any interference of Government.   

 JOURNALIST: So that would mean you would be in a position to change some of those promises or change some of  your own assumptions based on those figures?   

 BURKE: We’ve been very cautious in making sure we’ve done what no Opposition has done in living memory, that is  we’ve been announcing the improvements to the Budget bottom line before we’ve been announcing the expenditure.   

 Normally, and you will remember previous elections where oppositions announce all their spending and then put their  tax policy forward very late in the campaign. We’ve done the opposite. We started announcing our tax changes a full  12 months ago. We’ve been very responsible here in making sure we put in our improvements to the Budget bottom  line well in advance of our expenditure. Anything, in terms of the assumptions on which to rely, will come down in  the pre-election forecast   

 JOURNALIST: So you’ve got enough of a buffer? Just in case?   

 BURKE: I am very confident of the fiscal position we are in. Very confident. I’ve seen each day, Mathias Cormann,  each day for about three years Mathias Cormann gives the same press conference where he says “jobs growth”  “Labor bad” “black hole” “jobs growth” and he continues to give the media conference every day.   

 When he talks about the Budget “black hole”, he invents Labor promises. They’ve been making claims saying some  measures have been blocked in the Senate, when some of those measures haven’t even been put before the  Parliament. They’ve invented Labor policy, costed it and said “oh look at how expensive this is”. That’s been the  approach of Mathias Cormann to this. In contrast, we’ve been very responsible as an Opposition, as an alternative  Government, in making sure we announce our improvements to the Budget bottom line well in advance of  announcing expenditure   

 JOURNALIST: On Safe Schools, will a future Labor Government reverse the changes we are seeing to that  particular program by the Federal Government?   

 BURKE: This program started under Labor. Labor has always supported the program. We will be making our  announcements on it later. But be in no doubt here, Labor has always supported this program.   

 JOURNALIST: So, you’re keeping it open to reverse some of those changes?   

 BURKE: I’m not going to make a policy announcement today because there’s a story in the paper. Labor’s record on  this particular program is pretty clear.   

 Ok? Thanks very much.   

 ENDS   

 

 

 

