---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 8 November 2016: superannuation; same-sex marriage; refugees; back-packer tax; 18C; Day/Culleton"
date: "2016-11-08"
creators:
  - "Gallagher, Katy"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "superannuation"
  - "same-sex marriage"
  - "refugees"
  - "back-packer tax"
  - "18C"
  - "Day/Culleton"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/236786033
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4922937%22
---

 

 SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL  SERVICES  SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  TUESDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2016   

 Subjects: Superannuation, Same-Sex Marriage, Refugees, Back-packer tax, 18C,  Day/Culleton    

 SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL  SERVICES: Today Labor will be announcing a superannuation reform package which is  both fairer in terms of how it deals with superannuation tax concessions but also better  for budget repair.  We are constantly lectured by this government about budget repair  the package that Labor has agreed to will actually improve the budget over the forward  estimates by about $1.4 billion and over the medium term by about $18.9 billion.  We  are hopeful the government will consider these proposals put forward by Labor and will  assess their superannuation package against these when they release it, presumably  before the end of this year. In terms of superannuation, they announced a position in  the budget after saying they would never touch superannuation, the Treasurer then had  to spend four or five months wooing the backbench and compromising with the  backbench to actually even get a package of superannuation through the Party Room,  so who knows actually how this package will be introduced when the legislation is  finalised but in good faith Labor is putting forward these suggestions.  We believe there  is room to make some minor amendments to the package overall that will make it fairer  and improve budget repair. Happy to take questions.    

 JOURNALIST:  What do you think the chances are that we will seeing same sex  marriage within this term of government with the plebiscite being blocked last night?    

 GALLAGHER:  We should see same sex marriage by the end of the year.  There is  absolutely no reason why a free vote on the marriage equality bill and there are plenty  of them around drafted and ready to go can’t be put through both houses of Parliament  by the end of the year.  This is a matter that has been on the public agenda, certainly in  terms of my own political career on the political agenda since the early 2000's.  In the 

 ACT, we took this matter to the High Court back in 2013/2014 the High Court found that  the power to resolve this issue rests with the federal parliament.  It was very clear in its  decision and since then we have had two years of conservative backlash against any  reform to marriage equality. We know for a fact that Malcolm Turnbull supported a free  vote on marriage equality, we know that he supposedly supports marriage equality yet  we have the Prime Minister of this country unable to bring forward marriage equality  laws that will address the fundamental discrimination that exists across this country.  So  there is no reason, now the Plebiscite Bill was done, it was rejected by the Senate and it  is time to allow a free vote and get on with it.    

 JOURNALIST:  You wanted it to happen before the end of the year but how is it going  to happen before the end of the year? 

 GALLAGHER:  Well the Prime Minister needs to take control.  I mean this is an issue  that the Australian community wants dealt with.  They don't see it as something that  should be consuming all this time.  We know from all of the published data that  overwhelmingly that the Australian community supports marriage equality.  We know  that there are plenty politicians in the conservative side of politics that support marriage  equality. Put it to a free vote, let it be done and let's move onto other priorities. 

 JOURNALIST:  You previously said that it is possible Labor might support women  getting superannuation during PPL.  Is that now off the table?    

 GALLAGHER:  No not at all.  In fact this is some on-gong policy work that I will be  doing. There is some massive inequality in superannuation we know that women retire  with much less than men when it comes to superannuation and we know that for women  over the age of 50, lapsing into poverty and now homelessness is one of the critical  issues facing that age demographic.  So we do need to deal with the fact that how we  address that inequality in the superannuation system.  It is not easy as some of it  relates to pay inequity but there is some sensible reforms we could look at. I am working  with the various stakeholders on how we pursue that. 

 JOURNALIST:  Is it in this package?    

 GALLAGHER:  It is not in this package. 

 JOURNALIST:  Could Labor support a life time ban on refugees if it is heavily amended  by Labor?    

 GALLAGHER:  Well this is a matter that will be discussed in the Party Room this  morning.   I think the Leader of the Labor Party has made it clear that we have some  concerns around the proposals that have been outlined by the Government.  We don't  think they have made a case for this in fact on a day by day basis their arguments of  why they are actually proceeding with a bill like this seems to change and we will  discuss it in the Party Room but fundamentally I don't think the government has made  the case for it and we will have those discussions and then the Leader will make an  announcement later this morning. 

 JOURNALIST:  Will Labor support a 10.5 backpacker tax? 

 GALLAGHER:  Well again we have been looking at this and it is another one of  Malcolm Turnbull’s stuff ups.  I mean honestly this government can’t go 24 hours  without a further stuff up, payoffs and confusion.  This tax came out of nowhere, the  industry loathes it, there was no warning, no discussions with stakeholders so there is  very strong resistance particularly in the parts of the country that rely on backpackers  for labour.  We have been working, Joel Fitzgibbon, Anthony Albanese Chris Bowen  have been talking with those stakeholders about a sensible way forward and we will  have further to say on that later today. 

 JOURNALIST:  Are you upset that Rod Cullerton is continuing to vote cause it will  potentially be in favour of the government numbers in the Senate? 

 GALLAGHER:  Well look, ultimately this is a matter that will be resolved by the High  Court in accordance with the motion that was referred yesterday and these matters are I  guess a matter of judgement for Senator Cullerton himself.  I think the legal advice or  the advice that has been provided by the Clerk certainly allows for him to cast that vote  but I would hope and if it was me in this situation, I would be mindful of the case before  the High Court when exercising that vote in the chamber.  Let's remember this is the  Senate that Malcolm Turnbull created.  He went to the election, he went to a double  dissolution election, he supported the electoral voting reform that allowed for this  Senate to be convened and now he is paying the price for it.  We have potentially have  two ineligible Senators, one who has left the Senate and one who is now facing a sense  a very rare motion from the Senate to refer his eligibility to the High Court.  We have a  government that seemingly can’t get its agenda through because of the makeup of the  Senate and this is all Malcolm Turnbull's great plan so it seems. 

 JOURNALIST:  Where do you stand on having a parliamentary inquiry into changing  18C?    

 GALLAGHER:  Again this is shows everything about the Government’s priorities really,  that this is the matter that was discussed at Cabinet last night - changes that potentially  watering down race hate laws.  Again, Labor does not believe that there is a case to  pursue this change. We believe these laws have been there for more than 20 years and  don't believe in terms of the cases that come through the Human Rights Commission,  the vast majority of them are resolved in conciliation level.  Again this is Malcolm  Turnbull being pulled by the right wing of his party, you know he has lost control of the  agenda.  A few weeks ago he was saying that any reforms to 18C are not a priority, last  night they were on the Cabinet table.  I think it says everything about the position that  Malcom Turnbull is in. 

 JOURNALIST:  Is there any lessons there, just going back to the Day/Culleton case,  that Senators should not be running businesses while trying to be a Senator at the  same time?    

 GALLAGHER:  Look, again does this relate to Senator Bob Day? 

 

 JOURNALIST:  Yes, and Culleton also has a few businesses. 

 GALLAGHER:  Well you know, I mean the Senate and politicians more broadly are  drawn from the community, you know they come with a range of backgrounds and  occupations and it is important that that continue but I think you have to be mindful  when you take up a role or when you stand for politics that you have to make sure your  house is in order and if it is not in order it will come back and present problems for you  and we have clearly seen that in the case of Senator Culleton and indeed  overwhelmingly in relation to former Senator Bob Day.    

 

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: Sharon Scrivener 0412037573    

 

