---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Darwin: 16 June 2016: visit to Darwin; Labor's regional innovation policy; Labor will govern alone; speculation about Brexit; Tony Abbott to return to Cabinet; Arrium; asylum seekers; Government's botched backpacker tax"
date: "2016-06-16"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "visit to Darwin"
  - "Labor's regional innovation policy"
  - "Labor will govern alone"
  - "speculation about Brexit"
  - "Tony Abbott to return to Cabinet"
  - "Arrium"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Government's botched backpacker tax"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/229630199
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4634853%22
---

 

 

 THE HON CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON   

 LUKE GOSLING OAM  LABOR CANDIDATE FOR SOLOMON   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  DARWIN  THURSDAY, 16 JUNE 2016   

 SUBJECT/S: Visit to Darwin; Labor’s regional innovation policy; Labor will  govern alone; speculation about Brexit; Tony Abbott to return to Cabinet;  Arrium; asylum seekers; Government’s botched backpacker tax.   

 LUKE GOSLING, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR SOLOMON: Thanks for coming  everyone. It’s great to have our Shadow Treasurer, Chris Bowen, in Darwin. Chris  and I held some events last night and this morning, had a run down along the  waterfront. It’s been great to bring him up-to-date about where we are here in Darwin  and Palmerston and in the Territory more generally, so thanks very much for coming  Chris and I will hand over to you.   

 CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Well thanks very much Luke, it’s great to  be back here in Darwin, I’ve been a regular visitor here over the years with Luke, and  I’m really delighted to be with him on the home stretch of this election campaign.  He’s in a tough fight but he’s working hard to earn the votes and respect of single  voter in Solomon as he’s done for more than three years. While we can’t predict the  outcome of the result on election night, all I know is that this guy would be just a  fantastic voice for the people of Darwin and Palmerston, and this guy would be a fine  member of a Labor Government.   

 I’ll deal with a couple of local issues and couple of national issues before I take your  questions.   

 Locally, Luke and I have just visited Rust490. It really says it all about Labor’s  Regional Innovation policy. A policy which Bill Shorten, Ed Husic and I announced  some time ago. $15 million for regional innovation hubs. lnnovation is not just a  Sydney and Melbourne story exclusively, it’s very important that regional universities  are working together with businesses. What Rust490 is doing is really first class,  cutting edge technology, which is the kind of work that Labor’s policies will support,  including what Ed Husic announced yesterday, of a small grant to StartUpAUS to 

 focus on how jobs can be created in regional areas, like Darwin, through our regional  innovation policy.   

 A couple of national matters. Firstly, the Treasurer has continued this morning in his  outrageous and shrill scare campaign, instead of behaving like a Treasurer of the  nation should. Despite all of the evidence, continuing to claim there will be some sort  of Labor-Greens alliance after the election. Now, this scare campaign has been  reduced to its most ridiculous level this morning. I debated the Treasurer on the 7:30  report on Tuesday evening. I made it very clear that it takes two to tango and we are  not on the dance floor. The Treasurer has claimed that there is something in my  book from three years ago which supports a Coalition deal with the Greens. The  chapter is called: ‘Labor governs alone or not at all’. The whole chapter makes the  case for not doing deal with the Greens; making it clear that that is a bad idea. So  the Treasurer has been reduced in his ridiculous scare campaign that has reached  its lowest point this morning. Yesterday he released a ridiculous video that  suggested because there are Labor candidates who had been Green candidates that  there was some sort of conspiracy, forgetting to point out that the lead candidates for  Nationals in WA is a serial Greens candidate! That’s how ridiculous the Treasurer’s  scare campaigns have got to. He should concentrate on his day job of getting his  policies right.   

 He’s also trying to politicise the potential exit of Britain from the European Union.  Now this is a serious matter. Whether the UK leaves the EU is a matter for voters of  the United Kingdom. But it will have economic ramifications around the world. It’s not  the job of the Treasurer or alternative Treasurer or indeed the Prime Minister or  alternative Prime Minister to be scaring the Australian people in some sort of political  ploy about what that means. This is a serious issue that requires a serious response.  Under the caretaker provisions, I have written to the Treasurer to ensure we receive  the same briefings, the same advice from Treasury, in this caretaker period, about  the economic ramifications from the potential British exit from Europe. It is clear  however, that we need to ensure, long-term structural repair to the Budget, to ensure  that future Treasurers have the room to move for stimulus that may be necessary in  any international circumstance that requires it, whether it be the United Kingdom  leaving the EU or otherwise. We will continue with our calm, moderate and  considered language on the economy. The Treasurer can engage in his shouty  scare campaigns all he likes, producing videos, but he should really stick to his day  job, I recognise he’s not very good at it, but he should stick to his day job of being  Treasurer to the Commonwealth. Every time the Treasurer speaks, his credibility  falls. It’s actually important that the Treasurer of the day has some credibility. This  Treasurer loses it every time he opens his mouth.   

 Happy to take some questions.   

 JOURNALIST: To be fair, on the topic of the alliance with the Greens, on that 7:30  report debate the other night, you refused to rule out didn’t you, that Labor would not  negotiate with the Greens in the event of a hung Parliament?   

 BOWEN: No, that’s not right. I did rule it out. Clearly. I completely ruled it out, I said  ‘it takes two to tango and we’re not on the dance floor’. Crystal clear, rock solid, iron  clad commitment. No concessions, agreements or coalitions with any party, including 

 the Greens. I couldn’t be clearer on the 7:30 report, I can’t be clearer now. I’ve been  consistent on this view; I’ve written about it. It’s the Treasurer who is trying to whip  up a silly scare campaign. I said that on TV, I’ve said it consistently in many  interviews, I’m saying it to you now.   

 JOURNALIST: So there’s absolutely no way if we get into a hung Parliament  situation after the election, that Labor will do a deal to form Government with the  Greens?   

 BOWEN: No concessions, no deals, no coalitions with the Greens or any other  party. Now Malcolm Turnbull is the Prime Minister. If there is a hung Parliament - we  are getting way ahead of ourselves, a big hypothetical - if there is a hung  Parliament, he obviously needs to decide how to handle the Parliament and  confidence motions. We are not going to be making concessions to other parties in  that environment.   

 JOURNALIST: So you would be happy to send voters back to the polls?   

 BOWEN: What happens from then is mainly a matter for Malcolm Turnbull and the  advice he gives to the Governor-General. He will be the Prime Minister and he can  advise the Governor-General on a range of actions. But we are making clear that we  wouldn’t vote for a Liberal Government in terms of confidence, but how other parties  vote is a matter for them, but we won’t be doing deals with other parties.   

 JOURNALIST: Isn’t it a fair assumption to make though that you did form an alliance  with the Greens?   

 BOWEN: It’s a fair assumption to base our approach on what we say. Bill Shorten  says, I say, the entire Shadow Cabinet says it. I’m just not sure how I can be  clearer? I’m not sure what further and stronger commitments the Labor Party can  make, other than ‘there will be no arrangements, no coalitions, no undertakings, no  concessions, full stop, end of story’.   

 JOURNALIST: On Britain’s exit, what would you be prepared to do if Brexit did  cause a downturn in the economy?   

 BOWEN: Well I think that the Treasurer should respond to developments of the day  as and when they occur. I’m not interested in scaring the Australian people that  some sort of urgent action by Australia would be necessary. We’re not directly  affected by Britain’s exit from Europe. We’re affected by the general economic  uncertainty it would create. Now our economic links are stronger with other countries  these days. There was a time when our key economic links were with Britain. That  time has passed. They are still an important partner. We now have links through Asia  and of course, the United States, in terms of trade and economic and foreign  investment. Now the departure of Britain from Europe, if it were to occur, and the  opinion polls are close - we can all talk about Australian opinion polls but we are  less qualified to talk about British opinion polls as much as we take an interest - if it  were to occur, there would be economic uncertainty created. But I don’t think that it’s  appropriate for me, or the Treasurer, or anyone else, to be warning of calamity, when  it’s our job to reassure the Australian people, about the potential for the Australian 

 economy to grow into the future. To talk about the opportunities for Australia, not to  be whipping up ‘Brexit’ and Britain leaving Europe, as some sort of scare campaign  in the political context. It’s unbecoming of the Treasurer to do so.   

 JOURNALIST: What do you say about reports that Tony Abbott should be  considered by Malcolm Turnbull for promotion to the Cabinet?   

 BOWEN: Ah, yes. It’s trouble [inaudible] over there isn’t it? I can tell you that I will be  Treasurer in a Labor Government. The Labor caucus will elect a ministry. Quite  clearly, over there, you’ve got faction fights, Tony Abbott supporters continually  pushing him for a return to the Cabinet, which is little wonder given the hold that  Tony Abbott’s supporters have had over Malcolm Turnbull and how they determine  his view over so many measures, so many matters. Dysfunction over the other side  of the ledger. The Labor Party remains completely and utterly united about the task  of providing alternative policies for the Australian people.   

 JOURNALIST: But given what occurred with Kevin Rudd, isn’t it appropriate to bring  former Prime Ministers back to the front bench?   

 BOWEN: Completely a matter for Malcolm Turnbull. He has said before that he  wouldn’t. If he’s changed his view he might care to share it with the Australian  people. Defence is an important portfolio. If he’s changed his view he might care to  let the Australian people know given he’s previously said he wouldn’t bring back  Tony Abbott to the Cabinet table.   

 JOURNALIST: Labor has said that it will give Arrium a $100 million bail-out. Is that  right in these fiscally difficult times for governments to be stumping up that sort of  cash or bailout package?   

 BOWEN: The steel industry is vital for Australia’s economic future. Arrium plays a  unique role in that. Now what this is is a transition plan, it’s not about long-term  propping up of industry. It’s about a strategic and careful investment that supports  the people of Whyalla and Arrium more broadly, because they have facilities right  across the country, to make the important and strategic decisions they need for the  future. It’s based on a request from South Australia and to the credit of Premier  Weatherill and Treasurer Koutsantonis and the SA Government, they haven’t played  politics on this. They made the same request to the Labor Party and Liberal Party  under the caretaker provisions. The Liberal Party responded quite dismissively. The  Labor Party has taken its time to consider our options, to consider the proposal, and  have responded accordingly. This is a sensible investment for the future, which will  keep a key strategic industry with some viability in Australia. I think that’s entirely  appropriate.   

 JOURNALIST: Just on the exit of Britain from the EU, I know you said you didn’t  want to talk about what could happen, but isn’t there a need to be flexible with  monetary policy about what could happen, a possible downturn?   

 BOWEN: Well monetary policy is a matter for the independent Reserve Bank. The  Reserve Bank will consider a whole range of inputs into their decision-making,  domestic and international, and of course, that is one - interest rates are already at 

 record lows in Australia - they will consider the economic uncertainty created in their  future decisions. But it’s not appropriate for the Treasurer or the Shadow Treasurer  might do with monetary policy.   

 JOURNALIST: Would you be prepared to stimulate the economy if there was a  downturn?   

 BOWEN: I think as I indicated in answer to your question earlier, we can’t be  responding to what is a hypothetical at this stage. The people of Britain have not yet  voted. We’ve seen close opinion polls on the referendum on Scotland, for example,  and in the end Scotland decided to stay in the United Kingdom. You’ve seen close  opinion polls now. They may decide to stay in Europe. Then we need to carefully and  soberly consider the economic impacts. That’s why, under caretaker provisions, I’ve  sought access, and expect will receive, the same briefings that the Treasurer  receives in the coming days and weeks.   

 JOURNALIST: When you were the Immigration Minister, I remember you being up  here and there were asylum seekers all shacked up in the Asti Hotel in Darwin.  There were so many here that they couldn’t fit in detention centres. How can the  people of the Northern Territory be sure that they won’t see a return to that under a  Labor Government?   

 BOWEN: I remember the Asti Hotel and we closed it down, as I recall, under my  term as Minister because it was not sustainable. Our policy is crystal clear, I mean  the Government switches from one scare campaign on Greens, then back to boats,  they flip around. Our policy is crystal clear, we support an increase in the  humanitarian program, but we support tough policies, we took them through National  Conference. Bill Shorten showed real leadership at our National Conference for  measures that are supported by the Shadow Cabinet and will be implemented in  office, which ensure that the people smuggling trade will not and cannot  recommence. Our moral compass tells us we can take more refugees, but we cannot  risk people dying at sea, hence the need for difficult decisions on offshore  processing, on boat turn backs when necessary, and those other measures. Labor’s  resolve is clear, Bill Shorten has shown great leadership, in dealing with this difficult  issue for the Labor Party, the Labor Party that wants to do the right thing by as many  people as possible. Doing the right thing by as many people as possible means  taking refugees out of camps and having tough policies on our borders.   

 JOURNALIST: Can you comment on reports that Labor is seeking to resettle asylum  seekers [inaudible]?   

 BOWEN: There’s nothing new here. We’ve got a consistent position to say that  TPVs are bad policy, there’s been no change in our policy, it went through the  National Conference.  What we are dealing with is human beings who need to be  dealt with appropriately, who are here, and we continue to have tough policies on our  borders and to make sure the people smuggling trade does not recommence. There  have been no new policy announcements in recent times or no change in the Labor  Party’s position on Temporary Protection Visas.   

 JOURNALIST: When are we going to see a final policy from Labor on the  backpacker tax?   

 BOWEN: Well the Government needs to get its act together. This has been a  complete mess from start to finish. This is one area where we hoped and trusted that  the Government might get it right, that they might have got their homework and  consultation right, quite clearly they haven’t. Luke as a strong voice for Darwin and  Palmerston has raised this issue with me consistently, and frankly, before it came  controversial in the media. The Government has a mess here. They said they’ll keep  the money in the Budget, they’ll say they’ll have a six-month review. As Joel  Fitzgibbon pointed out, the Tax Office website a few days ago said it will come into  effect on 1 July and be implemented. So we encourage the Government to conclude  that review expeditiously and we can get the results of that review and assess the  situation. This is a problem of the Government’s making and they’re the resources of  government to work the issues through and I encourage them to do that very  expeditiously.   

 JOURNALIST: Will Labor scrap the backpacker tax?   

 BOWEN: Well, again, I will refer you to my previous answer. We need to see the  results of the Government’s review, this is a policy that hasn’t been well thought  through, not well implemented, and has been policy on the run. The Budget was  only, effectively, a few weeks ago, and it was in the Budget! And only a few days  later the Treasurer was walking away from it. The Budget is where government  announces it policies. We’ve been announcing our policies through a very careful  and considered process. We have our campaign launch on Sunday, more policies to  announce, and we will continue through that process, of course, well before any  Opposition in living memory, I’ll be releasing our alternative Budget bottom line.   

 Okay, thanks for coming.   

 ENDS   

 

