---
title: "Labor's laughable 'leadership' claim"
date: "2016-03-23"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/225740980
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4450878%22
---

 1 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 23 March 2016    

 LABOR’S LAUGHABLE ‘LEADERSHIP’ CLAIM     

 Richard Marles and the Labor party are in no position to give advice on border  protection and the detention of illegal maritime arrivals. 

 Mr Marles now claims - if ever returned to government - to fix the problems he and his  colleagues created in the first place when they were last in Government. 

 His contention today that Labor would play “a leadership role” in a regional asylum  seeker framework through the Bali Process is laughable.  

 Labor made these sorts of claims when they sought election in 2007. Remember Kevin  Rudd’s vow to stop the people smugglers’ boats. 

 What happened - over six years more than 800 illegal boats, more than 50,000 illegal  arrivals, more than 1200 people lost at sea, detention centres opened including regional  processing centres on Nauru and Manus Island, the detention centres were filled with  up to 10,000 people at a peak, including almost 2000 children. 

 Now Mr Marles wants people to believe that Labor can solve what remains of its own  mess - a ludicrous proposition. 

 The Coalition stopped the boats, emptied and closed the detention centres and  removed children from detention - there are just 25 IMA children remaining in detention  today and I am working towards zero. 

 Mr Marles is too busy papering over the cracks in Labor’s border policies to be able to  achieve anything.  

 Indeed should Labor ever be returned to power the loony left led by Labor’s Deputy  Leader Tanya Plibersek would quickly overrule Mr Marles and throw open the nation’s  borders to the people smugglers once again - with yet more disastrous results. 

 For further information: Minister’s Office - 02 6277 7860    

