---
title: "Katter supports immigration bill"
date: "2016-11-10"
creators:
  - "Katter, Bob, Jnr"
source: "KATTER'S AUSTRALIAN PARTY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/237073840
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4928362%22
---

 

 

 For more information or a comment from Bob Katter please contact Ali Winters 0418 840 243 

 “ 

 Katter supports immigration bill   10 November 2016: KAP Member for Kennedy, Bob Katter has supported the Government’s MIGRATION  LEGISLATION AMENDMENT (REGIONAL PROCESSING COHORT) BILL 2016. The proposal seeks to ban asylum  seekers who attempt to enter the country illegally from ever entering Australia. 

 

 Mr Katter tore down the Chamber during debate on the bill yesterday, “I heard the previous speaker get up in this  place and talk about 'these poor people, these poor refugees'. A refugee is not a person that looks at a globe of the  world and picks a country on the other side of the globe and says, 'I'm going to flee to there.' A refugee is a person  that flees for his life across the border.  

 

 “There were 12 million to 15 million refugees after the Second World War; they were all from neighboring  countries. The refugees fleeing Burma, or whatever it calls itself now, fled to Malaysia. You flee across the border.  You do not pick a spot on the other side of the globe to go to. That is not fleeing; you are going somewhere that  you want to go to.    

 “Why do they want to come here? These people are coming from countries where they are on $5,000-a-year  incomes. On welfare here, if you have a couple of kids, you are entitled to $60,000 a year. Why wouldn't they come  here? Two and a half thousands of them have died trying to get here. The previous speaker said, 'You are putting  these people at risk.' I tell you what is putting them at risk. It is you saying, 'Yes, you can come in.'    

 “After the last attempt at mass killing (Home Hill ), which was on the edge of the Kennedy electorate—some of the  people working there were actually from the Kennedy electorate and the town is two kilometres outside the  Kennedy electorate—I said, 'Well, that is it for me. There are no more people coming in from the Middle East.    

 “I am sorry but it is too risky bringing in new people from North Africa and from the Middle East into this country.   

 “We accept, of course, the persecuted minority groups who are obviously persecuted there—the Sikhs, the Jews,  and the Christians. We do not include them in the ban. You say that is anti-Muslim. No, it is not. I did not mention  the biggest Muslim country on earth, which is Indonesia. I did not say anything about Indonesia. They do not have  any terrorists in Albania; I did not say anything about Albania, and it is a Muslim country. It is not against Muslims.  It is against countries that have a culture and a continuous history of extreme violence.” 

 

 ##ENDS## 

 Hon Bob Katter MP  Federal Leader 

 It's the principle of it www.ausparty.org.au  Member for Kennedy 

