---
title: "Cambodia: one refugee left as situation deteriorates"
date: "2016-05-28"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/228659618
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4597564%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Saturday, 28 May 2016   

 Cambodia: one refugee left as situation  deteriorates   

 The government's deal with Cambodia has failed, with just one refugee remaining in the country, and  should be ended immediately the Australian Greens have said.   

 "Malcolm Turnbull must officially scrap this disastrous deal with Cambodia, before more people are put  in harms' way," the Greens' immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 "Cambodia is already struggling to care for its people and is facing its own political and security crises.  We shouldn't be dumping vulnerable people there.   

 "Malcolm Turnbull has wasted tens of millions of dollars on this failed scheme already and only the  Liberals want to see it continue.   

 "It's as clear as day that third country resettlement has failed. Each day that this charade is allowed to  continue is another day that women and children are abused on Nauru.   

 "It's time to close the camps on Manus Island and Nauru.   

 "There is a better way, where we care for people seeking asylum while saving lives at sea.   

 "The Greens would build a system that assesses people's claims fairly and efficiently in our region and  then flies those that need protection to Australia safely. That way we smash the people smugglers'  business model while caring for people in need."   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

