---
title: "Amnesty International's report demands a response"
date: "2016-10-18"
creators:
  - "Di Natale, Richard"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/235786812
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4884008%22
---

 

 

 

 Media Release: Amnesty International's report demands a response   

 October 18, 2016   

 Amnesty International's Island of Despair report should force members of the government and Labor  Party to publicly renounce Australia's deliberately cruel offshore detention regime.   

 Australian Greens Leader Richard Di Natale said the report was an indictment on successive  governments.    

 “This is a policy that systematically tears families apart, robs kids of any hope and deprives them of a  future," Senator Di Natale said.   

 “I am convinced that a future government will be forced to apologise for the actions of this  government’s systematic abuse of innocent people who are doing nothing other than coming to  Australia to seek protection.   

 “We’ve got voices inside both the Coalition and the Labor party who we know don’t support their  parties policies on this issue. I urge them to speak up. I appeal to the PM and Opposition leader, let’s  work together to get these children out of detention and to give them a future.”   

 Greens Immigration spokesperson Nick McKim said the fairest and most compassionate way to help  asylum seekers was to bring them to Australia.   

 "This report makes it crystal clear that what is happening on Nauru is torture, and that Australia bears  the ultimate responsibility for that," Senator McKim said.   

 "We cannot solve humanitarian crises by creating new ones."   

 Contact: Cass Stafford (Di Natale) 0428 152 347  Pat Caruana (McKim) 0400 425 380 

 

 

 

