---
title: "Dutton should be on the next plane to PNG"
date: "2016-04-26"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/227194294
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4525426%22
---

 

 

 

 RICHARD MARLES MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO    

 DUTTON SHOULD BE ON THE NEXT PLANE TO PNG    

 Labor believes Immigration Minister Peter Dutton should immediately be dispatched  to Port Moresby to hold urgent talks with the PNG Government about the future of  the Manus Island Regional Processing Centre.   

 Today’s PNG Supreme Court ruling that the detention of asylum seekers at the  Manus Island facility is illegal is of significant concern to Labor.   

 Labor is seeking an assurance from the Government that it has a contingency plan  to deal with today’s ruling.    

 This decision, and our Government’s response, will be monitored by people  smuggling networks.   

 Nearly three years since coming to office and this Government has failed to properly  manage its offshore processing network.   

 The Manus facility was established to serve as a circuit breaker, to end the capacity  for people smugglers to market the dangerous journey to Australia. The original  agreement Labor struck in 2013 was signed for 12 months.     

 It was never intended to serve as a punitive place of indefinite detention.   

 Mr Dutton and his predecessor, Scott Morrison failed to properly engage with the  Government of PNG to ensure processing was occurring in a timely manner.   

 They  have also both failed in securing a lasting, third country resettlement to resolve  the future for the people on Manus and Nauru.   

 In doing so, this Government has breached its duty of care to each one of those  men, women and children.    

 TUESDAY, 26 APRIL 2016    

 MEDIA CONTACTS: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563  

