---
title: "Third country settlement must be a priority"
date: "2016-02-03"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/223489228
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4337565%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO 

 

 

 THIRD COUNTRY SETTLEMENT MUST BE A PRIORITY     

 Following today’s High Court decision on offshore processing, the Turnbull Government  must immediately secure proper third country settlement options for refugees.    

 The Abbott / Turnbull Government has failed abysmally in securing any meaningful  resettlement plan with a viable third country, instead wasting $55 million on a botched  deal with Cambodia that has resettled only 3 people.    

 Over the last 24 months, media have also reported the Government has held talks to  resettle refugees with the countries of Philippines and Kyrgyzstan.   

 All the while, people have been left to languish in processing centres without any  certainty for their future.   

 There needs to be a credible third country option to resolve the fate of these people. If  Peter Dutton is unable to negotiate such a plan, Mr Turnbull or Ms Bishop must  personally intervene.   

 Working with the UNHCR to seek their input about appropriate and viable third party  settlement arrangements would be a priority for a future Labor Government.   

 Without an urgent resolution this Government will be doing enormous damage to this  refugee population.   

 It is critical this Government act now and engage with the UNHCR.    

 A future Labor Government will play a leadership role in building a regional  humanitarian framework in South East Asia to improve the situation of asylum seekers.   

 A future Labor Government will also increase our funding to the UNHCR to $450 million  over four years, taking Australia to a position where we would be one of the top five  global contributors to the agency.      

 WEDNESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2016 

 MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563 

 

