---
title: "Coalition confused on refugee laws"
date: "2016-11-01"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/236342254
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4909381%22
---

 

 SHAYNE NEUMANN MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR 

 

 COALITION CONFUSED ON REFUGEE LAWS    

 The Turnbull Government’s proposed new asylum seeker legislation is quickly turning  into another trademark Turnbull stuff up with confusion amongst senior Coalition front  benchers about the details of how this will work, what this legislation does and who will  be affected.       

 When asked whether refugees living in the Australian community on bridging visas will  be affected by a lifetime ban from ever visiting Australia, Peter Dutton’s office said yes,  Julie Bishop said no and Sussan Ley said no, then I don’t know.    

 When asked directly on Q&A if there are people in Australia currently on bridging visas  who will be affected by this legislation Sussan Ley said:    

 Sussan Ley: No, because the people who are affected by this are those who are in  Manus and Nauru now…    

 Tony Jones: I’m forced to interrupt you. I’m sorry about that, but we put questions to the  Minister Peter Dutton today, to his office, on whether people in Australia on bridging  visas would be affected by the proposed ban.  Their answer came back to us late this  afternoon, it’s yes, the answer is yes.  They couldn’t tell us how many, but they said it  was a relatively small number.  It could be in the hundreds.    

 Sussan Ley: And the reason for that is they would have been processed on Manus and  Nauru…    

 Labor has asked the Turnbull Government for a copy of the legislation and to be briefed  by department representatives but we’ve been told to wait until next week.    

 If the Turnbull Government was serious about bipartisanship on this issue, they would  release the legislation and meet with Labor today.    

 Labor will consider the detail of the legislation when the Turnbull Government finally  releases it next week and take this through our usual processes. 

 

 No amount of internal Coalition confusion can distract from the Turnbull Government’s  total failure to secure durable and credible third country resettlement arrangements to  get refugees off Manus Island and Nauru.    

 Rather than playing political games and do One Nations bidding, the Turnbull  Government should be focusing on resettlement options for these people.    

 TUESDAY, 1 NOVEMBER 2016    

 MEDIA CONTACT: MEL HOCKEY 0418 511 529   

