---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 5 February 2016: Australian workers to lose under Malcolm Turnbull's plan to abolish the lift of the Super Guarantee from 9.5 to 12 per cent; Liberal Party tradition of attacking universal compulsory superannuation; Turnbull's plan for a 15 per cent GST on everything; leaked National Security documents"
date: "2016-02-05"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "Australian workers to lose under Malcolm Turnbull's plan to abolish the lift of the Super Guarantee from 9.5 to 12 per cent"
  - "Liberal Party tradition of attacking universal compulsory superannuation"
  - "Turnbull's plan for a 15 per cent GST on everything"
  - "leaked National Security documents"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/223607895
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4341754%22
---

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON    

 E&EO TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SYDNEY  FRIDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 2016   

 SUBJECT/S: Australian workers to lose under Malcolm Turnbull’s plan to abolish  the lift of the Super Guarantee from 9.5 to 12 per cent; Liberal Party tradition of  attacking universal compulsory superannuation; Turnbull’s plan for a 15 per cent  GST on everything; leaked National Security documents.   

 CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks for coming everybody. Well reports  today on the front page of our newspapers clearly placed by senior Government  sources that the Government was going to freeze the superannuation guarantee at 9.5  per cent. Now I see that Malcolm Turnbull has denied those reports today.    

 This is the same Prime Minister who denied last year that the Tax White Paper process  would be junked. He swore hand on heart that that process would continue and we  would see a Tax White Paper. Low and behold just a few months later the Tax White  Paper has been junked. Malcolm Turnbull was not telling the truth.    

 Well if Malcolm Turnbull is not telling the truth about the Superannuation Guarantee he  will have a very, very big fight on his hands. Let's be very clear; superannuation is  designed to give working Australians a more dignified retirement. Compound interest  builds wealth. A young person putting money aside through superannuation, seeing that  wealth build year after year, gives them a better chance of a retirement which is  dignified without needing to be on the full Age Pension.    

 That's why the Labor Party set up superannuation. Now Liberal Prime Ministers have  form. John Howard promised to keep the scheduled increases that Paul Keating left  him, he broke that promise. He squelched on his promise. Tony Abbott promised to  keep the schedule that Kevin Rudd left him, he broke that promise. Now of course  Malcolm Turnbull looks like he is contemplating going down the same road.  

 

 While this is a Government which also abolished the low income superannuation  contribution, the one modest tax break which allowed lower income Australians to get a  little bit of tax support to save for the future through superannuation. The Liberal  Government abolished it and got rid of it.    

 Liberals oppose superannuation, they don't believe superannuation should be universal  they don't believe that working Australians should have access to a dignified retirement  through superannuation. Superannuation, universal superannuation is one of Labor’s  proudest achievements, one of our greatest legacies. Every time the Liberals attack it  we will defend it. The Liberals say they made a promise to have no adverse changes to  superannuation at the last election. They promised to keep the same schedule. They've  already promised twice. They’ve already twice delayed the increases of the  Superannuation Guarantee.    

 I predicted before the last election that they would end up freezing the superannuation  guarantee and the reports placed by senior Government sources today on the front  page of The Australian show that there are senior Government figures who want to do  that. Again the Labor Party will fight that plan every inch of the way.    

 Happy to take your questions   

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister said he doesn't plan to stop those scheduled rises,  do you take comfort in that?   

 BOWEN: Well we will hold them to his word on that. If he says that the report in The  Australian is wrong, if he says he has no plans to freeze superannuation, we will be  holding him to that and we will be fighting them if the Prime Minister goes back on that  word. But as I say Malcolm Turnbull has got form. He says one thing and does another.  He said that the Tax White Paper process was very important and would continue and  any reports as to its death were exaggerated. He was wrong, he wasn't telling the truth.  So he says one thing and does another. Well we will be holding him to what he has said  a little while ago.   

 JOURNALIST: What do you think of the Prime Minister’s indication there will be a back  down on increasing the GST?   

 BOWEN: Well it is quite clear the Prime Minister has got disunity and chaos on his  hands in his party room, both the Liberal Party and the National Party room. But it's also  quite clear that Liberal MPs who don't want him to increase the GST are saying that for  one reason; because they are worried about their seats, they are worried about their  careers, they are worried about themselves. The Labor Party opposes an increase in  the GST because we’re worried about Australian families on a tight budget, low and  middle income families, because increasing the GST effects them the most. The  Liberals who are pressuring Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison not to proceed with  the GST increase are doing so for themselves.  

 

 Now we know that Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison want to increase the GST,  nothing is clearer, all their public comments have been about the need to do this. If they  don’t proceed with it, it would be a humiliating back down for them. It would be  humiliating for Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison not to proceed. They would have  been rolled by their party room but it’s also distinctly possible that they will try to sneak it  out in a policy paper a couple of weeks before an election to avoid months of scrutiny  which we are willing to provide to this debate or indeed they give a never-ever promise  and then try and implement it after an election, true to form for this Liberal National  Government.    

 JOURNALIST: With the Budget coming up in May, Turnbull has said proposed changes  will be outlined by then. When will Labor outline their plans?   

 BOWEN: Labor’s already been outlining their plans. I mean here’s the great irony,  Labor’s announced the multinational tax plan, high income superannuation plan,  tobacco plan, abolition of the emission reduction fund, not proceeding with Scott  Morrison’s baby bonus, not proceeding with the cost of a plebiscite on marriage  equality. We’ve been announcing our policies. We’ve got the extraordinary situation  where 2.5 years after a government has been elected, the alternative government, the  Labor Opposition has far more policy on the table for debate and scrutiny than the  government of the day that has had 2 years to have their act together which has all the  resources of the Treasury, all the resources of the bureaucracy and they can’t tell you  what their tax plans are. Their answer to everything is ‘the answer is on the table’, well  it’s a very big table, it’s about time to get some policy out there. I’m happy to debate Mr  Morrison anytime, anywhere but he’s actually got to turn up with some policies in his  briefcase to debate. Not thought bubbles, not contradictory ideas, not little things he  leaks to the papers on a daily basis but actually some concrete costed plans, detailed  policy. That’s what we bring to the table. Our team has been developing that policy,  announcing that policy, we’ve announced our schools funding policy, all out for  everybody to see. Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison engage in one big waffle-fest  they just talk, talk, talk. We’ve been out there putting policy on the table.   

 JOURNALIST: Speaking of leaks, there’s leaked Cabinet documents, I think it’s only a  draft plan. Would Labor support the changes that have been proposed?   

 BOWEN: Well I’ve seen this report and it’s extraordinary.  From the report it’s a leaked  National Security Committee paper. Any leak from the National Security Committee is  very serious, regardless of what it is. The National Security Committee has to be the  most secure of the secure of the Cabinet processes and for Peter Dutton today to deny  any knowledge of these documents is extraordinary. He’s the Minister for Immigration. I  know he’s not on the National Security Committee, Malcolm Turnbull kicked him off it  but still he is the Minister for Immigration, he should know about this. And it’s very  concerning. Now on to matters of substance. The report, the paper borders on racist. It  would be extraordinary undermining of our long standing refugee system and would not  find any support from the Opposition.  

 

 JOURNALIST: Who do you think is behind the leaks?    

 BOWEN: Well I saw Malcolm Turnbull was leaking on himself today accidently waving  his documents about but clearly very senior members of the Government are leaking.  This is National Security Committee, the Cabinet, the most senior members of the  Government leaking on the Prime Minister.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you worried if the Government doesn’t take a GST hike to the  election that it might be something they’ll look to implement if their re-elected?    

 BOWEN: Well this is the thing. Again, you’ve got a Prime Minister and a Treasurer who  want to increase the GST and they may or may not have the guts to tell the Australian  people about it before an election but you know what they want to do. You know that  they want to increase the GST. You know that they think that’s the answer to their  problems, well we have a different view, happy to fight an election on it but they need to  be honest about their plans.    

 Okay, thanks for coming everybody.    

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879   

