---
title: "One year of Malcolm Turnbull: failing the community on immigration"
date: "2016-09-14"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/234004732
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4817201%22
---

 

 THE HON SHAYNE NEUMANN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR 

 

 ONE YEAR OF MALCOLM TURNBULL: FAILING THE COMMUNITY ON  IMMIGRATION   

 The Turnbull Government’s record on immigration is marred by delays and  uncertainty, proving the Government is out of touch with community expectations.   

 Under Malcolm Turnbull’s watch we’ve seen the leaking of the Nauru files - over  2,000 documents detailing allegations of assault and mistreatment in offshore  detention.   

 These are serious allegations made by vulnerable asylum seekers and they warrant  proper investigation. Labor initiated a Senate inquiry into the allegations after the  Turnbull Government failed to act.     

 Labor has made clear our commitment to offshore processing and regional  resettlement to ensure people smugglers are denied their trade in exploiting  vulnerable people, all while ensuring transparency in our offshore centres.    

 Asylum seekers living in these facilities need a clear third country resettlement  arrangement. The inability to achieve this has been another failure of the Turnbull  Government.    

 To add to the list of failings, the security contractors operating offshore detention  centres have formally notified the Government of their intention to cease operations  at the end of their current contract. 

 The Turnbull Government is also failing to protect Australians from dangerous and  deadly imported products.  

 Australia has one of the highest global rates of asbestos-related diseases and more  Australians die each year from asbestos-related diseases than the number of people  killed in road accidents. 

 It’s unacceptable that Australian workers are being exposed to this deadly product  following the importation of cheap materials from foreign companies, because the 

 Government has failed to provide Australian agencies with the resources required to  combat this threat      

 These failings are on top of hardworking Australian Border Force staff walking off the  job over pay and conditions that the Turnbull Government refuses to settle after  more than 1,000 days of dispute.   

 One year in, the Turnbull Government’s record is out of step with community  expectations and the Prime Minister must be held to account for his failures.   

 WEDNESDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2016   

 MEDIA CONTACT: MELISSA HOCKEY 0418 511 529    

 

