---
title: "Labor welcomes immigration decision"
date: "2016-10-20"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/235876849
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4887609%22
---

 SHAYNE NEUMANN MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR 

 LABOR WELCOMES IMMIGRATION DECISION 

 Labor welcomes the decision by the Department of Immigration and Border Protection  to clarify the rights of medical professionals working within Australian funded offshore  detention facilities. 

 Labor believes in greater transparency and took a policy last to the last election that  sought to strengthen transparency across Australian funded offshore detention facilities. 

 It is no surprise that Minister Dutton has secretively released this decision on the  Department’s website. 

 This is in a week where the Minister has spent his time attacking the ABC for critical  reporting that raised concerns about the treatment of people living in Australian funded  facilities on Nauru. 

 While we welcome this announcement Labor is still concerned that people are  languishing in indefinite detention because the Prime Minister and Minister have failed  to secure a durable third country resettlement option. 

 Labor believes in a humane and compassionate approach which enables refugees to  progress their claims safely and securely. 

 Labor’s policy is clear, we believe in strong borders, offshore processing and boat turn  backs when it’s safe to do so because we know it saves lives. But we do not believe  offshore facilities should be run as punitive holding cells. 

 This is the stark difference between the policies of the Turnbull Government and Labor. 

 We have a responsibility to investigate serious claims about any mistreatment of asylum  seekers in offshore processing centre. 

 Labor has initiated a Senate Inquiry to investigate serious allegations of abuse, self-  harm and neglect outlined in the Nauru files. That Inquiry will report back by the last  sitting day in March 2017. 

 Asylum seekers living in these Australian funded facilities need a clear third country  resettlement arrangement. The inability to achieve this has been another one of the  prominent failures of the Turnbull Government. 

 THURSDAY, 20 OCTOBER 2016 

 MEDIA CONTACT: JESSE NORTHFIELD 0407 099 469

