---
title: "Regional agreement to combat people smuggling and human trafficking"
date: "2016-03-23"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/225740982
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4450880%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP  23 March 2016 

 

 REGIONAL AGREEMENT TO COMBAT PEOPLE SMUGGLING AND  HUMAN TRAFFICKING    

 Australia and our regional partners have secured an ambitious agreement to combat  irregular migration, people smuggling and human trafficking.    

 Agreed today at the Sixth Ministerial Conference of the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, this landmark  Ministerial Declaration strengthens regional cooperation and determination to combat  these shared challenges.    

 Co-chaired by Minister Julie Bishop and Indonesian Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi,  the Conference agreed all countries will work together to find long-term solutions for  refugees and irregular migrants. States were also encouraged to criminalise people  smuggling and human trafficking activities.    

 The Conference agreed Australia and Indonesia, as Bali Process co-chairs, can now  convene regional meetings on urgent irregular migration issues to ensure more agile  and timely responses.    

 To improve our preparedness for any future large influxes of irregular migrants, it was  also agreed to review the region’s response to the tragic Andaman Sea event in May  2015.    

 Australia’s delegation, led by Minister Dutton, played a key role in facilitating  agreement on the Bali Process priorities for the next two years. Three areas of focus  were determined: expanding safe and legal migration pathways; returns and  reintegration; and cross-border operations to tackle criminal syndicates.      

 The Declaration complements Australia’s new International Strategy to Combat  Human Trafficking and Slavery, launched by Minister Bishop today. The strategy  outlines the Government’s agenda to strengthen Australia’s role as a regional leader in  combatting trafficking and slavery.    

 Foreign Minister’s Office:  Rachel Obradovic 0478 488 874  Immigration Minister’s Office: Merryn Royle 0409 272 971 

