---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Robertson Barracks, Darwin: 11 November 2016: farewelling Taji Taskforce Rotation 4; fight against Daesh; regional resettlement"
date: "2016-11-11"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "farewelling Taji Taskforce Rotation 4"
  - "fight against Daesh"
  - "regional resettlement"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/237228398
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4934711%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND  ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS 

 MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  DARWIN  FRIDAY, 11 NOVEMBER 2016   

 SUBJECT/S: Farewelling Taji Taskforce Rotation 4; Fight against Daesh;  Regional resettlement   

 SHORTEN: Good evening everybody, it's a real privilege to be at Robertson  Barracks, witnessing the farewell to the Taji Taskforce Rotation 4, I'm here with Luke  Gosling and Warren Snowdon, Labor's Federal Members of Parliament for the  Territory. 98 years ago today, the guns fell silent at the end of the First World War. I  think it is a fantastic privilege to be commemorating Remembrance Day 98 years on,  watching Australia's finest young men and women prepare to renew the ANZAC  tradition once again in the cause of peace.    

 98 years after Remembrance Day we, again, see remarkable young ANZAC men  and women, highly skilled, highly trained, who prepared for this mission. I have  complete confidence in their skills, their professionalism, the love of their families  and I have complete confidence and support for the mission that they are carrying  out. The ability to degrade and destroy Daesh, to ensure that the territorial integrity  of Iraq is preserved. To help train Iraq's security forces, elements of Iraq's security  forces, to carry out their mission of restoring peace and stability to Iraq is in the finest  traditions of ANZAC, 98 years after Remembrance Day. There is no finer place to be  in Australia than watching the sheer professionalism commitment of our Defence  Forces.    

 JOURNALIST: How confident are you that the Iraqi forces are getting on top and  they're going to win that battle against Daesh? Particularly in the city of Mosul.   

 SHORTEN: The briefings which we receive indicate that the Iraqi forces are  reclaiming territory and restoring territorial integrity to the borders of Iraq. I have no  doubt, having visited Bagdad myself, having seen what the previous rotations,  Australian troops, have been doing. I have no doubt that the Australian contribution  is making a material difference to improve the peace and the lives of the citizens of  Iraq and in the finest traditions of ANZAC, Australian and New Zealand troops will 

 again be helping ensure that other peoples are free from terror, free from the evil  scourge of Daesh.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, are you, what are your, do you welcome any deal  between the United States and Australia to resettle refugees on Manus Island and  Nauru?    

 SHORTEN: We haven't seen the detail, the Government hasn't told us. But let's be  straight, if there is a regional resettlement arrangement to secure genuine refugees,  currently in indefinite detention on Manus and Nauru and if an arrangement is struck  with the United States, Labor in principle will support such an arrangement. We  obviously need to see the detail but I think that our strong bipartisan commitment to  stop the people smugglers and the scourge of people smuggling, does not mean that  people should be kept in indefinite detention on Manus and Nauru. Labor went to the  last election with a policy to support regional resettlement, if the reports are correct  that there is an arrangement to be struck with the United States, Labor in principle  will welcome giving these people on Manus and Nauru the opportunity to resettle,  the genuine refugees.    

 JOURNALISTS: And would the US be an appropriate location for that?    

 SHORTEN: I've said many times that Australia should negotiate with settlement  nations. One of which is the United States, but lets see the detail, we need to see the  detail. But I believe that if there is an opportunity to resettle genuine refugees in third  party nations, this is a part of the regional resettlement policies which both Labor and  Liberal's support. Strong borders, but fair treatment for people as well. Thanks  everyone.   

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

 

