---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 13 November 2016: regional resettlement deal; NSW by-elections; inequality"
date: "2016-11-13"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "regional resettlement deal"
  - "NSW by-elections"
  - "inequality"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/237228377
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4934710%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND ABORIGINAL  AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP   MELBOURNE  SUNDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2016    

 SUBJECT/S: Regional resettlement deal; NSW By-Elections; Inequality.     

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Labor is committed to making sure  that the Australian economy works in the interests of all people. The working class  families, the middle class families of Australia. This message has been well received  this morning. Labor's looking forward to continuing to develop our policies to prioritise  jobs at the centre of everything that we do between now and the next election. Happy to  take questions.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the Prime Minister has announced a one off resettlement  deal with the US, have you had any discussions with the Government in regards to  this?     

 SHORTEN: No, the Government hasn't briefed us at all. However, let me just say that, if  the detail as has been reported is correct and there is an opportunity for people to be  regionally resettled in the United States, I welcome that.    

 Labor would be hypocritical if we didn't welcome this because this is the very thing we  wanted with the Malaysia solution some years ago.     

 It has taken the current government three plus years to negotiate this one-off deal but  we are pleased if it means an end to indefinite detention, especially for genuine  refugees and they get the opportunity to be regionally resettled. Because after all, Labor  and Liberal are on a unity ticket to defeat the people smugglers and we will work with  the Government as they talk to us and subsequently brief us on the detail.    

 JOURNALIST: Could Donald Trump’s election win have an impact on this going  forward?    

 SHORTEN: I sincerely hope not. I guess it would have been better to conclude this  before the United States election so the very issue you are raising doesn't come up but  it is what it is.     

 We will certainly, in principle, work with the Government subject to seeing the detail, we  do welcome this. We want to see people moved out of these facilities. Labor's  commitment to regional resettlement is based on, one, stopping the people smugglers  and their cruel and evil trade and, two, making sure that we don't have people stuck in  indefinite detention in facilities which Australia has indirect responsibility for.    

 JOURNALIST: In your speech, you mentioned Donald Trump and you also mentioned  that real wages growth is stalled, inequality rising, people locked out of the  housing market - are you planning to tap into a similar wave of sentiment that occurred  in the US about people feeling disillusioned and locked out of the mainstream?    

 SHORTEN: The American election was of course very important to the world and also  Australia. But 30 years ago, Australia took a different economic path. We didn't go down  the path of Ronald Regan and trickle down economics, where the very rich and the top  companies get all the benefit and the theory is that'll miraculously, magically flow  through to everyone else. We don't think that path works. Instead 30 years ago we  supported the idea of a social wage. That a strong safety net and a strong minimum  wage and Medicare, it's what helps keep working middle class families in the game.     

 Now 30 years on, we're not in the same state as the United States. But having said that,  there are worrying signs. Living standards have fallen since the Liberals were elected,  down two per cent. Most of the jobs that get created now are part-time jobs. Even more  worryingly, most of the jobs getting lost are full-time jobs. Inequality is high, mums who  go to work are seeing their wages devoured by childcare fees.  First home owners are  locked out of the housing market. We've got got this tax system with the wrong  priorities, where we see taxpayers' money going to reward people for investing in their  fifth or tenth property but new home-owners have got to bid in a market against people  being subsidised by their very own taxes.     

 So, inequality is a challenge. You can't grow the economy without a fair dose of fairness  in the system. That's why we're going to focus on jobs, jobs, jobs. And one of the key  messages for me to tell our conference today, is where you have over a million people  who say they'd like more work, where you've got hundreds of thousands of people  trapped on the disability pension and 700,000-plus people who are unemployed, we  need to reform our temporary overseas guest worker scheme, the visa system. What's  happening is we've got people coming to work in Australia, nearly one million people-plus with temporary work rights and, in some cases, they're getting ripped off and  exploited, lowering wage outcomes and taking the jobs of nurses, motor mechanics,  carpenters, auto-electricians. These are the jobs which can be done by Australians and  we make no apology for saying Labor's approach to the Australian economy is buy  Australian, build Australian, employ Australians.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think it's fair to say your speech had a little bit of an anti-globalisation bent and is that a deliberate shift in policy from you or more a matter of  nuance or rhetoric?    

 SHORTEN: No, there was nothing new in what we're saying. You'll see me today in that  speech, saying we've got to embrace Asia. We've got to have an outward-looking  economic system. We've got to grab the benefits of trade. We want to make sure our  manufacturers are part of global supply chains. That ticks all the boxes of saying we  need to engage in our region and the wider world.     

 But what I will never do is apologise for putting Australian jobs first. I do not believe that  we're doing enough to prioritise local apprenticeships. Did you know that 170,000  apprenticeships have been lost or we have 170,000 fewer apprenticeships than five  years ago? Did you know that when it comes to infrastructure contracts, not enough is  done to prioritise Aussie steel, Australian-made, in taxpayer-funded contracts.     

 It was the Labor Party who went against the tide over two years ago to defend an  Australian build of our submarines, for which we received some criticism from a few  people at the time but now everyone is on the bandwagon of building Australian  defence equipment. I will never apologise and never take a backward step to fighting for  Australian jobs.    

 JOURNALIST: If refugees refuse to return home, and their claims are rejected, they  could face 20 years. Is that something you will support?    

 SHORTEN: We haven't seen the detail. We'll sit down and get properly briefed by the  Government. But the whole proposition of defeating people smugglers is not that you  have people in indefinite detention. So I’d expect the Government to do everything  they can to move people on from Nauru and Manus.    

 JOURNALIST: What message is that sending if it's true?    

 SHORTEN: First of all, it's a hypothetical so I'll give the Government the benefit of the  doubt and hear the facts about what they're putting forward. But let's be straight about  the message we give people smugglers. It doesn't matter who is in power in Canberra,  we're on to your shonky game. And none of us support people making unsafe voyages,  at risk of life, being exploited by criminal syndicates. We do that by making clear that  you'll never achieve permanent settlement in Australia if you come by that means but  that doesn't mean that you keep people in indefinite detention. That's why we're not  going to play the sort of politics we saw the Liberals play when they were in opposition.  When Labor proposed a Malaysia settlement, which would have seen people resettled  there, the Liberals and the Greens formed an unholy alliance against that, and then we  saw a lot of the chaos that happened since then.   

 No, the Opposition I lead will where practicable will work with the Government and we  welcome today's announcement.    

 JOURNALIST: What do you think of the swing against the Nats in the Orange by-election?    

 SHORTEN: The National Party and Mike Baird in New South Wales are just as out of  touch as Malcolm Turnbull - and when you're out of touch you pay the electoral price.  One of the big unspoken debates in Australia is the National Party have treated the  regions of Australia as their own fiefdom and they haven't done enough for them.    

 Did you know nationally, nine of the ten poorest electorates in Australia are National  Party electorates? This is the same National Party who never supports increasing the  minimum wage, who does nothing about buying Australian and making sure we defend  Australian manufacturing. I'm not surprised by the result at all. And the message here is  for Barnaby Joyce: as long as you're the country branch office of Malcolm Turnbull's  harbourside Liberals, you are going to pay a price.    

 JOURNALIST: Have you, as Paul Keating says, drifted away from the centre? And is  the party too under sway from unions and factional bosses as he said on Saturday?    

 SHORTEN: Well, I've got a lot of respect for Paul Keating and I listen to him in  particular. I think there's a hypothesis or a proposition, which is an eternal of Australian  politics: this country is run best from the centre and the more that we can do to help our  middle class, the better that the whole economy and the whole stability our nation goes.    

 If there is a vacuum and there are insufficient policies prioritising the jobs and  opportunities of middle class Australians, politics hates a vacuum and more extreme  voices will fill it. I agree with this hypothesis about the need to be in the centre and to  help make sure that the middle class are getting their fair share of the economic  dividends of Australia. Perhaps one final question if there is one.    

 JOURNALIST: Just to follow up on that, he says your primary vote of between 35 and  36 indicates you're not in the centre at the last election. Is that fair or not?    

 SHORTEN: Well first of all, we did better in the last election than we did previously, but  there is a job to be done. Paul Keating is saying what a lot of people are saying and it's  something I agree with - that you can only ever run Australia from the middle.    

 That's why I'm defending Medicare. That's why I'm defending making sure that working  class kids can go to university and that it's their marks, not their parents' income, that  determines their opportunities in life. That's why I'm fighting for Australian  apprenticeships. That's why I believe in a system where it should be your Medicare  card, not your credit card, that determines the level of health care.    

 These are very important institutions to help protect middle class and working class  Australia and we will be relentless in our defence of the middle class. It's why I think  giving a tax cut of $50 billion to the richest companies in Australia is just very poor  economics.    

 It's why I don't believe the time is right to pass on a $17,000 tax cut for a millionaire but  for a family on $80,000 or $100,000 a year, see their standard of living decreasing. It's  why I'll fight for a strong minimum wage and it's why we also think in this country that we  need to reform our temporary overseas labour schemes to make sure that Australians  are getting opportunities for jobs first.    

 Thanks, everybody.     

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

