---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 8 November 2016: 18C; proposed refugee ban; Newspoll"
date: "2016-11-08"
creators:
  - "Aly, Anne"
source: "Office of ALY, ANNE, MP"
subjects:
  - "18C"
  - "proposed refugee ban"
  - "Newspoll"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/236786022
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4922904%22
---

 

 

 DR ANNE ALY MP  MEMBER FOR COWAN    

 

 TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2016    

 SUBJECT/S: 18C, Proposed refugee ban, Newspoll    

 DR ANNE ALY MP: I just want to say that Australians, myself included, are left once  again wondering about a Prime Minister, a weak Prime Minister, that has again  backflipped - this time on the Racial Discrimination Act.    

 And I think this latest backflip is particularly extraordinary when you consider that even  Tony Abbott, the least likely suspect, back in 2014 recognised the importance of  working with communities, recognised the value of not alienating certain sections of the  community in the interests of our national security.    

 So, you know, at least with Tony Abbott we knew who he was, we knew where he  stood, we knew what he stood for. But with this Prime Minister and his thought bubbles  that impact on national security, that’s a hard thing to peg down.    

 18C and 18D have served Australians well for many years now, and this latest backflip  by the Prime Minister is just another in the series of backflips that have left Australia  wondering just exactly who it is that’s governing this country.    

 JOURNALIST: Given the QUT case, isn’t there scop for a review of this section of the  Act?    

 ALY: Well I think there’s a difference between the Act itself and the way that the Act is  administered. I think in this case perhaps there is room to look at how the Act is  administered and whether or not every claim needs to be investigated. But the Act itself  in terms of 18C and 18D - 18C is there to protect all Australians and 18D is there to  protect free speech. The Act itself and reviewing the Act and reviewing the bureaucratic  processes around the Act are two different things.    

 JOURNALIST: How might you see the processes changed?    

 ALY: Well one thing could be that we could look at how the human rights and equal  opportunity commission investigates claims, whether or not there’s a process for  eliminating certain vexatious claims or determining vexatious claims - that could be one  thing. But I’m not about to pre-empt how that might happen, it’s not my forte, it’s not my  area of expertise. But I’m sure that there’s some way that that could be done.    

 JOURNALIST: The other issue that’s going to come before the Parliament today is the  Government’s changes to the Migration Act. Where do you think the Labor caucus will  sit on this?    

 ALY: Well, once again I don’t want to pre-empt what the caucus is going to say about  this, but I think it’s very clear and I would reiterate the words of Bill Shorten that at its  face value, at least, it seems quite ludicrous. The last 100 days the Government has  been telling us about how the last 800 days they haven’t had a boat; that they’ve  managed to stop the boats. And the rationale for this seems to be sending a message  to the people smugglers. Well the people smugglers aren’t listening because they don’t  care about the people that they dumped on our shores and that we’ve dumped  consequently in Nauru and Manus. So I’ll wait to see what the caucus is going to say  this morning, but all indications are as our Leader Bill Shorten and Tanya Plibersek  have said that this is actually quite ludicrous, there doesn’t seem to be any rationale for  it at all.    

 JOURNALIST: And so there probably won’t be any wriggle room to support the  Government’s changes?    

 ALY: Well as I said, I wouldn’t like to pre-empt what comes out of caucus, but at face-value and based on the discussions that have been had and on the comments that have  been made, it seems that we simply don’t see any rationale for this at all.    

 JOURNALIST: If this measure is connected to a resettlement deal to Canada or the US  and the people currently languishing on Nauru were able to start a new life in other  Western countries, surely that’s a small price to pay not to go on holidays on the Gold  Coast?    

 ALY: Well that offer has already been made by New Zealand and New Zealand came  out and said they would not resettle people and have a second-class citizenship. And  so, you know, even if there was this deal in place it would be a two-way deal and  already another country has indicated that it will not play ball on the basis of that deal.    

 JOURNALIST: And the polls say 53-47, you must be pretty happy that things seem to  be moving in the right direction for Labor?    

 ALY: I don’t really pay a lot of attention to the polls. I know everybody says that, but I  really don’t pay a lot of attention to the polls. 

 

 Thank you    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: ROBERT WILLIAMSON 0427 677 335   

