---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Intercontinental Hotel, Sydney: 6 November 2016: Indonesia-Australia Comphrensive Economic Partnership Agreement"
date: "2016-11-06"
creators:
  - "Ciobo, Steven"
source: "MINISTER FOR TRADE, TOURISM AND INVESTMENT"
subjects:
  - "Indonesia-Australia Comphrensive Economic Partnership Agreement"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/236786157
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4921174%22
---

 

 

 

 THE HON STEVEN CIOBO MP  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment 

 

 DOORSTOP REGARDING THE INDONESIA-AUSTRALIA COMPREHENSIVE  ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT   

 SUNDAY, 6 NOVEMBER 2016 

 INTERCONTINENTAL, SYDNEY 

 E&OE….   

 STEVEN CIOBO: It's terrific to have the chance to meet with the Indonesian Trade  Minister, Minister Lukita, this afternoon with this delegation from Indonesia. A very  clear sign that notwithstanding the unfortunate need for President Widodo to postpone  his trip to Australia, both Australia and Indonesia remain very committed toward  taking this relationship from strength to strength. And also the very solid progress  we've made with respect to the Australia-Indonesia Comprehensive Economic  Partnership Agreement. Discussions are ongoing. There is a lot of good will on both  sides, and of course there's huge untapped potential, both between Australia and  Indonesia. And that really underscores why both Australia and Indonesia are very  committed to this process. The meeting today went very well. Very warm and cordial.  Minister Lukita and I have met on a number of occasions now and we're progressing  our discussions and those negotiations very well. Still very committed to concluding,  we hope, by the end of next year. We also took the opportunity today to have  discussions in relation to the live cattle trade. I was very pleased Indonesia has  confirmed that there will not be a quota for animals out of Australia, and that they'll  be also happy to have annual permits for live cattle exports from Australia. Very good  news for Australian industry. We're going to continue to work together to also help  Indonesia boost their domestic breeding stock of cattle. This is of course value for  Indonesia and it's one that Australia of course brings a lot of knowledge and a lot of  ability to the table. And I'm very confident we'll be able to work together for an  effective outcome around live cattle exports as well. Questions?   

 JOURNALIST: Do you expect that the live cattle trade will increase with this new  deal?   

 STEVEN CIOBO: We're working together to make sure that Indonesia's need for  increased beef cattle and Australia's desire of course, to be able to sell more beef  cattle is in a position that's going to produce a win-win outcome. Shifting to annual  permits and having no quota will definitely be advantageous for Australian exports 

 but this really is about achieving a win-win outcome. And so I'm confident that by  working together, we'll be able to do just that.   

 JOURNALIST: So Australia is, population-wise, comparatively a very small  country, very small market compared to Indonesia. What can they get from us?  What's in it for them?   

 STEVEN CIOBO: For Indonesia?   

 JOURNALIST: Yeah.   

 STEVEN CIOBO: In relation to live cattle or more broadly?   

 JOURNALIST: No, more broadly. In trade.   

 STEVEN CIOBO: Sure. Australia of course is different measures - we're the 12th-  largest economy in the world. We have a very mature, developed economy. We  generate a lot of intellectual property, we've got a lot of good technical skills and  knowledge here in Australia. We're able to share that with a country like Indonesia, a  country which of course, is rapidly growing. A country which has very strong focus  on building a capacity for their domestic population. We're very focused in particular  on services exports from Australia, opportunities in relation to tourism, in relation to  education, as well as what we're doing in our traditional markets like agriculture and  live cattle exports, for example. All of that, very important export industries for  Australia and highly regarded by the Indonesians.   

 JOURNALIST: Have you brought up, or any of your colleagues brought up the  possibility of Indonesia taking refugees from our offshore processing centres?   

 STEVEN CIOBO: I haven't, no.   

 JOURNALIST: And what industries do you hope will be some of the first to take up  trade under this new deal?   

 STEVEN CIOBO: I continue to see an expansion of trade opportunities between  Australia and Indonesia. In many respects, that's precisely why we want to put in  place a high quality, commercially meaningful agreement between Australia and  Indonesia. This is why we are undergoing negotiations now, and I'm very hopeful that  with the successful conclusion of negotiations, we hope around the middle to end of  next year, we'll be well placed to see the economic relationship between Australia and  Indonesia go from strength to strength. Thanks everybody.   

 [ends] 

