---
title: "Greens urge PM to accept Victorian offer to let asylum seekers stay"
date: "2016-02-06"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/223717390
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4348701%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE  Saturday, 6 February 2016   

 Greens urge PM to accept Victorian offer to let asylum seekers stay   

 The Australian Greens have today urged Malcolm Turnbull to accept the Victorian Government’s  offer to give refuge to the 267 asylum seekers slated for deportation to Nauru.   

 If Malcolm Turnbull is truly different and if he’s actually running this government then he will step up  and let them stay," said Greens Leader Richard Di Natale.   

 "This is a question of leadership.   

 “The Victorian Government has today displayed the leadership and courage that has been sadly  lacking from both Malcolm Turnbull and Bill Shorten this week.   

 “This offer gives the Prime Minister a second chance to show that this is no longer the Abbott  Government,” Senator Di Natale said.   

 “In the absence of leadership from the Labor and Liberal parties in Canberra, it's fallen to the states  to stand up for these vulnerable people,” Greens immigration spokesperson Senator Sarah Hanson-  Young said.   

 “I urge the Prime Minister to do the right thing when it comes to these people and that is, let them  stay.   

 “There is no reason to ship these people back to Nauru now, except for the Liberal Party's nasty  politics,” said Senator Hanson-Young.   

 Media Contacts:  Senator Di Natale - Andrew Blyberg 0457 901 600  Senator Hanson-Young - Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760 

