---
title: "Increased humanitarian support for Syria and Iraq"
date: "2016-02-04"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/223489176
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4339574%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP 

 

 4 February 2016 

 

 INCREASED HUMANITARIAN SUPPORT FOR SYRIA AND IRAQ   

 Today I will announce at the Syria Donors Conference that Australia will provide an  additional $25 million for life-saving humanitarian assistance in Syria, Iraq and  countries in the region hosting large numbers of refugees.    

 This new funding includes $20 million for partners within Syria, and to partners  operating in the region including the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),  UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF), World Food Programme (WFP) and Australian NGOs.  Australia’s assistance will help Syrian refugees and their host communities in the  region access vital resources such as food, shelter and protection.    

 The Australian Government will also provide an additional $5 million for Iraq, including  $2 million to the United Nations Development Programme to help stabilise areas of the  country liberated from Daesh, and the balance to NGO partners.    

 This increased contribution will support civilians affected by the world’s worst  humanitarian crisis. In Syria, 13.5 million people require urgent humanitarian  assistance. A further 4.6 million Syrians are refugees in neighbouring countries. An  estimated 10 million people in Iraq also require urgent humanitarian support this year.   

 In addition to this increased humanitarian funding, the Australian Government will also  deploy 10 Australian Civilian Corps specialists to Lebanon and Jordan to assist UN  and NGO partners deliver education, water, sanitation, camp infrastructure, logistics  and protection to Syrian refugees.   

 This announcement brings Australia’s humanitarian response to the Syria crisis to  more than $213 million since 2011, and for Iraq to $45 million since 2014, totalling  $258 million.   

 

 Foreign Minister’s Office:  Rachel Obradovic  0478 488 874  Phoebe Nolan   0408 275 340 

 

