---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 20 November 2016: Malcolm Turnbull's latest cuts to paid parent leave; 457 visas; possible resettlement deal with Malaysia"
date: "2016-11-20"
creators:
  - "Macklin, Jenny"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "Malcolm Turnbull's latest cuts to paid parent leave"
  - "457 visas"
  - "possible resettlement deal with Malaysia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/237605236
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4948276%22
---

 THE HON. JENNY MACKLIN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES  MEMBER FOR JAGAJAGA   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SUNDAY, 20 NOVEMBER 2016   

 SUBJECT/S: Malcolm Turnbull’s latest cuts to paid parental leave, 457 visas,  possible resettlement deal with Malaysia.   

 JENNY MACKLIN: There are reports today of Malcolm Turnbull’s latestround of paid  parental leave cuts - it will mean that more than 70,000 mothers will lose some or all of  their paid parental leave. This is just the latest proposal to cut paid parental leave in  Australia and will leave parents on median incomes of around $60,000 more than 

 $5,000 worse off, because of these cuts to their paid parental leave.   

 JOURNALIST: Isn’t the 20 weeks that their proposing better than the 18 weeks  proposal?   

 JENNY MACKLIN: Well, the real problem is that that’s only part of the story. The other  part of the story that Malcolm Turnbull wants to say to mothers is that 70,000 of you will  lose some or all of your paid parental leave. If you’re a retail worker, working for Coles  or Woolworths or Bunnings - you’ve negotiated your paid parental leave with your  employer - you’ll see a cut to your paid parental leave as a result of Malcolm Turnbull’s  changes.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think though that mums will be more open to 20 weeks as  opposed to the 18 weeks?   

 JENNY MACKLIN: Of course, all mums and dads would like more time off - that’s why  it’s so important that parents can combine their government funded paid parental leave  with their employer provided paid parental leave and there are now hundreds of  thousands of people that can benefit from agreements that they’ve made with their  employers whether its retail workers, whether its Qantas workers, teachers, nurses all of  these mothers and fathers now have access to employer supported paid parental leave  and we don’t want that cut.   

 JOURNALIST: What do you see as the main problem with the new proposal of the 20  weeks?   

 JENNY MACKLIN: This will see 70,000 mothers lose some or all of their paid parental  leave. It is a straight cut to paid parental leave for 70,000 mothers in Australia.   

 JOURNALIST: And just on 457 - the Government has indicated that they’re going to  cut some of the occupation from the 457 visa list. How deeply do you think it should  cut? 

 JENNY MACKLIN: The most important message that Labor has is that we want to see  the jobs that are available in Australia going to Australians. We know that there are  hundreds of thousands of Australians who are unemployed who are looking for work  and more than a million underemployed - who want more work. We want those people  to get the jobs that are available in Australia.   

 JOURNALIST: So does Labor think that different labour markets in different parts of the  country have to be accounted for under any changes to the 457s?   

 JENNY MACKLIN: Well of course, we need to look at unemployment in different parts  of Australia. Some parts of Australia have very high levels of unemployment, particularly  high levels of youth unemployment. We want those young Australians to get the chance  to get the jobs that are available in those regional centres.   

 JOURNALIST: Is there a figure? How deeply do you think the 457 visa list should be  cut?   

 JENNY MACKLIN: The objective has to be to make sure that Australians can get those  jobs where they’re available.   

 JOURNALIST: The Government appears to be in talks with Malaysia about taking  refugees from Nauru and Manus - Labor welcomes this?   

 JENNY MACKLIN: First and foremost the Prime Minister should tell us what agreement  he has entered into with Malaysia or any other country. And I would say that if there is  an agreement with Malaysia of course that would be welcomed, but Mr Turnbull is just  showing his extraordinary hypocrisy given that he and Mr Dutton both voted against the  agreement with Malaysia when Labor was in Government.   

 JOURNALIST: Hypocrisy or not - this is something that Labor has wanted in the past.   

 JENNY MACKLIN: Sure, we want to see resettlement arrangements entered into, we  want to make sure that people are resettled as quickly as possible. But I think it does  demonstrate that Mr Turnbull really cannot be believed, he says one thing when he’s in  opposition and now he’s doing something completely different.   

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LACHLAN POULTER 0423 937 655 

