---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne, Victoria: 29 April 2016: Malcolm Turnbull's attack on Medicare and cuts to pathology; Malcolm Turnbull's approval of tax avoidance; Infrastructure; Manus Island Detention Centre; penalty rates"
date: "2016-04-29"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Malcolm Turnbull's attack on Medicare and cuts to pathology"
  - "Malcolm Turnbull's approval of tax avoidance"
  - "Infrastructure"
  - "Manus Island Detention Centre"
  - "penalty rates"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/227441171
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4536593%22
---

 

 

 

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE  FRIDAY, 29 APRIL 2016 

 SUBJECT/S: Malcolm Turnbull’s attack on Medicare and cuts to pathology;  Malcolm Turnbull’s approval of tax avoidance; Infrastructure; Manus Island  Detention Centre; Penalty rates   

 LIESEL WETT, CEO OF PATHOLOGY AUSTRALIA: Welcome everybody, my  name is Liesel Wett, and I am the CEO of Pathology Australia, and I am  here today  with the Leader of the Opposition and the Shadow Minister for Health. Welcome to  Melbourne Pathology. Melbourne Pathology has been providing services to the  Victorian community for more than 80 years. Pathology, you would know, Australian  pathology is world class. 70 per cent of all medical diagnosis, and 100 per cent of all  cancer diagnosis, requires the skills of a pathologist. Yesterday we launched a major  report that showed the contribution that the pathology sector has made to health  care to Australian citizens in this country. That $2 billion in 2014-2015, includes up to  half a billion dollars in free pathology tests. That's half a billion dollars in free  pathology tests every year. That's why we think the cuts to the bulk billing initiative  are a nonsense and need to go. Eight weeks ago we launched a campaign to ask  the community, the broader Australian community, to help us to stop these cuts to  pathology. We have now, half a million signatures to that policy. We're soon, if we  keep going the way we're going, we are soon to reach over a million signatures  trying to stop those cuts. That'll happen just before 1 July. We know half a billion, half  a million, people can't be wrong. They can't be wrong. They want their pathology  tests, their life saving pathology tests where they need them, when they need them,  without fear of cost. That's why we're asking the Government today to overturn this  decision and to keep petitioning, and to running our petition right up until the election.  I'd now like to ask the Leader of the Opposition to say a few words.   

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Liesel It's great to be 

 

 

 here at this pathology lab with my shadow health spokesperson, Catherine King.  Labor is absolutely committed to defending Medicare against Mr Turnbull's cuts.  We've now seen half a million Australians sign a petition opposing the cuts to bulk  billing that the Turnbull Government are effectively putting in place for diabetics  seeking blood tests, for people dealing with the battle of cancer getting the  necessary treatment and identification they need so they can be helped on their  journey to recovery. This Government, Mr Turnbull, on Tuesday night has a last  opportunity to reverse the dreadful cuts to Medicare which are happening here with  pathology testing and x-rays. The consequences of the Turnbull Government  arrogantly continuing with their war against Medicare, past the Budget, are dreadful  to contemplate for people who are battling with chronic diseases and life-threatening  diseases. This election will be a referendum about the privatisation and slashing of  Medicare. The Labor Party is absolutely committed to a sensible policy which  ensures that patients who need treatment, pathology tests and x-rays, don't have to  pay a large upfront fee in order to get the vital tests they need. The consequence of  Mr Turnbull's anti-Medicare policies is that sick people will get sicker and the  taxpayer will end up paying more tax because we all know that people who don't get  early treatment will require more expensive treatment the longer that their diseases  and medical challenges remain unsupported. But this just goes to show how out of  touch Mr Turnbull's priorities are. When it comes to defending the big end of town,  Mr Turnbull is very strong. He doesn't want a Banking Royal Commission. He  doesn't make multinationals pay their fair share. He's proposing in the Budget to give  the biggest tax cuts to the people who are already the most well off. And this  morning on Melbourne radio, he gave Prime Ministerial blessing to tax avoidance in  Australia. Mr Turnbull is the best friend that people who seek to avoid their tax have  in Canberra. The very wealthy who are able to access the most favourable tax  concessions, who are able to engage in tax avoidance, the people who are avoiding  tax in Australia, couldn't ask for a better friend in Canberra than Malcolm Turnbull.  It's all about priorities. At the next election, Labor will defend bulk billing, we will  defend the ability of people to get timely medical care and the blood tests they need  so they can cope with the biggest challenges in their life. By contrast, Mr Turnbull will  defend the banks against a Royal Commission, he'll defend multinationals against  paying their fair share and he seems intent upon using Prime Ministerial office to  encourage tax avoidance in Australia. Happy to take questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, do you support Malcolm Turnbull's idea to go (inaudible)  loans to build infrastructure?     

 SHORTEN: We have seen Mr Turnbull today propose a plan that favours bankers  but just not builders. Six months ago, Anthony Albanese, my transport  spokesperson, and myself outlined a $10 billion concrete bank with firm proposals to  help reinvest in public transport in our big cities, to help reinvest in necessary roads  to clear congestion so that people can have better productivity and better quality of  life. But all we've seen today from Mr Turnbull is a $50 million inquiry and we don't  see any detail of what his priorities are. Mr Turnbull has a plan for bankers but not for  building the projects that Australia needs. 

 

 

 

 JOURNALIST: Would you cave into the demands of the Left and let asylum seekers  come to Australia if you were PM?    

 SHORTEN: I think it is absolutely outrageous that Mr Turnbull and Minister Dutton,  arguably the worst Minister in the Coalition although there's strong competition for  that, it is outrageous that Mr Turnbull and Mr Dutton have allowed this train wreck to  occur in terms of offshore processing and Papua New Guinea. It was amazing  yesterday morning when Minister Dutton said that he and Prime Minister Turnbull  had known that this problem had been coming for months. Well what have they been  doing about it? A Labor Government is supportive of regional processing. We will not  allow the people smugglers to get back into business. On that, both Mr Turnbull and I  are on a unity ticket. But what we won't do is allow a situation, if we're elected on  July 2, of indefinite detention of people on Manus and Nauru. The Government of the  day needs to make sure that we're actively negotiating agreements in our region so  that those people in those facilities are given a real path to be able to be resettled in  a third country. Labor's policy is settled.    

 JOURNALIST: Would you send them to New Zealand? They've offered to take  refugees from us.    

 SHORTEN: We are open to the question of resettlement countries. The issue here is  that what on earth has Mr Turnbull and Mr Dutton been doing for the last number of  months when they have known that PNG and the situation there is going to arise and  the sort of situation we've seen this week? It is not good enough for the Government  to simply focus on turning back boats and not have a plan to regionally resettle  people. It's not good enough for them to leave people in indefinite detention. I  understand the frustration and concerns of many Australians who don't want to  see indefinite detention. But also, I am equally committed to making sure that the  people smugglers, the criminal syndicates who prey upon vulnerable people who  merely seek to come to this country, offering them expensive tickets in dangerous  boats and we see thousands of people drown. Australia needs to pursue a path  which defeats the people smugglers but doesn't see people kept in indefinite  detention.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you have anything to say to the MPs, including people like  Melissa Clarke (sic), who are calling on you and everyone to settle people in  Australia?    

 SHORTEN: We settled this matter at the ALP National Conference. See, unlike Mr  Turnbull, I'm able to persuade my party to be able move in a particular direction. We  know he can't persuade them to do anything on climate change, anything on  marriage equality, anything in terms of a whole range of policies that he used to  believe. I know it's a difficult issue and I understand that a lot of Australians, not just  members of parliament, want to see an end to indefinite detention but I also  understand that all Australians don't want to see mass drownings at sea. I'm 

 

 

 committed to beating the people smugglers and I must take this opportunity to make  it clear to the criminal syndicates who watch what happens in Australian politics,  after July 2, whether or not it's another term with the Liberals or whether or not Labor  wins, we're all equally committed and all Australians are too, in defeating people  smugglers and putting people on unsafe boats and seeing people drown at sea.  We're not going to go back to that.    

 JOURNALIST: Just back on health, we read a story today about the size of the  health bureaucracy saying it was bigger than the army reserve. Are you worried  about that flowing out, that non-core health worker population blowing out and have  impacts on patient care?    

 SHORTEN: I'm going to get Catherine to go to the detail of that but let me state  again, the number one priority for Labor is to make sure that it is your Medicare card  not your credit card that determines the level of health care you get in this country.  There is no more important issue than health care, that's why we are fighting so hard  against the ridiculous and savage cuts which will discourage sick people from getting  the blood tests they need, which will in fact help them more speedily to recovery or  indeed in some cases, it becomes a matter of life and death. But I'll get Catherine to  go to your specific matter.    

 CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks for that Bill and I  saw those reports as well, so thanks for the question. I find it pretty extraordinary for  a Government that said they were going to get rid of the bureaucracy when it came  to health care that we've seen this happen on their watch and in particular, the  Commonwealth bureaucracy. We are absolutely committed to making sure that we  pursue efficiencies across the health system and making sure that dollars go into  Medicare. What we've seen from this Government is substantial cuts and more  bureaucracy and I think the report today points to that.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister, can I just get you on higher education as well? There's a  story out today that the Government would look at going ahead with deregulation of  university fees. Putting a cap on how much they can charge per degree. What are  your thoughts on that?    

 SHORTEN: I don't trust the Liberals when it comes to providing opportunities for  middle class and working class kids to go to university. They're very out of touch.  The idea that you make slashing cuts to higher education, such as the Liberals are  proposing. So, you put universities under incredible pressure and then what they do  is they deregulate the fees so that you force universities to increase their fees. What  that means is that this nation goes backwards in higher education. It's important that  the kids in the regions of Australia get a chance to go to university. It's important that  mature-age students who might be seeking to retrain and reskill for the jobs of the  future in a changing job market aren’t discouraged from going back to university  because of $100,000 degrees. Labor's already outlined our policies on higher  education. We would make multinationals pay their fair share, we would make reform 

 

 

 to unsustainable tax concessions and superannuation at the top end and using some  of that money we would be able to then fund a minimum guarantee for every student  going to university. In Australia, it should be how hard you work which determines  whether or not you get to university not what school you went to or how rich your  parents are. My concern is that if Mr Turnbull and the Liberals get another 1,000  days to be in power they're going to turn higher education into the bastion of the elite  and lot of other people are going to be locked out and that's not good for the  economic growth of the nation.    

 JOURNALIST: Just on Martin Ferguson, what's your view about the (inaudible). Has  Dave Oliver gone too far for the tough and tumble of the (inaudible).     

 SHORTEN: I haven't seen the comments, Rick. What I do know is that the Labor  Party has learned a lot of the lessons of the previous six years of government. I think  it's fair to say we pass the test for being a united Opposition. You can't make  everyone in your political party like each other, that's a fact, but today we see Tony  Abbott saying he doesn't think he could get the votes to be leader. What's interesting  about that is that he didn't say he doesn’t want to be leader. What we've got is real  dysfunction in the Liberal Party. I was in Tasmania yesterday and one of the things I  noticed is that Malcolm Turnbull's key backer and most senior Tasmanian Minister,  Senator Colbeck, is number five on the Senate ticket. Another thing which I have to  say about some aspects of Mr Turnbull's Liberal Party is why are the top five  positions in Tasmania all gone to men? You know, this Liberal Party is out of touch.  They don't have as many women running for parliament as the Labor Party, they  don't have as many women in senior positions running, they certainly aren't as  united. We know after the next election that whatever happens in the election, the  Liberal Party is itching for a real civil war and a dust-up in their own ranks. This  election is just a skirmish for the Liberal Party that takes them off what they see to be  the main game which is either the Abbott forces squaring off with the Turnbull  forces of the Turnbull forces squaring off with the Abbott forces. So when we talk  about unity I can guarantee the Australian people that the Labor Party is a united  team. That's why I think we're putting our policies out so positively whereas Mr  Turnbull, in the last eight months, he's had to totally turn his personality inside out  and be all the things now he said he would never be before he became Prime  Minister and I use climate change as the perfect example of that. One more  question, thanks.    

 JOURNALIST: So one of his comments was that he flies business class and he's  lost sight of the (inaudible) - penalty rates saying he shouldn't oppose penalty rates  (inaudible).    

 SHORTEN: Well, I'm not going to get into the gossip and the chatter but what I will  say about penalty rates, only a Labor Government can be trusted to protect people's  penalty rates. The Liberal Party, through the Productivity Commission, put a  submission in to the current penalty rates case by the Independent tribunal which  recommended really cutting penalty rates. I, from Opposition, for the first time in the 

 

 

 history of Federation, put forward a submission supporting our penalty rates  structure. The truth of the matter is that people who work the inconvenient hours, the  unsocial hours, the hours which rob you of time with your family do deserve extra  loading and extra support. Only Labor can be trusted - we get their penalty rates. For  them it's not a matter of a whim or a thought bubble, for them it's the difference  between being able to afford the decencies of life, be able to afford to pay the bills or  not. That's why the Labor Party is on the side of penalty rates and I might just say in  closing the Labor Party is going to back in the rights of kids from modest  backgrounds to go to university and we will oppose rampant deregulation of higher  education. The Labor Party is on the side of the half a million Australians who've  already signed the very important petition in the matter of eight weeks to defend the  right to be able to access quality pathology tests without having to pay an upfront  fee. When it comes to standing up for people who are sick, for people who are down  on their luck, for people who are working hard every day to raise their family and  need penalty rates, for parents who dream of their kids going to university and also  importantly for parents who want to see their adult children be able to buy their first  home in the housing market without competing unfairly with people buying their 10th  property subsidised by taxpayers, that's who the Labor Party stand for. Look forward  to seeing you soon. Thank you.    

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053   

