---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Brisbane: 30 June 2016: Labor's positive plans for Medicare; election 2016; CFA; asylum seekers; National Broadband Network; marriage equality; United Nations"
date: "2016-06-30"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Labor's positive plans for Medicare"
  - "election 2016"
  - "CFA"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "National Broadband Network"
  - "marriage equality"
  - "United Nations"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/230341085
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4665071%22
---

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT 

 DOORSTOP 

 BRISBANE 

 THURSDAY, 30 JUNE 2016 

 SUBJECTS: Labor’s positive plans for Medicare; Election 2016; CFA; Asylum 

 seekers; National Broadband Network; Marriage equality; United Nations 

 DES HARDMAN, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR FORDE: Good morning everybody 

 thank you for coming along. I'm Des Hardman, the Labor Candidate for Forde in the 

 upcoming Federal Election just two days away. It's time for Australia to make a very 

 important decision about who is going to run the country and we all know only Labor 

 will put people first and has the policies that support our community. Today we are 

 here with Bill Shorten, Bill has been visiting people and talking with people here in 

 Forde with me today at Logan Hospital and at the Logan Hyperdome. As part of every 

 conversation, people keep on raising with us the importance of public healthcare and 

 Medicare and how important it is to every part of our health services here in Australia. 

 People have also been talking to us about the importance of education and how that 

 will establish the future for all of our children and their families here in Forde into the 

 future. So we're here with Bill today and he's come along to talk to you also about the 

 importance  of what we're taking to the election and why we need a Labor Government 

 here in Australia. 

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Des. Good afternoon 

 everybody. I started early this morning at the Royal Brisbane Hospital. I had the 

 privilege to talk to oncology nurses and staff who work in the emergency ward at the 

 Royal Brisbane Hospital. Subsequently I've been to Logan hospital, again speaking to 

 the nurses who work in the children's ward. The common argument, the common 

 concern the people at the front line of our healthcare system have, is they are worried 

 about the cuts which Malcolm Turnbull is making to Medicare, the cuts he's making to 

 hospitals. In fact, talking to the oncology nurses made me realise the cuts to pathology 

 and diagnostic imaging bulk billing start tomorrow on July 1. The cuts start tomorrow. 

 Australians have a chance to stop these cuts by voting Labor on Saturday. The case is 

 pretty clear, the choice is very clear: You can either have Malcolm Turnbull or you can 

 have well-funded Medicare but you can't have both.  

 Indeed, choices are the key issues in this election. What we said, what we saw in this 

 election at the start, was choices between funding Medicare or giving corporate tax 

 cuts of $50 billion. In fact, in the journey to this election, which comes to its close in 

 two days' time, started three years ago. Three years ago I set out to unite the Labor 

 Party. I set out to formulate a social and economic program for both the short-term and 

 the long-term future of Australia. Eight weeks ago, I determined to explain our policy 

 agenda to the people of Australia. To explain our policy agenda with clarity, with 

 transparency and in great detail. Today, when we get to the end of this campaign, I 

 can say with complete honesty and confidence: Labor is ready to govern, ready to 

 implement our policy agenda, ready to serve Australia. I want to say to the people of 

 this great nation: Labor will serve the interests of all Australians. I want to make it very 

 clear to Australians: we are ready to govern. I hope we've done enough to earn the 

 votes of Australians on Saturday and I want to make one more promise: If you vote 

 Labor on July 2, we won't let you down. Happy to take questions. 

 REPORTER: Mr Shorten, how many seats do you think you have to win to ward off a 

 challenge from Anthony Albanese and do you still trust Sam Dastyari after he told 

 people he would support Mr Albanese in a challenge? 

 SHORTEN: Silly question I'm afraid. I'm in this election to win it. What Labor is doing 

 to win this election is put forward a positive policy agenda. Since Malcolm Turnbull 

 became Prime Minister, he has disappointed people. He has become a small target 

 Government with more to say about us than himself. By contrast, the Labor Party I 

 lead has been united for the last three years and we are more united now than ever. 

 What unites us, is our vision for the future of this country, both in the short-term and 

 the long-term. We are ready to govern. We are ready to implement our policy agenda 

 and we are ready to serve this country. We hope we've done enough to earn the votes 

 of Australians. 

 REPORTER: The firies union is upping its presence at polling booths, has said it will 

 be doing that. Does that lend to any concerns for you or for Labor candidates, given 

 the CFA issue has blown up in Victoria? 

 SHORTEN: Well, as a Victorian, I'm very conscious that what really matters is the 

 safety of Victoria and Victorians. The integral and irreplaceable elements to the safety 

 of Victorians from bushfire and fire, are our volunteers, they are the heart of the CFA, 

 and our career firefighters. I'm incredibly disappointed this state issue has rolled on. 

 I'm incredibly disappointed the national Liberals are seeking to inject opportunism in 

 what is always going to be resolved at the state level. I know the parties can resolve 

 this, but I would be less than candid if I didn't say I wasn't incredibly disappointed this 

 issue rolls on and on. 

 REPORTER: Are you worried this whole dispute is going to be affecting Labor's 

 chances in Victoria given it's so closely tied to the state Government, Dan Andrews? 

 SHORTEN: Neither Mr Turnbull or I are running for Premier of Victoria. I think 

 Victorians know it's a state issue at its core. I think the issues important to Australians 

 in this election, are who's going to fight for jobs? Who’s going to fight for Australian 

 jobs? Who's going to make sure we have our school systems and universities and 

 TAFEs properly funded? Perhaps most importantly, who is going to save Medicare?  

 REPORTER: You didn't answer the last part of Alicia's question regarding if you trust 

 Sam Dastyari to back you. Is it frustrating you these are the questions you are getting 

 at press conferences instead of the focus on what you want to talk about?  

 SHORTEN: No, to be fair you're allowed to ask whatever questions you want. I'm not 

 fustrated about what you ask. What I know, is what I've experienced in the last eight 

 weeks on this campaign trail. Australians know we're united. If you want to look at 

 leadership tensions, you've got the gold standard down the road in the Liberal camp, 

 haven't you? I mean, Mr Turnbull is talking about unity today. Goodness me, that's 

 ironic. He can't even unite his own party. He can't even unite the Liberal Party. I mean 

 if there is going to be real unity in the Liberal Party, is he going to put Tony Abbott 

 back into the Cabinet? A man of his experience or going to keep punishing him? 

 That's the leadership tension. 

 REPORTER: Mr Shorten, the Prime Minister this morning said on radio that your plans 

 for the NBN to fix it will actually cost $30 billion more. If that is the case, is that the sort 

 of money that will need to be spent to get the system running properly? 

 SHORTEN: I'm just glad you were able to get Malcolm Turnbull to talk about the NBN. 

 I've got to concede, I was a bit surprised, within the launch, the showcasing of 

 Malcolm Turnbull's case for re-election, he didn't mention the NBN once. When you 

 cut it, slice and dice it any which way, Mr Turnbull's major contribution in public life has 

 been to be the Minister for Communications. What's he done? He's slowed the internet 

 speed from 30th in the world to 60 th . Australia's fallen. He's doubled the cost of the 

 NBN. He promised we'd have the NBN rolled out by the end of 2016. There is no 

 chance. So when Mr Turnbull talks about faulty NBN policy, I do acknowledge he's 

 qualified to talk about it, but what he is, basically, he is envious of Labor's policy. The 

 truth of the matter is, he's given Australia a second rate technology. What Labor is 

 going to do is go back after the current contracts are rolled out for the copper and we 

 are going to go back to doing the job properly the first time. That's fibre to the home.  

 REPORTER: Mr Shorten, there are 14,000 refugees and asylum seekers in Indonesia 

 registered with the UNHCR. The Immigration Minister, Peter Dutton, frequently warns 

 they could jump on boats tomorrow. Since 2014, the Federal Government has banned 

 accepting refugees for resettlement who are registered with the UN in Indonesia. 

 Specifically, would Labor lift that ban to avoid those people falling prey to people 

 smugglers and drowning at sea? 

 SHORTEN: Labor's got a very strong policy on deterring the people smugglers. The 

 fact of the matter is, on July 3, if Labor wins the election, the people smugglers will 

 face a Government just as determined as the one we replace. We will not see a 

 situation where vulnerable people are exploited by unscrupulous criminal syndicates to 

 get on unsafe boats and drown at sea. In terms of our general approach on refugees, 

 we've said we are a nation which will have refugees as part of our mix. But what we 

 are not going to do is have them come by water across that dangerous stretch of 

 ocean. I have said I will send Richard Marles, on the day we are sworn in, and he's 

 sworn in, immediately to talk to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees to 

 look at the question you've raised and all the other matters involved.  

 REPORTER: Two questions, just following up Stephanie and Alicia's question, are you 

 confident Sam Dastyari still supports you? Hypothetical I know, but if the vote doesn't 

 go your way on Saturday, will you support a plebiscite enabling legislation to legalise 

 same-sex marriage?  

 SHORTEN: Thank you for the first part of that question. It gives me an opportunity to 

 say something, which whilst I've said a little bit in this campaign, I'm really pleased to 

 say again today. The Labor Party entrusted me with a great privilege when I was 

 elected leader of the Labor Party. We've probably exceeded the expectations of the 

 people who wrote us off, but we are still going with every inch of energy right down to 

 the wire. Every vote is important to Labor. I have to say, the only reason we are in the 

 competitive position we are in and that we can win is because of my entire Labor 

 team. I won't name the whole of my frontbench and whole of my backbench, but you 

 can take it from that, there is not a single member of my team I would swap. I have 

 been very well served by my united team. Really, the fact we've got a strong policy 

 offering and a united approach, the fact voters can go into the polling booths on 

 Saturday and know when they vote Labor, they are voting for jobs, education, 

 Medicare, first grade NBN, standing up for housing affordability for young home 

 buyers and real action on climate change. That is a credit to my whole team and I will 

 not hear one word about me, critical of my team because they have helped put us in 

 the position where we are fulfilling the trust of millions of Australians. What was the 

 second part of your question?  

 REPORTER: The hypothetical, if you don't win on Saturday, would you support a 

 plebiscite to legalise same-sex marriage? 

 SHORTEN: Just as Mr Turnbull refuses to answer the hypothetical situation if he 

 loses, I'm going to set myself the same standard. I know the best approach for 

 marriage equality in this country is to legislate it within 100 days. We all know 

 community attitudes have moved on. Mr Turnbull himself has said the majority of 

 Australians want it. If he knows the majority of Australians support marriage equality, 

 why are we spending $160 million of scarce taxpayer money for any other reason than 

 this is what he has to do to negotiate his fragile control of the Liberal Party. Why on 

 earth is Malcolm Turnbull so determined to have a plebiscite which will unleash, 

 beyond doubt, some very ugly arguments when he knows there is a quicker, cheaper, 

 more effective way of doing it, which doesn't involve the whole nation paying for his 

 deal with some of the Tony Abbott supporters who then deserted Tony Abbott.  

 REPORTER: Mr Shorten, you just asked whether Tony Abbott should be put back into 

 Cabinet. Does that mean you think Mr Turnbull will still have a Cabinet next week? 

 SHORTEN: No, what it means is it's clear there are leadership tensions within the 

 Liberal Party. I don't mind if Malcolm puts him in Shadow Cabinet. It doesn't worry me 

 in the slightest. The point about it is we know the Liberal Party is not united. Mr 

 Turnbull's talking about unity today. He says ‘give me another chance because I will 

 unite the nation.’ It's ironic because of the tensions in the Liberal Party, but more 

 importantly than that, the issues which affect working class and middle class people in 

 Australia, the issues which affect them, will not be solved by Mr Turnbull. You cannot 

 unite Australia whilst you are cutting school funding. You cannot unite Australia when 

 your only policy for housing affordability is get rich parents. You cannot unite Australia 

 when you won't take real action on climate change. You cannot unite Australia when 

 your only economic plan is to give tax cuts for millionaires and corporate tax 

 giveaways for the big end of town. You cannot unite Australia when you are seeing a 

 collapse in apprenticeships and you don't see TAFE being treated with the respect it 

 deserves. You most certainly cannot unite Australia if you're not prepared to fund and 

 save Medicare. One last question. 

 REPORTER: After the election, you talked about you don't want to hypothesise, but 

 would Labor support Kevin Rudd in a bid for the United Nations or Tony Abbott going 

 to the UK as a High Commissioner? 

 SHORTEN: I've already answered the question about Kevin Rudd. I am supportive of 

 Australians when they make their bids on the international stage. It's not a hypothetical 

 for me I support the Australian team in Rio for instance. When it comes to the issues 

 of this election, let me be perfectly clear. For the last three years the Labor Party has 

 worked on policies and strategies, ideas and values and vision for this country. I'm 

 very proud we have got the most cogent policy agenda in a generation from 

 opposition. We have put forward our plans and argued them in the greater part of the 

 last eight weeks. I am very confident, and I can say with complete honesty: we're 

 ready. We're ready to implement our policy agenda. We're ready to serve Australia. I 

 hope we have done enough to earn the votes of Australians. I make one more promise 

 to Australians: If you vote Labor, we won't let you down. Thank you everybody. 

 Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111 

 Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor Party, 5/9 Sydney Ave, Barton, ACT  2600 

 

 

