---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Perth, WA: 23 May 2016: Perth METRONET; asylum seeker policy; GST distribution"
date: "2016-05-23"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Perth METRONET"
  - "asylum seeker policy"
  - "GST distribution"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/228329669
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4584186%22
---

 

 

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT 

 DOORSTOP  

 PERTH  MONDAY, 23 MAY 2016 

 SUBJECTS: Perth METRONET, Asylum seeker policy, GST distribution 

 

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody. It’s great to be 

 here in Western Australia with Mark McGowan, Labor’s hard working Leader of the Opposition in 

 the West. I am also here with Tim Hammond, Labor’s Candidate for Perth. But most importantly I 

 am really pleased that I can announce that if Labor is elected on July the 2nd, we will contribute 

 $1 billion towards the building of Perth METRONET. Real jobs, real money, delivering for the 

 public transport needs of Perth. Everybody knows that WA's been hit by the downturn in the 

 mining boom and we need to see real jobs, real jobs created to help the community transition from  the peak of the mining boom to a post-mining boom state economy. 

 Everybody knows that congestion is increasing in Perth. All the people who come from the north 

 and the south, they know the congestion is one of the great frustrations which stops people 

 spending more time with their families. Congestion obviously leads to greater costs for business. 

 Only Labor has a plan to put the public transport needs of Perth first. We will do this by a grant 

 funding of $1 billion and this will enhance the liveability of Perth, it will enhance the jobs for Perth 

 and Western Australia. Nearly 4,000 jobs will be created through the development of this exciting 

 city-building initiative and we will be able to fund this because we won't be going ahead with Perth 

 Freight Link. I would now like to ask Mark McGowan to talk further about Labor's vision for Perth  and for jobs and for public transport, then we are happy to take questions after that. 

 MARK McGOWAN, WESTERN AUSTRALIA LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks very 

 much, Bill. Can I thank Bill Shorten and the Federal Labor team for this commitment towards 

 METRONET. METRONET is the congestion-busting public transport scheme which will make sure 

 Perth can deal with the very significant congestion issues into the long-term future. This 

 commitment of $1 billion is far better spent on METRONET than on the Perth Freight Link which is 

 a waste of money and won't solve the freight issues confronting our city. Infrastructure Australia 

 found a couple of years ago that by 2030, seven of the 10 most congested roads in Australia will 

 be in Perth. That is why we need to build METRONET to ensure we give people the opportunity to 

 get out of their cars and use public transport. When Labor was in power back in the 2000’s we 

 built the Mandurah line, extended the Northern line, built the Thornlie line and made sure that 

 Perth had a real alternative when it came to public transport as opposed to private motor vehicles. 

 It's time once again for a revolution in public transport. METRONET is that revolution and I'm very  pleased that Bill Shorten and the Federal Labor team are committed to supporting it. 

 SHORTEN: Are there any questions? 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the WA Transport Minister says that this is just taking money away 

 from one project and putting it into another. He has criticised this announcement today. What do  you say in response to that? 

 SHORTEN: Well I'm not surprised the Liberals are throwing rocks at better public transport. What 

 it shows to me is there is a clear choice in this election. There is a clear choice for people who 

 want to do something about the congestion on Perth's city roads. Under Labor's plans, we will 

 invest in Perth METRONET. Under Mr Turnbull and Mr Barnett’s plans, they will build a freight rail 

 link which doesn't even get to the port, a port which will be full up in coming years. Under Labor’s 

 plans, what we are going to do is use the same money and benefit everyone in Perth. We think  our proposal stacks up. The other good news about our proposal; it generates much-needed jobs. 

 JOURNALIST: I understand its estimated to cost $5.2 billion. You are committing $1 billion. 

 Where will the other $4 billion coming from? 

 SHORTEN: I will let Mark answer some of that question in detail. I don't agree with what you 

 asserted about a $5.2 billion price tag. That is just not true. 

 JOURNALIST: How much is it? 

 SHORTEN: I will come to you. You made a statement which isn't correct. We see the Liberals 

 often trying to put out things which aren't true and I will tackle it every day. The truth of the matter 

 is Perth needs better public transport. You make decisions with scarce taxpayer money. We have 

 chosen to use scarce taxpayer money to back in public transport in Perth, not a freight link project 

 where the benefits are arguable at best and we will see a lot of problems with that project. I will  get Mark to supplement the answer. 

 McGOWAN: METRONET will cost around $2.5 billion, that includes the extensions to Yanchep, to 

 Ellenbrook, out to Byford. It includes fixing the existing rail crossings that need repair and also 

 includes the Thornlie spur across to the Kwinana Freeway. What's happened with this State 

 Government is they don't have a transport plan. I heard Dean Nalder on the radio this morning 

 saying that after eight years in office, he’s planning at some point in the future taking a transport 

 plan to Cabinet. Well frankly that’s not good enough. It’s not good enough. After eight years in 

 power, after promising a transport plan within a hundred days of coming to office, he now has a 

 plan at some future point to take a proposal to Cabinet. It’s not good enough. Only Labor has a 

 plan to deal with the transport issues confronting Western Australia and Perth. METRONET is a 

 great plan. It will ensure people are given real opportunities to get out of their car and we can  make sure for the long term we fix the congestion problems confronting our city. 

 JOURNALIST: The first time you put it, it was 2.5 billion… 

 McGOWAN: The routes we have in our plan were costed by Treasury at the time of the last state 

 election. That was the costing they put on the routes that are in our plan. 

 JOURNALIST: If Federal Labor is not elected, how do you fund METRONET? 

 McGOWAN: Well, you’ve got to remember that the Perth Freight Link is a waste of money. If 

 we’re elected at the next State election, we will be saying to the Federal Government, spend that 

 money on METRONET and spend that money on real transport initiatives that solve congestion 

 around the city and indeed around Western Australia. Perth Freight Link is around $2 billion that 

 the State and Federal Governments are spending, including $715 million of State money. That  goes a long way to funding a real transport alternative which is METRONET. 

 JOURNALIST: 2.5, is that escalated? 

 McGOWAN: I will get those details afterwards, Josh. 

 JOURNALIST: Isn’t it fiscally irresponsible to be promising this project given that the state of the 

 WA coffers are in dire straits and there is a record deficit for the Budget? 

 McGOWAN: It's true that the Barnett Liberal National Government has wrecked the state’s 

 finances and failed to diversify the state's economy. They have been the worst economic and 

 financial managers in the history of Western Australia, without doubt. We now have in the coming 

 year, 6.75 per cent predicted unemployment, and we have $40 billion worth of debt in 2019 and in 

 the coming year we have a $3.9 billion deficit. And I’ll just take you back to when Labor left power 

 in Western Australia, eight years ago, the State's debt was $3.6 billion. Under the Liberal Party, 

 they’re taking it to $40 billion. It's true, there is a significant issue. Having said that the Federal 

 Government and the State Government have committed nearly two billion dollars towards the 

 Perth Freight Link. I would want to ensure that that money was spent more wisely and I think that's 

 a sensible thing to do. On top of that, as we always say, we will build METRONET as we can 

 afford it. We will build it as the finances allow and we will ensure that decent financial  management is put back in place in Western Australia. 

 JOURNALIST: What sort of timeframe is that, Mr McGowan, as you can afford it? 

 McGOWAN: It is ten months until the next state election; obviously you can't start building things 

 from day one, you can’t go out there with a backhoe from day one and start building things. You 

 have to actually plan them and do them properly as you can afford it. But just remember, one 

 billion from Federal Labor is a big slab of money and that goes a long way to making sure we put  METRONET in place. 

 JOURNALIST: Wouldn't 2.5 billion be just a starting point considering community consultation 

 was underway right up until recently with other lines that could be added to the… 

 McGOWAN: The lines we’ve announced are: the extension to Yanchep, the Ellenbrook-Morley 

 rail, the extension to Byford, the extension from Thornlie across to the Mandurah line and also 

 some improvements on existing lines. These are affordable over the medium term, particularly if  you put in place Federal support for it, which is what Bill is doing and I welcome that. 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, will you commit Federal Labor giving to WA a fairer deal on the GST 

 carve up and Mr McGowan, what do you think is a fair contribution? 

 SHORTEN: First, let me go to Labor's bona fides to Western Australia in terms of a fairer carve up 

 of Commonwealth revenue full stop. Only Labor will make sure that Western Australian GPs don't 

 have to get rid of bulk billing. Only Federal Labor is offering West Australians the chance to pay 

 less for their prescription medicine. Only Federal Labor is offering to properly fund the schools of 

 Western Australia, TAFE and make sure that working and middle class kids can go to university. 

 Labor's approach to Western Australia is to make sure they get a fair share of Commonwealth 

 resources, not just through the debate about the GST but through our general policies which will 

 lift quality of life and put downward pressure on cost of living for Western Australians. In addition 

 to that, one thing I can make very clear to West Australians, if you vote Labor on July 2, you will 

 not be paying a 15 per cent GST, an idea that Prime Minister Turnbull was very interested in, an 

 idea that Colin Barnett has mused and speculated about. The other promise I can give Western 

 Australians about a fair share of revenue, is that I will never support double taxation. Mr Turnbull 

 called this the greatest idea since Federation. When he mused and said, “Wouldn't it be good if 

 States had the power to levy income taxes.” In addition, Colin Barnett said he thought this was a 

 good idea. Only Labor really understands the needs of every day Western Australians. Today we 

 have made it clear that we want to put downward pressure on the price of prescriptions. Today we 

 have made it clear that we’ll back in bulk billing. Today we’ve made it clear we want better public 

 transport for Perth, less congestion and more jobs. We will make sure from our schools policies, to 

 our health policies to indeed our policies about not having double taxation or increasing GST,  West Australia will benefit from a Labor Government in Canberra after July 2nd. 

 McGOWAN: Look, I will continue to argue for a fairer deal for GST for Western Australia. 

 Currently we get around 31 cents in the dollar, that's not good enough. The only leader currently 

 at COAG who was there when the original GST deal was signed, and who supported it I might 

 add, is Colin Barnett. So we will continue to argue for a floor under which no state's share can go, 

 and I think a consistent position from Western Australia would be one, refreshing, and secondly a 

 great change on the existing arrangement that Mr Barnett put in place whereby it chops and  changes every week.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr. Shorten, can I just ask you, just a more general spending question, this 

 morning you were very critical of the Health Minister Susan Ley, so do we take from that that 

 under a Labor Government your Ministers would have the ability to override the Treasurer, the  finance team, and to put in place big spending proposals they want to see happen? 

 SHORTEN: No Anna, that's not what I said. I just drew your attention to the remarkable set of 

 circumstances that a Liberal Health Minister said that she doesn't like her own Government's 

 policy and is arguing for exactly what Labor will do after July 2nd. I think the Liberal Health 

 Minister just belled the cat. She made it very, very clear, that by not increasing and indexing the 

 rebates which go to GPs, by insisting upon increasing the cost of prescription medicine, that is not 

 a great health policy. We have a united team in Labor, and yes there is a big difference between 

 me and Malcolm Turnbull, he'll prioritise the needs of multinationals, I'll prioritise the needs of 

 Australians to get the health care they need when they're sick, and not charge them a lot of money  to get the basics of a quality health system. One more question, thank you. 

 JOURNALIST: Your candidate, Bill Leadbetter, earlier said that he believed that Labor's asylum 

 seeker policy is not merciful. How do you respond to that and what do you do to unify your party  on this issue? 

 SHORTEN: Well I didn't see the exact comments to which you are referring, but I can state this, 

 and again, this has been one of the big lies of Malcolm Turnbull during this election. He wants 

 people to believe that somehow Labor is not equally committed to stopping the shameful people 

 smuggling and criminal syndicates in Southeast Asia putting people, vulnerable people, on boats 

 and seeing them drown at sea. Well I have a clear message for Mr Turnbull, but even more 

 importantly than that gentlemen, for the people smugglers in Southeast Asia: after July 2nd if 

 Labor is elected we will do everything we can, just like the Liberals will do, to stop the evil people 

 smuggling trade. Of course, one difference between us and the Liberals is that the way you stop 

 this evil trade is not by keeping people in indefinite detention on Manus or Narau. We would 

 prioritise regional resettlement, something which Mr Turnbull simply hasn’t done since he has 

 become Prime Minister, because you don't need to have indefinite detention in order to beat the 

 people smugglers. But when it comes to that fundamental truth, I will call out Mr Turnbull every 

 day on this, Liberal and Labor are both equally determined to stop the criminals exploiting the  vulnerable, and seeing mass drownings at sea. Last question thanks. 

 JOURNALIST: How do you plan to do that Mr Shorten? If the Government is having problems 

 trying to sort out a regional processing deal with third countries, why is it going to be any different  for Labor to do?  

 SHORTEN: Well, it's about leadership and it's about rolling up your sleeves and putting the 

 energy into it. I'm willing to say what Mr Turnbull isn't. I'm willing to say that keeping people in 

 indefinite detention is not the Australian way. You saw Tim Costello yesterday say that there were 

 real problems with how that's being implemented, Mr Turnbull tried to brush that under the carpet. 

 What I will do is negotiate with nations in our region, regional resettlement. But what I will also do, 

 and again, I'm going to make it perfectly clear, that Labor debated our policies last July, a Labor 

 Government I lead will defeat the people smugglers with the same vigour and energy as the 

 Liberals. This is a matter that the people smugglers need to be on notice about. It doesn't reflect 

 well on the Government when they send out signals to people smugglers that somehow they  could be back in business. 

 Thanks everyone, it is a great announcement on Perth METRONET, Mark McGowan is working 

 hard for it. We're committed to jobs in Western Australia, we're committed to better public 

 transport in Perth, and we know the combination of these goals, materialised in the form of Perth 

 METRONET, puts Western Australians and people in Perth in particular, first. Thank you  everybody.  

 ENDS 

 

