---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 18 October 2016: Australian Building and Construction Commission; resignation of Bob Day; Amnesty International report on Nauru"
date: "2016-10-18"
creators:
  - "Canavan, Matthew"
source: "MINISTER FOR RESOURCES AND NORTHERN AUSTRALIA"
subjects:
  - "Australian Building and Construction Commission"
  - "resignation of Bob Day"
  - "Amnesty International report on Nauru"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/235678165
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4882387%22
---

 Senator the Hon. Matt Canavan  Minister for Resources and Northern Australia    

 TRANSCRIPT - SENATE MORNING DOORS  DATE: 18/10/2016    

 E&OE    

 Topics: Australian Building and Construction Commission; resignation of Bob Day; Amnesty International  report on Nauru    

 MINISTER CANAVAN:  I always found Senator Day to be a man of integrity, humility and commitment to the  professionalism of his role as a Senator. He took his role as a Senator very seriously, and I was  lucky enough to work with him for a couple of years on important issues in the Senate. He will  be a great loss to the Senate. I'd also like to commend him for the integrity he has shown in  these last few weeks, which have obviously been a trying time for him and his family. But he  would appear to be putting the interests of his customers and clients ahead of his own personal  interests which is a great credit to him. I wish him and his family all the best in resolving these  difficult issues and doing his best to get his business and his life back on track.   

 But I'd also like to talk about a cause that was close to the heart of Senator Day and that is  reform to the construction sector. It is incredibly important today, that we are re-establishing,  that we're reintroducing the Australian Building and Construction Commission Bill, to re-establish a strong cop on the beat. It is crucial that this reform occurs for our country. We are a  country that wants to develop, that wants to grow. I am a Senator for a state that wants to  keep growing and developing, and when we have these kinds of tactics, these bullying and  intimidating tactics from trade unions, it pushes up the cost of building our great country. It  stops development from occurring, and it certainly slows things down like building sporting  precincts on the Gold Coast as we can see in the papers today.    

 As the Minister for Northern Australia, I want to grow northern Australia. I want to build dams,  build roads, build new cities and towns and build bigger existing cities and towns right across  our north. And people who are all about stopping construction and stopping things from  happening, stop that from happening. That denies the great right of all Australians to have a  bigger country, a better country, a country with great promise because we're still a young  country. We need to crack down on this kind of behaviour, because it's anti-social, it's anti-Australian and it's stopping people from having jobs and building their own homes in the  country.   

 And if I can say, I encourage everybody to watch this video that's been released overnight, of  intimidatory tactics at a site on the Gold Coast. I encourage everybody to watch this, because  this is behaviour that should be condemned by all. There is threatening behaviour in the video.  There are claims that ‘I know where you live and what your phone number is’, there is  objectionable language that I can't repeat here this morning. It should be condemned by all. 

 But I bet you, I bet you, you won't have one Labor Senator or one Labor Member on the other  side of the place come out and condemn these tactics.    

 This should be a Donald Trump test for the Labor Party. Last week they were lining up to  condemn Mr Trump and his objectionable comments, and we all condemn those comments.  But today there will be a vacuum of silence from the Labor Party on this issue. They will not  condemn the behaviour of the CFMEU, which is at least as objectionable, if not more  objectionable than the comments of Mr Trump.  But they will not seek to condemn that  because they are in hock to these unions. They are their donors, their friends, their supporters,  and you will not hear boo from them criticising their conduct. And that's why they cannot be  believed on this issue, they cannot be trusted, and we should re-establish the Australian  Building and Construction Commission so that we can get our construction sector efficient and  continuing to deliver the services it brings to all Australians.    

 REPORTER:  Will you be considering many of the amendments that are being put forward by the cross  bench?    

 MINISTER CANAVAN:  We will always seek to communicate to Senate crossbenchers and other parliamentarians  about issues. We have done that on other bills of course through the Parliament and I am sure  we will do likewise with these important reforms.    

 REPORTER:  As a father, did you watch the Four Corners report about the children's stories from Nauru and  how did that make you feel?    

 MINISTER CANAVAN:  Look I haven't had a chance to watch the Four Corners episode at this stage. I had a function  last night. But often I do catch up on iView with Four Corners. The issue of refugees in general,  and I have heard some of the extracts of Four Corners this morning in the media, does touch  me, and does have an impact on myself. I like to think we are a country that does open our  arms to those in distress. We, among developed countries, have one of the largest refugee  intakes in the world and I'm proud that we do do that. At the same time, we need to of course  have a managed system in place. We cannot accept all. And we certainly cannot promote a  people smuggling trade which has, as you know led to thousands of deaths and causes great  human suffering and grief in and of itself. So these are difficult decisions for any government.  They are decisions though that we have taken and we proudly stand by because it has ended  that abominable trade. That is clear. And I hope that no future government does anything that  will encourage that trade to start up again and contribute to this kind of human suffering and  grief.    

 REPORTER:  Would you find the conditions acceptable if another country were to impose them on your own  children, hypothetically? 

 

 MINSITER CANAVAN:  Look I hope no human beings are put in a situation where they are desperate enough to flee  from their own home countries. Unfortunately though, we don't have the world I would like.  We have the world as it is. And we have to respond to that world. These decisions that were  put in place are difficult. They are tough. But they are needed, clearly, to stop this trade. When  the former government closed offshore processing and announced publicly and proudly that  they would no longer adopt these policies, we had 50,000 people arrive on 800 or more boats.  It was something that was not sustainable and they themselves admit that by reintroducing  offshore processing before the 2013 election. So we have had experimentation in this field, and  I think the time for experimentation is finished. It should be settled policy now, at least for both  major parties. These are the policies we need to protect our country and to maintain the  integrity of our humanitarian refugee intake.    

 REPORTER:  What do you make of Amnesty International < inaudible >    

 MINISTER CANAVAN:  Look I have respect for Amnesty International. I have worked with Amnesty before and they do  a lot of good work around the world. But I don't agree with their assessment in this case. There  is other reporting and that testimony last night with the Secretary of the Department of  Immigration who has been to Nauru recently, indicating any comparisons to torture here would  appear overblown. They certainly don't seem to me to fit the normal definition of that word. Of  course it's a difficult circumstance for people in this situation. But life is sometimes about  difficult choices, and government is about making tough choices on behalf of the Australian  people in the best interests of our country.   

