---
title: "Building on a long, proud tradition of settling new arrivals"
date: "2016-05-06"
creators:
  - "Laundy, Craig"
source: "ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/227680061
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4545404%22
---

 

 The Hon Craig Laundy MP  Assistant Minister for Multicultural Affairs   

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 Telephone (02) 6277 4345 Fax (02) 6277 8577   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

  6 May  2016 

 

 Building on a long, proud tradition of settling new arrivals   

 The Assistant Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Craig Laundy MP, delivered a keynote  address at the Settlement Council of Australia (SCOA) ‘Settlement and Citizenship in Civil  Society’ conference in Melbourne today. 

 The Settlement Council of Australia is an independent peak body representing migrant and  refugee settlement agencies across Australia. 

 The conference brings together the settlement sector, communities and government as well  as academic and industry groups to broaden understanding, collaboration and  responsiveness to migration, settlement and citizenship. 

 Mr Laundy said the conference is an opportunity to explore Australia’s long and proud  tradition of resettling migrants, refugees and vulnerable people in humanitarian need. 

 “This is vitally important as we increase our humanitarian intake this year to resettle an  additional 12,000 refugee fleeing the conflict in Syria and Iraq,” Mr Laundy said. 

 “We have some of the best settlement services in the world. These are services that support  new arrivals to settle into their new lives and communities.  

 “This is very much thanks to the partnerships we have in place, including those with  community organisations, business and service providers” 

 Since World War II, 7.5 million migrants, including more than 825,000 humanitarian entrants  and people in humanitarian need, have been resettled in Australia. 

 Mr Laundy said Australia is a migrant nation, with almost half of us either born overseas or  with at least one parent who was.  

 “Our combination of rich cultural diversity, social cohesion and economic prosperity makes  us the envy of the world,” he said. 

 “So much of this is due to our migrants and humanitarian entrants who have enriched our  culture and added to our national story. 

 “And so much is also due to the right support made available to our new arrivals.” 

 Mr Laundy said most humanitarian entrants come to Australia in tragic circumstances,  having experienced torture and trauma as well as persecution and discrimination. 

 

 The Hon Craig Laundy MP  Assistant Minister for Multicultural Affairs   

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 Telephone (02) 6277 4345 Fax (02) 6277 8577   

 “With the benefit of work by the Government and civil society, including the Settlement  Council of Australia and its members, we can and are, turning these harrowing stories into  positive ones,” he said. 

 “I thank the Council and its members for their efforts in making a difference not only to  people’s lives but to Australian life in general.  

 “The Council and its members are there when our new arrivals first try to piece together their  new lives in a new and probably unfamiliar country.” 

 For more information on the Australian Government’s work in multicultural affairs and  settlement services, go to https://www.dss.gov.au/settlement-and-multicultural-affairs  

 

 Media Contact: Dominic Meoli, 0491 213 436 

 [END] 

 

