---
title: "Australia commits additional $8.5 million to UNHCR"
date: "2016-03-31"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/225995495
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4463875%22
---

 1 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 31 March 2016    

 AUSTRALIA COMMITS ADDITIONAL $8.5 MILLION TO UNHCR    

 Australia has committed a further $8.5 million to the United Nations High Commission  for Refugees (UNHCR) in response to the Syrian refugee crisis.    

 The Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton announced the extra  funding at a UNHCR meeting in Geneva.   

 Australia has committed more than $258 million to the humanitarian response to the  Syria and Iraq conflicts since 2011.    

 Mr Dutton said the additional funding would assist the UNHCR to deliver on the  increased refugee resettlement and activities they are managing to support this.   

 The funding pledged will support a range of UNHCR activities, including procedures  streamlining, additional staffing including integrity officer positions, a staff training rollout  to link resettlement with protection activities and biometric registration enhancements.    

 It will also support UNHCR’s administration of engagements in 2016 with the goal of  improving the global response to refugee and displacement crises including Syria.    

 “Australia has also committed 12,000 resettlement places additional to an intake of  more than 4,000 places for Syrians and Iraqis in Australia’s annual humanitarian  programme of 13,750 places,” Mr Dutton said.   

 “Australia has made a significant commitment to the global pool of resettlement places  by increasing our overall humanitarian programme over a four-year period.    

 “We remain committed to working with the international community to find practical  solutions to the challenges being faced.”   

 

 Further information: Minister’s office 02 6277 7860    

 

