---
title: "Senate to investigate abuse claims outlined in the Nauru files"
date: "2016-09-12"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/233894038
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4815389%22
---

 

 THE HON SHAYNE NEUMANN 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR   

 SENATOR MURRAY WATT  SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND   

 SENATE TO INVESTIGATE ABUSE CLAIMS OUTLINED IN THE NAURU FILES   

 The Senate has today voted in favour of Labor’s motion to establish a Senate Inquiry to  investigate serious allegations of abuse, self-harm and neglect outlined in the Nauru  files.   

 The Nauru files represents the largest leak of documents detailing the reporting of and  responses to allegations of mistreatment of individuals residing in offshore detention  centres and like many Australians, Labor was concerned by the contents of those  reports.   

 Labor has made clear our commitment to offshore processing and regional  resettlement, combined with the policy of turning back boats to ensure people  smugglers are denied their trade in exploiting vulnerable people. We have also made  clear our view that we have a special obligation to ensure those vulnerable people are  not subjected to any further harm or violence.     

 As representatives, we have a responsibility to investigate serious claims about any  mistreatment of asylum seekers in offshore processing centre.   

 The motion moved by Labor to establish a Senate Inquiry, outlines terms of reference  including how notifications of self-harm are investigated, the factors that have  contributed to abuse and self-harm where this is found to have occurred and the  support services offered to those people.   

 Unaccompanied minors are some of the most vulnerable asylum seekers and the  Inquiry will be asked to specifically give consideration to the role an independent  children’s advocate could play in protecting the rights and interests of unaccompanied  minors.   

 The Turnbull Government has failed to establish durable, third country resettlement  arrangements to resolve the future of asylum seekers in offshore processing centres.   

 The Inquiry will investigate the Government’s attempts to negotiate third country  resettlement of asylum seekers and refugees and any additional measures that could  be implemented to expedite third country resettlement.   

 The motion to establish a Senate Inquiry was co-sponsored by the Australian Greens.   

 A Senate Inquiry is the most appropriate way to investigate serious claims of abuse and  self-harm in offshore detention centres and importantly, the terms of reference set a  deadline to report back to Parliament by the last sitting day in March 2017.   

 MONDAY, 12 SEPTEMBER 2016   

 MEDIA CONTACTS: MELISSA HOCKEY 0418 511 529   

