---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra: 1 November 2016: apprenticeship pilot programs; Bob Day; asylum seekers; Tony Abbott"
date: "2016-11-01"
creators:
  - "Cameron, Doug"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR SKILLS AND APPRENTICESHIPS"
subjects:
  - "apprenticeship pilot programs"
  - "Bob Day"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Tony Abbott"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/236436839
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4910952%22
---

 

 SENATOR THE HON. DOUG CAMERON  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SKILLS AND APPRENTICESHIPS  SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  CANBERRA, NEW SOUTH WALES  TUESDAY 1 NOVEMBER 2016   

 SUBJECT/S: Apprenticeship Pilot Programs, Bob Day, Asylum Seekers, Tony  Abbott   

 SENATOR DOUG CAMERON, SHADOW MINISTER HOUSING AND  HOMELESSNESS, SHADOW MINISTER SKILLS AND APPRENTICESHIPS:  Thanks very much for coming along. I just thought it was absolutely important that  we expose another vote buying episode by this Government.   

 Malcolm Turnbull is a weak Prime Minister who is basically looking everywhere to  buy votes and what he has done is provide $2 million to Bob Day of all  people.       $2 million for one of his pet projects.   

 December last year Bob Day approached Simon Birmingham and by March the next  year there was a committee set up to have a look at the proposal, and instead of  what he was asking - which was $1.4 million, he ended up getting $2 million.   

 The result of this will be young apprentices will not have a contract of training, they  will not have any employment as an employee, they will be classified as students  and they will have to rely on VET -FEE HELP and the youth allowance.   

 This is a terrible attack on young people, it’s a terrible attack on the apprenticeship  system, and it just shows how low Malcolm Turnbull and Simon Birmingham will go  to try and make sure that Bob Day continues to vote for their legislation in the  Parliament.      

 How bad is it? You go and ask for $1.4 million and you get $2.0 million. This is  outrageous. And another two supporters of the ABCC Bill, the Master Builders  Association and the National Electrical Contractors Association, get exactly the same  money to do different projects. Again, all designed to break down the apprenticeship  system and make it tougher for tradies to get their apprenticeship completed.    

 This is outrageous. There’s been a cover up. I asked for all the documentation from  Simon Birmingham on this issue. That wasn’t forthcoming. I asked in Estimates for  details of all the issues and correspondence surrounding this $2 million handover to  Bob Day. That was not forthcoming. But the ETU (Electrical Trades Union) had  asked for documentation to be provided through a freedom of information advice and  that’s where it all started falling apart for Simon Birmingham. My view is that Simon  Birmingham has misled the Senate Estimates. That is the same as misleading the  Senate. He has got huge questions to answer. This is an attack on apprentices. It’s  done for pure base political motives and this is something that we will continue to  follow up.   

 JOURNALIST: What evidence do you actually have that there was a vote deal in  place here?   

 CAMERON: Well it’s quite clear what’s happened. Bob Day goes and has a private  meeting with Simon Birmingham and a few weeks later an advisory group is set up  to try and deliver what he has asked. Unfortunately, the advisory group did not  support this project. This is another issue, the advisory group did not support the  project. Yet again, it was pushed off to another group, which we think was the ACCI  and the ACCI comes back with the part that then says that we should provide  $2million to Bob Day.    

 Now Bob Day should not be in the Senate now. Bob Day has indicated clearly  himself that it’s intolerable for him to be there. Add this on top of his ripping off of  both subcontractors in the industry and people battling to build a house. This guy has  got no credibility. This government has got no credibility. They should not accept any  vote from Bob Day because what they’ve done is set up another bribe for Bob Day to  continue to support their legislation. That’s not acceptable, not good enough and it’s  a scourge on democracy in this country.     

 JOURNALIST: You said that Senator Day got the money but he didn’t get the  money did he, the training college got the money. He got no personal benefit  (inaudible).   

 CAMERON: All the documentation says that this is Bob Day’s ask of the  government. The money was then sent to his pet project, a project that he was a  Director on for ten years and Chairman of that project. So the money was for his pet  project. That’s where the money went.    

 JOURNALIST: Just on the Government’s changes to visa laws for asylum seekers  who travel to Australia by boat. It seems like Labor’s not ruling out supporting that.   

 CAMERON: Look I agree with Bill Shorten. This is an absolutely ridiculous proposition.  You know this is about the Government and Malcom Turnbull being too weak and too  jelly backed to stand up to the right wing of his own party. You’ve just got to look at  the report in the Herald this morning where Liberal members are calling for a blanket  immigration ban. They’re putting forward motions calling migrants criminals and  bastards. This is a problem not for Bill Shorten, not for the Labor Party, but for Malcom  Turnbull, a guy who has got no credibility as a prime minister, who is failing every day.  I mean if this guy was running in the Melbourne Cup today, you’d say good bloodline, 

 pulling to the right and heading for the knackers yard. That’s where this guy is heading.  He is not going to get support in the party for too much longer. So this is a problem for  him, he’s just picking up more and more of the right wing ideas, more and more of the  right wing rhetoric. That’s all this is, a sop to the right wing of his party, and even worse,  a sop to One Nation. It’s a sop to One Nation to try and make sure they support this  Government. It’s outrageous that they would hold refugees up in these terms.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think Labor should not vote for the legislation?    

 CAMERON: As Bill has said, could Sussan Ley last night tell you what was in the  legislation? There is differences between Sussan Ley, Julie Bishop, and the Minister  responsible. They are all over the place on this. They are an absolute rabble and all  this is is a weak Prime Minister who is kowtowing to the worst elements of the Liberal  Party and the worst elements in this country through One Nation.    

 JOURNALIST: Will you be arguing in Caucus against any move like this though?   

 CAMERON: Well I don’t know - what is this move?  Can tell me what the move is? If  the Coalition themselves can’t explain what this proposed legislation is, how do you  expect Labor to be having any sensible position on it. But if it is simply an attack on  refugees, if it is simply about trying to wedge the Labor Party, if it is simply about  kowtowing to the worst elements in this country then there has to be a good long  look at it by Labor. We will do it through our processes and we will ensure that we do  the right thing.   

 JOURNALIST: Given you have said it seems ridiculous and outrageous, isn’t it  going to be pretty hard to step back from that?   

 CAMERON: I am just saying the reports are ridiculous, the reports of what we have  seen are absolutely ridiculous. Why don’t you go and ask Malcolm Turnbull what it  means because the front benchers don’t understand what it means. They don’t  understand exactly what the legislation is, there is nothing in front of Labor, there is  nothing for us to look at and sometimes you have to draw a line in the sand.   This sort of nonsense in my view deserves a line in the sand. Labor are  waiting to  see exactly what is put forward and I am confident Labor will do the right thing  by  this  country because it’s not the right thing to simply kowtow to the worst elements  and try and pretend that you are kowtowing to the Trump type view in the Liberal  Party in this country.    

 JOURNALIST: The measure though to ban even genuine refugees from ever visiting  Australia, even if they get refugee status somewhere else and want to come here on  a holiday or a business trip, is that something you would encourage your other  colleagues to vote down?   

 CAMERON: I am with Bill - I think it is ridiculous, and if you look at what they are  saying here, they are basically saying there should be no immigrants in this country  at all. That’s elements of the Liberal Party, so instead of coming and asking me  about some legislation that’s not out there, ask the Prime Minister why he has caved  in to the worst elements of the Liberal Party and One Nation.    

 This is Hanson-ite approaches and that’s what this government is about. They will do  anything to try to maintain their grip on power and it’s a loosening grip. They have  absolutely no capacity to run this country effectively and that is why you get  nonsense like what they seem to be proposing.    

 JOURNALIST: Has this proposed legislation though put Labor in a bit of a sticky  situation because if Labor doesn’t support it then of course the Government is going  to go after you saying you are not tough on border protection?   

 CAMERON: It doesn’t put Labor in a sticky situation at all. As I have indicated the  people with the problem are Malcolm Turnbull and his Ministers who don’t  understand what the legislation is about. They are all saying different things about it.  Let’s see what a proposed bill would say and in my view it simply is an indication that  Malcolm Turnbull is desperate, that Malcolm Turnbull is clinging on to power by the  skin of his teeth, that Malcolm Turnbull has got no back bone to stand up to the right  wing of his party and now he is capitulating to Hanson.      

 This is a Prime Minister who doesn’t deserve to be in the job, a weak Prime Minister,  a jelly back Prime Minister who sells his own values out, who would sell apprentices  out  to get votes and that’s what the Bob Day issue is about.  Malcolm Turnbull and  Simon Birmingham selling apprentices out to get votes.   

 JOURNALIST: Just on the Catherine McGregor issue. She is a good friend of Tony  Abbotts, she has renewed calls for him to return to the front bench, do you think he is  using her as a mouthpiece to create further distractions for the Government?      

 CAMERON: I wouldn’t know but you know that there is a war on between Malcolm  Turnbull and Tony Abbott, I mean they are briefing their own people that there is a  war on so I am not sure what Catherine McGregor has said, but the issue of who is  on the front bench I don’t think matters a lot because they are all weak on the Liberal  Party front bench. They are all capitulating to the worst elements in this country, they  don’t look after apprentices, they don’t look after pensioners, they don’t look after  women that are pregnant. This is a bad Government and the sooner they fall apart  the better.        

 JOURNALIST: Would Tony Abbott be suited to the role of Indigenous Affairs  Minister?   

 CAMERON: Tony Abbott would not be suited to any role in my view. Tony Abbott  has demonstrated his complete incompetence in terms of being the Prime Minister of  this country and Tony Abbott has demonstrated that all he wants to do is run a right  wing agenda attacking working families, attacking wages and conditions, so if you  are asking me for a reference for Tony Abbott - sorry I am not giving him one.   

 ENDS  TUESDAY, 1 NOVEMBER 2016   

 MEDIA CONTACT:          LUKE WHITINGTON 0422 265 775   

