---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra: 12 May 2016: 2016 election; Labor's plan for schools; Malcolm Turnbull in Panama Papers"
date: "2016-05-12"
creators:
  - "Wong, Penny"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE"
subjects:
  - "2016 election"
  - "Labor's plan for schools"
  - "Malcolm Turnbull in Panama Papers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/227927544
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4558079%22
---

 

 

 SENATOR PENNY WONG  CAMPAIGN SPOKESPERSON  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT 

 SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  CANBERRA  THURSDAY, 12 MAY 2016 

 SUBJECT/S: 2016 Election; Labor’s plan for schools; Malcolm Turnbull in  Panama Papers. 

 SENATOR PENNY WONG, CAMPAIGN SPOKESPERSON: Thanks very much.  Today I'm here, on day 52 of the campaign to talk about Labor's plan for schools.  Today, Bill Shorten will be announcing the next tranche of Your Child, Our Future,  our emphasis on education in schools funding. Today, we'll be talking about kids in  the regions and in country schools. 

 Now we know that children in regional Australia, children in country schools, are up to  two years behind their city peers when it comes to reading and mathematics. One of  the things Labor will be announcing today will be a focus on how we bridge that  educational divide. I think the question for Barnaby Joyce and the Nationals is this:  how is it that you can justify this educational divide between the people you represent  and their city peers? Labor wants to bridge that divide. 

 The second thing I wanted to talk about today was the front page of one of the  papers which talks about the Panama Papers. We've had a big discussion in this  country for over the last few years about tax avoidance and Australians are deeply  concerned about tax avoidance, to the extent that we finally see the government  following Labor's lead and trying to do something about tax avoidance. 

 On the front page of one of today's major papers we have Malcolm Turnbull listed as  being involved in a company established in a tax haven, a company which Mossack  Fonseca established and a company that's involved in a Siberian gold mine, a  company which allegedly made payments to Russian politicians about its 

 activities. Well, I see in the papers that Mr Turnbull has had a spokesperson answer  questions. Those answers seem to suggest, ‘I don't know, I don't recall it was a long  time ago’. Well, this is a man who is the Prime Minister of the country and he's  running to be the Prime Minister again. The standards which are expected of him are  high standards and he should provide a full and frank explanation of his involvement  in this company which was established in a tax haven. 

 But more than that, we shouldn't have to wait for a good journalist to tell  Australians about this. We shouldn't have to wait for a paper to run a story about the  Prime Minister's involvement in this company. The Prime Minister should be full  and frank with the Australian people about his business affairs. He should be clear. 

 How many other companies was he involved in which were established in tax  havens? How many other companies was he involved in that Mossack Fonseca was  involved with? He should be very up-front in answering questions about what he did  or didn't know about the activities of this company in relation to the Siberian gold  mine. Happy to take questions. 

 JOURNALIST: What specific questions do you want him to answer, especially in  relation to the Russian link that you just spelled out? 

 WONG: I think I've outlined them already. I think he should be full and frank about his  involvement. He shouldn't be hiding behind his spokesperson, he should stand  up and say to people, ‘this is what I knew about this company, established in a tax  haven, this is what I knew about the Siberian goldmine activities’ and he should  be very clear that he had no knowledge of any of the activities which are alleged in  the paper. 

 But as I said, I think it's more than that. We ought not have to wait. Australians ought  not have to wait for a good journalist to do their job and expose these matters. The  Prime Minister should do what David Cameron and others have done which is to  be full and frank with the Australian people, with their electors about their tax affairs.  Which other companies has Mr Turnbull been involved with that have  been established in tax havens? 

 JOURNALIST: Is this a smoking gun for him and how hard will Labor push on this? 

 WONG: I think the issue is Australians expect people to pay tax, they expect their  politicians to be open and transparent about their financial arrangements. That's why  we have ministerial standards, that's why we have disclosure arrangements. So I  think the first step is for Mr Turnbull to answer questions and to disclose fully. 

 JOURNALIST: His ministers have come out today saying that this was in the 1990s,  it was a long time ago so isn't it fair, given that Chris Brown also says this  is something that happened to him when he was 18? 

 WONG: If the test is how long ago things occurred then I suppose that Malcolm  Turnbull and Tony Abbott will be apologising to Julia Gillard for the pursuit of her  for matters which occurred 20 years ago. 

 JOURNALIST: Can I just get you also on Chris Brown? 

 WONG: Sure. 

 JOURNALIST: How do you feel about that situation? 

 WONG: Well look, I understand Mr Brown is disappointed. These are  ultimately matters for the party organisation and the national executive and  they make decisions in the best interests of the party and that is what has happened. 

 JOURNALIST: This is obviously damaging to Labor, some of your candidates have  come out speaking out on asylum seeker policy and now you've got someone with  this criminal record? 

 WONG: I think there's a bit of a long bow there. But firstly on asylum seekers, I know  that the Government, who don't want to talk about their cuts to health, their cuts to  education, don't want to talk about how they're going to fund their company tax cut -  they want to talk about asylum seekers. We've settled this issue. We've been very  clear in our position which was argued in front of all those who wanted to watch at the  national conference last year. In relation to Mr Brown, I've answered that question. 

 JOURNALIST: All these candidates that are coming out, they're obviously damaging  the Labor campaign in the first week? 

 WONG: I don't agree with that. I think that you know that the Labor Party is full of  people who want to do the right thing and we've made it clear our position at  national conference. There is a humanitarian crisis. Australia should play a bigger  part in that. We should take more refugees, but they should come here safely and  we've resolved that debate. Thank you. 

 ENDS 

 

