---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Perth, WA: 24 May 2016: Labor's plans to protect Medicare; Labor's plan for inclusive growth; a desperate Prime Minister; Senator Nova Peris; asylum seekers; Mr Turnbull's NBN mess; religious exemption from anti-discrimination laws; Liberal lies about Labor's policies"
date: "2016-05-24"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Labor's plans to protect Medicare"
  - "Labor's plan for inclusive growth"
  - "a desperate Prime Minister"
  - "Senator Nova Peris"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Mr Turnbull's NBN mess"
  - "religious exemption from anti-discrimination laws"
  - "Liberal lies about Labor's policies"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/228449234
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4586165%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT 

 DOORSTOP 

 PERTH 

 TUESDAY, 24 MAY 2016 

 SUBJECT/S: Labor’s plans to protect Medicare; Labor’s plan for inclusive growth; A desperate Prime 

 Minister; Senator Nova Peris; Asylum seekers; Mr Turnbull’s NBN mess; Religious exemption from 

 anti-discrimination laws; Liberal lies about Labor’s policies 

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I’m really pleased to be here in Gosnells today to 

 announce that, if Labor is elected on July 2, we will legislate a Medicare guarantee to protect Medicare for 

 future generations. Specifically, as part of our guarantee, one, we will abolish Malcolm Turnbull's GP tax by 

 stealth. Two, we will scrap the price hikes to prescription medicine which will mean that for an average family 

 with two healthy children they will save up to $400 a year. And, three, we will enact a special act of 

 Parliament which will prohibit the privatisation of Medicare into the future. Anyone who travels overseas, any 

 Australian who travels overseas, knows how good our national health care system is, our Medicare system. 

 Yet Mr Turnbull constantly says that we can't afford to defend Medicare or invest in Medicare. But when 

 parents have got sick children or there's an older relative who needs to see the doctor, the last thing Aussies 

 want to hear is Mr Turnbull saying that we cannot invest in Medicare. That is why, if Labor is elected on July 

 2, within 100 days we will pass a special act of Parliament to enshrine Medicare and protect it from 

 privatisation. Our act will codify the importance of keeping Medicare in public hands. Now, this is the first time 

 this has been proposed in 41 years. But never before have we seen such sustained attacks upon parts of the 

 Medicare system. I will, if elected, immediately disband a $5 million taskforce in the Department of Health, 

 whose sole purpose is to line up parts of Medicare to be sold off. Australians love their Medicare and we 

 have made a clear choice in this election. We have chosen not to give $50 billion in corporate tax cuts. 

 Instead we have chosen to protect and defend Medicare with $12 billion over 10 years to ensure GPs can 

 keep providing bulk-billing and the quality care which we are so fortunate to receive. It's why we have chosen 

 not to give $50 billion in tax cuts and instead we have chosen to keep downward pressure on the price of 

 pharmaceuticals. In this election, the Liberals are carrying out a great big fat lie. What they are saying is we 

 cannot afford to invest in Medicare. The truth is that Mr Turnbull has chosen to spend $50 billion of taxpayer 

 money giving corporate tax cuts. Labor chooses instead to give money to defend Medicare and bulk-billing 

 and keep downward pressure on prescriptions. Mr Turnbull's spending people's money. He is just not 

 spending it on Australians. Happy to take questions. 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Turnbull says you lack an economic plan for growth. What is your plan for growth and also 

 he's labelled you Billion Dollar Bill, what would you call him? 

 SHORTEN: First of all, Labor's plan for economic growth is jobs, education, Medicare, renewable energy, fair 

 taxation, access for first home buyers into the housing market. Our economic plan is all about fairness. We 

 don't think that economic growth can be guaranteed or sustained by giving multi-millionaires tax cuts. I don't 

 think the solution for Australia’s economic growth is giving large foreign multinationals and large banks 

 business tax cuts that this nation can't afford. I think economic growth comes from fairness; treating women 

 equally in the workplace, making sure we have affordable childcare, make sure our kids get the best 

 education possible, make sure that adults who want to retrain after they have been displaced after losing one 

 job can do so through strong properly funded public TAFE. An economic growth plan which puts people at 

 the centre of our decisions and a viable Medicare system, a well-funded Medicare system is actually 

 excellent for economic growth. Look at the comparative system in the United States. In America they spend 

 17 per cent of their GDP on a two-tier health system which is notorious for not delivering for people who don't 

 have a lot of money. The truth of is matter is our Medicare system is very efficient. Having Medicare in public 

 hands with one system of payments is actually not just good in term of fairness, but it's good in terms of 

 economic efficiency. Imagine going down the American path where employers have to pay for the health 

 insurance of their employees. No-one in Australia wants that. They would rather see an economically efficient 

 and fair medical system. What Mr Turnbull doesn't get is there are two economic growth plans on trial at this 

 election - Mr Turnbull's trickledown economics, where you look after the top one and  two per cent and hope 

 everyone else gets something on the way through, or Labor's plan to look after working class and middle 

 class families, good education, good health, good jobs, that is, I think, the most sustainable way to generate 

 economic growth in the long-term. 

 JOURNALIST: He called you Billion Dollar Bill. 

 SHORTEN: Yes. 

 JOURNALIST: What would you call him? 

 SHORTEN: What Mr Turnbull calls me - sorry, you did ask that second part of the question. What Mr 

 Turnbull calls me doesn't worry me in the slightest. What a desperate fellow this Mr Turnbull is becoming 

 when he is resorting to the negative big lie of this election. Let's call Mr Turnbull's actions in the last few days 

 for what they are. A great big fat lie. We know in this country that there are two clearly competing stories put 

 before the Australian people on July 2. You can vote Liberal and mandate a $50 billion tax cut for large 

 corporations. You can vote Labor and make sure that we have Medicare and well-funded schools for all 

 Australians. Mr Turnbull loves to talk about spending but what he won't ever do is talk about their own plans 

 they announced the week before the election. $50 billion in corporate tax cuts. $17 billion in cuts for high 

 income earners to get back literally tens of thousands of dollars. And then there's the $32 billion that Mr 

 Turnbull wants to keep feeding the property spectators and parts of the real estate industry through his 

 defense of negative gearing and capital gains tax deductions system. That’s $100 billion. But we know why 

 Mr Turnbull never wants to talk about that economic plan because he knows that is not the economic plan 

 which Australians want to hear. Mr Turnbull since he's become Prime Minister has shrunk into his job. He 

 promised a new form of politics, remember, but in fact what he has done is just gone to the Tony Abbott play 

 book of desperate smear and lie about Labor. 

 By contrast, we do have positive plans. I couldn't be prouder of the fact that Labor's fighting this election as a 

 referendum on Medicare. What Labor will do is talk about the needs of everyday Australians. If mum can get 

 in to see the doctor with her kids who are sick, that means she has to have less worry about her financial bills 

 and everything else she has to do. If someone is a self-funded retiree who has measured their income right 

 down to the margins they don't need the extra pressure of paying more for prescription medicine in Mr 

 Turnbull's Australia. Defending Medicare, opposing the privatisation of Medicare, this is a strategy for 

 economic growth in Australia and it’s a strategy for fairness and Mr Turnbull can call me all the names under 

 the sun. I know that when I'm on the side of everyday people, working and middle class families, I think that 

 is the right path for Australia's future. 

 JOURNALIST: You’ve just lost a Senator during an election campaign and you are someone who has 

 advocated for Indigenous representation. Is this an indictment on your leadership and what did you say to try 

 to convince her to stay? 

 SHORTEN: First of all, the news has just come out publicly. Senator Peris has just issued a statement that 

 she will not be renominating for the Senate. Let me just here right now record my appreciation for her service 

 to this country. She is a trailblazer. She is a trailblazer on the athletics track and she has been a trailblazer in 

 the Senate. She's a distinguished Territorian, she is a distinguished Indigenous Australian. I am very grateful 

 for the time that she has served the Labor Party and the people of the Northern Territory. She departs with 

 my absolute best wishes. In terms of my championing having Indigenous candidates, there are now a record 

 six Indigenous Australians running for the Labor Party and I think that is a long overdue development. But 

 certainly we are very committed to improving the political voice of all Indigenous Australians. 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Scullion has this morning said she was a captain's pick by Julia Gillard and a captain's 

 flick by you. Was Nova Peris sacked and who will replace her? 

 SHORTEN: That is just complete rubbish. Don't you love these Liberals, they even lie about the small things 

 as well as the big things. That is complete rubbish and Senator Scullion should not be focusing on trying to 

 say that Nova Peris has been anything other than made a choice which she sees as in her own interest and 

 the best wishes of her family. I expect better from Senator Scullion. The second part of the question, I wasn't 

 going to let Nigel Scullion get away with some silly cheap politics on an important day for Senator Peris. The 

 Labor Party in the Territory will no doubt have a range of candidates and the party will go through its process 

 in the coming days. 

 JOURNALIST: You were outraged this week when the AFP raided your offices in Melbourne. That was done 

 under a 100-year-old law that doesn’t give any public interest defence to the leak of public information. If you 

 are so angry about that, why not commit if you form government to reforming laws to allow some public 

 interest defence in leaking information? 

 SHORTEN: We’ll make that commitment. I said at press conference last week when one of your colleague 

 journalists asked me a general question about whistle-blower protection. I do think this is a matter which 

 deserves attention. I am scandalised that the Government is going to such efforts to cover up their poor 

 performance in the National Broadband Network and the fact that under Mr Turnbull internet speeds in 

 Australia have dropped from 30th to 60th. The fact he promised before the last election it would cost $29 

 billion and now it's at $56 billion and climbing. This is the biggest Commonwealth infrastructure project we 

 have ever done. It is the only real thing that Mr Turnbull has been in charge of in public life, other than being 

 Prime Minister, and the extent the Government will go to suppress Mr Turnbull's embarrassment and 

 exposure over his incompetence is staggering. So the point you say about whistle-blower protection, Labor is 

 absolutely in the market to start strengthening whistle-blower protection in this country full stop. 

 JOURNALIST: Canada has resettled 27,000 Syrian refugees since last November. Do you think that they 

 have done enough heavy lifting in the humanitarian refugee crisis or do you agree with Anthony Albanese 

 that Canada would be a good destination to send asylum seekers that Australia has locked up in offshore 

 detention camps? 

 SHORTEN: In terms of evaluating Canada's handling of 27,000 Syrian refugees, it certainly does make our 

 Government's efforts not look in any fashion heroic compared to that. I think the broader question though is 

 about our policies in terms of people smugglers and refugees. Again, let me be 100 per cent crystal clear. 

 Labor will not support seeing the people smugglers back in business. The criminal syndicates in South-East 

 Asia, who sell expensive tickets to vulnerable people on unsafe vessels which see people drown at sea, is 

 not a policy, is not a policy or an action which they will ever, ever, ever support. What we also have to 

 recognise is that the indefinite detention or the semi-indefinite detention of people in Australia's care is 

 unacceptable. Labor, if elected, and it's hard to negotiate, we obviously can't negotiate with other countries 

 from Opposition, one of the first things l will do is put Richard Marles, the immigration spokesman, hopefully 

 minister, on a plane to talk to the United Nations High Commissioner for refugees. It is disgraceful that we 

 haven't had that sort of high level dialogue to have regional resettlement. In terms of Canada, it’s an excellent 

 settlement country and we would certainly make it a priority through the United Nations High Commission for 

 Refugees, and other nations in our region, the timely resettlement of people on Manus and Nauru. Two more 

 questions, thanks. 

 JOURNALIST: If you become Prime Minister, will you keep the exemptions for religious institutions that 

 currently exist in Australia's anti-discrimination framework? Can you give a commitment that those exemption 

 will remain given the Greens are campaigning against them? 

 SHORTEN: At this point in time let me be really clear about that. We are not interested in telling religious 

 organisations how to run their faith-based organisations. We haven't seen the case made to make change. 

 But also let's be straight up here. It is a massive waste of money, $160 million being spent on a plebiscite on 

 marriage equality. Why should some people's relationships have to undergo the gauntlet of public opinion 

 and taxpayer funded hate campaigns? On this issue, Malcolm Turnbull should return to the old Malcolm 

 Turnbull. He knows and you know he knows, we all know he knows, that his heart is not in this plebiscite, so 

 why on earth is he subjecting Australia to a process and a $160 million of taxpayer expenditure when he 

 knows that it isn't the right thing to do? It is long overdue for Malcolm Turnbull to start showing leadership. 

 Last question. Excuse me, two questions. Jason? 

 JOURNALIST: You've spoken a lot about ensuring that people are able to get to their GPs in a timely 

 fashion. We have had a number of media events that have displaced patients and again we spent an hour in 

 a major medical centre, do you think it's appropriate to be displacing patients while arguing that we should be 

 making it easier for people to access GPs? 

 SHORTEN: Of course not. That's why I'm going to answer that question as quickly as we did. Last question. 

 JOURNALIST: Do you accept that Labor has committed to $200 billion worth of spending over the next 

 decade and if not, which of the Coalition figures do you specifically not agree with? 

 SHORTEN: It's a big lie by the Government. Let's be straight here. They're trying to pretend that any decision 

 they made before the calling of the election isn't a spend. They're spending $50 billion on corporate tax cuts, 

 $32 billion in maintaining taxpayer subsidies for negative gearing and capital gains tax deductions. They're 

 spending $17 billion by handing back income tax cuts to people who don't really need the money at this point 

 in time. No I don't accept the big lie of the Liberal Party. Let's be really clear - Mr Turnbull's choosing to invest 

 $50 billion of Australian's money in corporate tax cuts, Labor chooses to invest $49 billion in funding schools 

 and Medicare. Mr Turnbull is spending Australian's money, he's just not spending it on them. Thank you 

 everybody, I did say last question. 

 ENDS 

 

