---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Gladstone, QLD: 2 November 2016: jobs; Bob Day; Abbott vs Turnbull 'war'; refugee laws"
date: "2016-11-02"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "jobs"
  - "Bob Day"
  - "Abbott vs Turnbull 'war'"
  - "refugee laws"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/236436793
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4911061%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND ABORIGINAL  AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  GLADSTONE  WEDNESDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2016   

 SUBJECTS: Jobs; Bob Day; Abbott vs Turnbull ‘War’; refugee laws   

 

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon. I think it's  important to be up here with Senator Chris Ketter, the duty Senator for the area and of  course, Zac Beers, Labor's candidate for Flynn at the last election.   

 We want to be up here now when Gladstone needs a chop out. People tell me that  Gladstone is doing it as hard as they've seen it do recent memory. This is a great town,  it's a town which has frequently driven its own destiny; backing in industry, backing in  jobs. And when Gladstone goes well, it does very well but when you've got a resources  slump, when you've got the challenge of keeping jobs then Gladstone is doing it very  hard.    

 It's great though to be here meeting half a dozen plus apprentices, young men and  women who are interested in becoming skilled tradespeople of the future and they're  giving it their all. And they just want to have a government in Canberra with the same  degree of ambition for Gladstone that the apprentices have for their future.    

 So we're here to talk about jobs, jobs and jobs. For us, that's the start, the middle and  the finish for what is most important about what's happening in Gladstone. We're  interested to see Gladstone develop it's tourism capacity, there is a great story to tell  here. We're interested in seeing Gladstone expand its industrial opportunities. We want  to see mining doing well and we appreciate the jobs that come with opportunities in  mining.    

 The people of Gladstone have got one great resource that is often underestimated, I  think, when they look at the landscape of Gladstone's future is looked at: it's the people  themselves. They have a knack of sticking together and backing Gladstone and making  sure that Gladstone has a bright future.    

 It is tough at the moment but Labor is here because we got the message loud and clear:  that we will need to work even harder to win the confidence of people. So I think that  when the times are tough, when you turn up and you’re talking about the issues when  the town is doing it hard - that's our down payment of our commitment to greater future  in the Gladstone and Central Queensland area.    

 Happy to take questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Talking about jobs in Central Queensland, the Rookwood Weir project  will create some infrastructure jobs. The Coalition says that State Labor is dragging its  feet on it. Do you agree with that?    

 SHORTEN: Let's face it - the Federal Coalition are pretty keen to blame everyone else  for the woes of the Federal Government. In the case of the weir, it's a matter of making  sure the business case stacks up. We want to see the intelligent use of taxpayer  money. Water infrastructure is very important but you've got to make sure the numbers  add up and that's what I think the Queensland State Government is doing. I will certainly  carry the message back to them that people are keen to see things move along.    

 JOURNALIST: If the Government only received advice last week that there were  constitutional problems with Mr Day's validity in the Senate, how can you claim that they  should of came out earlier?   

 SHORTEN: Well, I think this is a very dodgy Government covering up its improper  behaviour. This issue of whether or not Senator Day was eligible to be elected didn't just  start at the end of last week. I think the Government has to explain when did it think it  was a problem with Senator Day eligibility? How long has it thought there was a  problem with Senator Day's eligibility? How long have they been accepting a vote on  legislation and turning a blind eye to all of the issues surrounding Senator Day and his  conduct? I think this Government has to explain who knew that there was a problem?  How long have they known there was a problem? How high up the food chain in the  Government have been the attempts to keep this a secret for the longest possible time?  Is it right that this Government has been able to utilise this Senator’s votes, even though  there was concerns about his eligibility.    

 The Turnbull Government has an attraction for swapping guns for votes, or keeping a  Senator in place when there is a clear question mark over his eligibility in return for  votes, the secrecy has got to stop. The Turnbull Government and the Prime Minister  need to spell out what they knew, when they knew it, how long they've known it and  what are they going to do about it.   

 JOURNALIST: When should they have come out and spoken publicly?    

 SHORTEN: Well I think the Government needs to explain when did they first think there  was a problem with Senator Day's eligibility. I think that starts to answer a lot of the  questions. But no-one thinks that the Governments been upfront with the Australian  people. This problem of Senator Day's eligibility did not start last Thursday. We know  that there's been the Department of Finance, it's emerged, has expressed concerns  about some of the business dealings. Government Ministers have now said that they  have known for at least four weeks. I think the Prime Minister needs to explain what'd  he know and when did he know it and how long has this Government been relying on 

 the vote of a Senator to get through their anti-worker legislation in return for turning a  blind eye to what may have been going on, in terms of this Senator's lack of eligibility to  be a Senator.   

 JOURNALIST: Only last weekend you were arguing the Government's propping Mr Day  up for his vote and now we discover they were seeking to have him disqualified. Is that  embarrassing that you got it so wrong?   

 SHORTEN: Hang on a second here, I think last weekend I was saying that the  Government was propping up Senator Day's vote. I had no idea about the extent to  which they've been propping this vote up. If there is a problem with a Senator's  eligibility, did they know this before the last election? Did they know it, when did they  know it from the last election? And in the meantime, if you think that you're accepting a  vote of someone not eligible, possibly not eligible to vote in the Parliament don't you  think you should tell the Australian people? This is a dodgy deal and the Government  needs to explain how long it has known.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied that none of your MPs or Senators have any financial  interests or contract of any kind?   

 SHORTEN: Yeah to the best of my knowledge I absolutely am.   

 JOURNALIST: Kevin Rudd's written a piece today rather scathing of the Government's  proposal to ban asylum seekers who arrive to Australia by boat for life, do you think  those sort of comments (inaudible)   

 SHORTEN: Well I think the real issue here is that Malcolm Turnbull's had a thought  bubble. He wants to look tough on refugees, he's trying to appease the right wing of his  party and some of the more extreme right wing views in the Senate. My initial reaction  when I heard about this latest effort by the Government to look tough, was that the idea  just seemed ridiculous. Now on one hand Labor's committed to stopping the people  smugglers and we will work with the Government on sensible policies. But this is a  ridiculous overreach, I think it looks like, a ridiculous overreach. Well what they're saying  is someone who is an American citizen or a Canadian citizen in 40 years’ time because  they were once a refugee couldn't even visit Australia on a tourism visa. It doesn't make  sense does it? I mean what happens one day if one of these refugees wins a scientific  prize and wants to talk to our academics? You could go through all of these scenarios.   

 This Government is playing politics. What they're trying to do is distract from the fact  that they've got a couple of thousand people in semi-indefinite detention. What they're  trying to do, is they're pressing the ‘look over here button’ to look tough on refugees to  distract from the Government’s instability. And we've seen examples of this instability in  the last week. The Government was caught out in the last week of Parliament,  weakening gun laws for votes, they've been propping up the beleaguered Senator Day,  and they've got to explain how long they knew this, and of course, you've got the civil  war in the Liberal Party between Tony Abbott and Malcolm Turnbull.    

 I mean, only yesterday we see emissaries and friends, good friends of Tony Abbott  saying: 'Look what Malcolm Turnbull needs to do is put Tony Abbott into the Cabinet',  but the problem for Malcolm Turnbull is that if he puts Tony Abbott into the Cabinet, well  there's still the ongoing division. If he doesn't put Tony Abbott into the Cabinet there's 

 ongoing division.   

 We've heard radio silence from Tony Abbott about this latest proposal to promote him.  We've heard radio silence from Malcolm Turnbull about his response to it. The fact of  the matter is, that whatever Malcolm Turnbull does with Tony Abbott, division is  ongoing. There will be division in this Government as long as this Government goes on.    

 JOURNALIST: Just back on Senator Day, you said to the best of your knowledge you  don't know if looking into it with your MPs and Senators? 

 SHORTEN: We have had screening processes. I've got no doubt the Party would have  looked at these matters. And let's be clear, Senator Day now wants to start blaming  everyone else, the question here is, what did the Government know about Senator  Day's eligibility? When did they know there might be a cloud over his eligibility? How far  back does this problem go? How far up the Government food chain? What discussions  have there been with Malcolm Turnbull about Senator Day's eligibility?    

 This is a dodgy Government propping up a dodgy Senator, and in return we've seen  laws that have been voted upon, possibly with dodgy votes. It's not good enough, the  Government needs to reject this addiction to secrecy and be upfront and tell the truth  with the Australian people. Quite frankly, the whole Senator Day scandal reeks of  improper behaviour and it goes to the heart of the Turnbull Government.     

 JOURNALIST: Just back in Gladstone, with the apprentices, while there's no Labor  member in the Flynn electorate, what can we be doing, what should the Federal  Member in Flynn be doing for our apprentices?   

 SHORTEN: Who's the Federal Member?   

 JOURNALIST: Ken O'Dowd.   

 SHORTEN: Oh that's right. Well I think Ken O'Dowd probably needs to lift the work rate  doesn't he? I mean, to be fair, we've seen the lowest number of apprenticeships in  recent times now happening in Flynn. The Government needs to start standing up  making sure that we clamp down on the dodgy private providers who are ripping off  young people doing training, we need to properly support TAFE and group training, we  need to make sure that when there are Commonwealth projects, that there's a  requirement to employ apprentices on those Commonwealth projects. There are a  range of things which can be done even before the next election, but the best chance to  give apprenticeships and local jobs a go in the electorate of Flynn in Gladstone is vote  Labor at the next election. Thank you everybody.     

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT (02) 6277 4053   

 

