---
title: "Bill heading for a boat backflip"
date: "2016-04-29"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/227441179
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4536611%22
---

 1 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 29 April 2016     

 BILL HEADING FOR A BOAT BACKFLIP    

 Bill Shorten has refused to rule out bringing the Illegal Maritime Arrivals (IMAs) in Regional  Processing Centres on Nauru and Manus Island to Australia.   

 Mr Shorten is under pressure as a growing number of his MPs repudiate Labor’s policy adopted  narrowly at Labor’s national conference just last year.   

 In a further sign that Labor and Mr Shorten’s commitment to the measures necessary keep the  boats stopped is weak he refused to answer a direct question on what he would do about  people in Regional Processing Centres.   

 JOURNALIST: Would you cave into the demands of the Left and let asylum seekers come  to Australia if you were PM?   

 Mr Shorten’s response was evasive all he could do was attack the Coalition Government’s  policies which ended the years of chaos and dysfunction under the previous Rudd and Gillard  Labor Governments.    

 The Labor leader continually says he is on a “unity ticket” with the Coalition on border protection  policies and that Labor supports regional processing.   

 Yet today he would not provide an answer to a direct question that goes to the core of the  matter.   

 It is clear Mr Shorten’s policy position is fragile with five of his fellow Labor MP’s now opposing  outright regional processing and wanting IMAs at Manus Island and Nauru brought to Australia  - a move which would give the green light to people smugglers to start the flow of boats on the  dangerous journey to Australia.   

 There are an estimated 14,000 people in Indonesia just awaiting such a signal.   

 Labor will talk tough before and election and backflip in government, just as Kevin Rudd did.   

 Labor will never keep the boats stopped.    

 For further information: Minister’s Office - 02 6277 7860  

