---
title: "Dutton's denial shows a government mired in dysfunction"
date: "2016-02-05"
creators:
  - "Rowland, Michelle"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURALISM"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/223607879
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4341718%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO 

 

 MICHELLE ROWLAND MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND  MULTICULTURALISM 

 MEMBER FOR GREENWAY    

 

 DUTTON’S DENIAL SHOWS A GOVERNMENT MIRED IN DYSFUNCTION     

 A leaked National Security Committee document that flags draconian changes to  migration is the latest example of the Turnbull Liberal Government’s rapid descent into  division and dysfunction.    

 The clumsy attempt by Peter Dutton’s office to deny all knowledge of the document is a  joke and does not pass basic scrutiny.    

 This document was marked ‘protected’, ‘sensitive’ and ‘cabinet’ and was prepared for  the Government’s National Security Committee.      

 If Peter Dutton has no knowledge of a document prepared for him, by his own  department - he is clearly inept and should finally admit he is out of his depth.    

 The last time Peter Dutton claimed he was kept in the dark was when he said his office  had not been told about the Operation Fortitude debacle.  It subsequently emerged that  his office had been briefed on the operation at least two times.    

 Labor has consistently demonstrated a bipartisan attitude when it comes to sensible  improvements to national security laws.    

 It is clear that same sensible co-operation doesn't exist within Mr Turnbull's divided  party room.      

 The document, obtained by the ABC is verging on bigotry and racism, and singles out  particular ethnic groups.        

 The document also proposes closing the door to permanent resettlement for refugees -  people on a humanitarian program need to be on a pathway to permanency.    

 Refugees cannot settle into a community in a state of limbo.      

 Labor has a clear plan to increase the humanitarian program to 27,000, recently  supported by a business delegation to refugee camps in the Middle East, led by Tony  Shepherd and Innes Willox.    

 Malcolm Turnbull must today be up front on whether the Government he leads endorses  this document and its sentiment.    

 FRIDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 2016 

 MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI (MARLES) 0427 051 563                                      NICK TRAINOR (ROWLAND) 0407 078 138 

 

 

 

