---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney, NSW: 7 May 2016: launch of 'getting results - Gonski funding in Australian schools'; Labor's 'your child. our future' plan to fund Australian schools; 2016 election; Malcolm Turnbull's budget for big business over battlers, asylum seekers"
date: "2016-05-07"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "launch of 'getting results - Gonski funding in Australian schools'"
  - "Labor's 'your child. our future' plan to fund Australian schools"
  - "2016 election"
  - "Malcolm Turnbull's budget for big business over battlers, asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/227843214
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4552224%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SYDNEY  SATURDAY, 7 MAY 2016    

 SUBJECT/S: Launch of  'Getting Results - Gonski funding in Australian Schools';  Labor’s ‘Your Child.Our Future’ plan to fund Australian schools; 2016 Election;  Malcolm Turnbull’s Budget for big business over battlers; asylum seekers.  

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning, thank  you all for coming out today.  It's my great pleasure to have Bill Shorten here in the  electorate with me.  

 We all know that we're likely to be going to the polls probably on the 2nd July, and on  that day in schools right around Australia you'll see P&C's holding cake stalls, raffles  and other fundraising activities. That's fantastic; it's great to see parents and community  organisations involved in fundraising for local schools. But they shouldn't be fundraising  for the basics; they should be fundraising for the extras. 

 That's why school education funding is so important. In my school - in my area, the  Gonski school education funding has made a huge difference in the recent years that  it's been available. And if it's taken away my schools will lose about $120 million. 

 In my area, Ultimo Public School has a lot of kids newly arrived in Australia and they're  using the Gonski money to help with English as a second language teaching. Another  school in my area, Glebe Public School has hired a speech pathologist to help kids  who've got difficulties in speaking gain the confidence that they need to fully participate  in their learning.  

 We are really thrilled to be here in Surry Hills today launching a very important report  and it's wonderful to have Bill here to do that. Thanks Bill. 

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Tanya. This report 'Getting  Results - Gonski funding in Australian Schools' is testament to the fact that needs based 

 funding in Australian schools delivers results. The individual attention which every  student deserves. 

 Now Mr Turnbull has a choice, but he has chosen to support $50 billion in tax cuts to  Australia's richest companies, and instead cut funding to schools.  

 Only Labor can be trusted to fully implement Gonski needs-based funding for every  child, in every school, in every post code to get a great education. Australian parents  expect nothing less. Happy to take any questions people might have.  

 JOURNALIST: We're looking at an eight week campaign likely, are you ready for that? 

 SHORTEN: Labor's ready. Labor's ready because we've got positive plans for the future  of Australia. Education, defending Medicare. Making sure that it's your Medicare card  and not your credit card which determines the quality of the health care that you get. We  want to make sure that there's real action on climate change, in particular by focusing  on renewable energy. We believe in a fair taxation system and that will also mean that  first home buyers can compete on a level playing field with people who are subsidised  by taxpayers to buy their tenth investment property. We're ready for this election  because we're going to put people first.  

 JOURNALIST: Eight weeks is a long time. How will you sustain momentum? 

 SHORTEN: Because we've got really good ideas. I am really looking forward to having  a debate about the future of this country based upon who's got the best policies. To be  honest, I think I'm like many Australians when Mr Turnbull rolled Mr Abbott, I thought  that my personal job would be harder, but I thought that we would get to a better level  of government under the Liberals with Mr Turnbull. He's proven to be a massive  disappointment. He is a seriously out of touch Prime Minister, with seriously out of touch  policies. 

 I think radio listeners, Australians were stunned during the course of this week to hear  Mr Turnbull's advice to first home buyers, just get a rich parent and ask them to shell  out. I think Australians were really disturbed to see Mr Turnbull play political games,  pretend that he could give a business tax cut to multinationals and then not fess up, not  fess us to how much that would cost the Budget, when in fact Treasury has now said  that the Government new this number weeks ago. 

 By contrast, Labor's taken an alternative approach as the alternative government. We  have rejected being a small target opposition. We’ll put our ideas out there, we're going  to treat genuinely the Australian people as smart. We're going to trust them to tell them  how much an idea costs, how we think this fits into the future. We're fundamentally  committed to laying down the markers for Australia's future. Jobs, education, health  care, the environment. Making sure that our young people get the best start in life. Real  action in terms of tax reform.    

 We are really ready and we look forward to the challenge of the next eight weeks,  putting our ideas forward. I understand that we start this election as the underdog, but I 

 lead a united team who spent the last 1,000 days preparing good policies, which will put  people first. 

 JOURNALIST: Are you really the underdog, the latest polls show you neck and neck  with the Government. Does that give you hope? 

 SHORTEN: I have hope in Labor's policies speaking to the lives that Australians are  leading. I have hope that we can have real action on climate change. I've got hope that  every school, every child will get every opportunity regardless of what post code they  live in because we can have needs-based funding, fully-funded. I have made a decision  that in a beauty parade giving multinationals a $50 billion tax cut or properly funding our  schools, I choose schools. I have hope that in a beauty parade between giving  someone who earns $1 million in income annually as opposed to providing proper  funding for our health care system, I choose the hospitals, I choose bulk billing, I choose  Medicare. I've got a lot of hope that as we advance our policies, Australians will see that  we have the positive plans for the future. 

 JOURNALIST: Just on health care that you mentioned. When will we see you hospitals  funding plan (inaudible)? 

 SHORTEN: Well before the election, but I can tell you some of the markers and pointers  to what we're thinking in terms of hospitals. One, we don't want to see bulk-billing  attacked in the manner in which it is. I'm deeply disturbed that this out of touch  Government thinks that somehow you help sick people by increasing the cost of going  to get a blood test. We will also make clear that we think that the - and I said this in  my Budget Reply speech on Thursday night, I'm deeply disturbed that this Government  is attacking and undermining the funding base of our GP's. GP's don't ask a lot from this  Government, they're too busy seeing the patients of Australia. But it isn't right in my  opinion that this Government continues to build there form of Budget repair by asking  GP's to have to pressure their patients to pay more to go and see the doctor.  

 I can also say this about hospitals; the Government's $2.9 billion offer is too low. It's too  low when I think about patients who are waiting on elective surgery lists to have knee  reconstructions or hip replacements. It's too low when I think about the waiting times in  emergency wards. We'll work with the states, we'll work with doctors and nurses and  consumers to make sure that we maintain a first world health care system in this  country. Perhaps if there's time for one or two more questions.  

 JOURNALIST: What do you think of reports Norfolk Island could be offered as an  alternative option for a detention centre. 

 SHORTEN: Oh listen, this Government just needs to actually get on with resolving the  indefinite detention. Labor is completely committed and I'm want to take the opportunity  of your question to send a message to people smugglers or any criminals seeking to  exploit vulnerable people seeking to come to Australia by boat from Indonesia. Doesn't  matter after this election who wins, we'll both be right on your case.  

 But that shouldn't be an excuse to allow indefinite detention because this Government's  been too lazy and too negligent to negotiate regional resettlement arrangements. I don't  believe that the choice has to be either you let people risk a dangerous journey by sea,  exploited by criminals, with mass drownings, or indefinite detention. There has to be a  better way, that'll be the Labor way if we're elected on July 2. 

 JOURNALIST: You spoke beforehand about being a united team, has Labor done  enough to convince voters it's learnt from the mistakes of the Rudd/Gillard era? 

 SHORTEN: Well I think the evidence is in, isn't it. I think fair minded observers would  acknowledge that in this term of Opposition, Labor's been the most coherent, the most  united and we have learnt fundamentally that what Australians want are positive polices,  not infighting.  

 Let's be clear after July 2, whether or not the Liberal Party win or lose the election, one  prediction which I'm sure everyone would agree, is that the Liberal Party is ready to  have a civil war in their own ranks. You've got Mr Abbott popping up, you've got Mr  Turnbull popping up. They just want to get the election out of the way so that they can  get on with fighting each other. I just say to Australians, if we know they're going to have  that fight, let's all make them have it from opposition not from government because  Australians need better.  

 By contrast we're outlining our positive policies. We are laying down the markers for the  future. We believe that this country can have a well-funded school system, that we can  have a strong public sector TAFE, that working class and middle class kids can go to  university and they don't need to pay for $100,000 degrees. We believe that young  people bidding for their first home shouldn't have the unfair competition of property  investor speculators being subsidised by the taxpayer to buy their tenth investment  property. I believe this nation is ready for real action on climate change, I believe this  nation wants to see a greater priority for Australian jobs and advanced manufacturing.  We are absolutely ready, and we will put our positive case to Australians every day  between now and July 2. Thank you very much.  

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

