---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Jerusalem, Israel: 29 October 2017: centenary of the Battle of Beersheba; foreign policy; Coalition chaos"
date: "2017-10-29"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "centenary of the Battle of Beersheba"
  - "foreign policy"
  - "Coalition chaos"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/251320857
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5602726%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND ABORIGINAL  AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  JERUSALEM  SUNDAY, 29 OCTOBER 2017   

 SUBJECTS: Centenary of the Battle of Beersheba; foreign policy; Coalition chaos   

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good evening, everybody. I am  here accompanied by my colleagues, Mark Dreyfus and Warren Snowdon. We will be  attending the celebration and commemoration of the Australian Light Horse charge of  Beersheba on Tuesday. I am here, along with the Federal Labor Party, to pay tribute to  the men of the first ANZAC and the First World War, the Light Horse, and indeed all of  the men and women who served in the Middle Eastern theatre of operations in the first  World War.    

 I am also here to pay tribute to the men and women of the Australian Defence Forces  serving Australia right now in the Middle East stopping the scourge of terrorism.   

 Happy to take any questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Can you tell us what you're doing tomorrow and why?   

 SHORTEN: Well I am looking forward to meeting with the Prime Minister of the  Palestinian Authority, Prime Minister Hamdallah and I am also looking forward to visiting  refugees and work in United Nations in Hebron and Bethlehem. I am also looking  forward to meeting with representatives of the Israeli Government and the Israeli  Opposition, including the new leader of the Labor Party, Avi Gabbay.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Prime Minister Hamdallah and the Palestinian Authority -  his government is now 12 years into a five year term, they're arresting anyone who  opposes them and dissidents. What's your message to them? Why should Australia  support a government like that - that has become so undemocratic?    

 SHORTEN:  Well, first of all: I am here in support of a two-state solution. I think the right  of Israelis to live within secure borders should be paramount and I also support the  legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people to have their own homeland.    

 I am here to hear how they think they're going, to hear their point of view and of course  as I said earlier, to visit Hebron and Bethlehem and to see what services are being  provided to support refugees and others in the Palestinian territory.    

 JOURNALIST: What about the Labor Party's position on recognising a Palestinian  state. We've had six Labor conferences, territories and states, recognise this motion -  pass it. Are you going to look at changing your policy on this?   

 SHORTEN: What I will do tomorrow is meet with the Palestinian Authority, meet with  their Prime Minister, just as I will meet with Israeli representatives. The path to peace  ultimately relies upon a two-state solution, that is Labor's policy; that's our policy from  the National Conference, that's the one which I support.   

 JOURNALIST: Barnaby Joyce has teed off on the Liberal Party on the front page of the  Australian today. Have you had a chance to have a look at that?   

 SHORTEN: I haven't seen Monday's Australian as I am still working on Sunday time.  But listen, I said at the outset that I am here to pay tribute to the 100 years  commemoration of the charge of the Australian Light Horse at Beersheba.   

 It's my intention that when I travel overseas, to not forensically engage in domestic  Australian politics. There's plenty of people, as your question implies, doing that in  Australia right now.    

 There are perhaps two points I will briefly make: I think that all of this current turmoil and  chaos in the Australian Government and the Australian Parliament could have been  avoided if Turnbull had simply stood Joyce aside until the High Court had made it's  decision. Turnbull is too arrogant for that and because of his arrogance and his poor  judgment we've now got the current turmoil.    

 The second point I want to make is this: Mr Turnbull's judgment was further underlined  when he announced in Parliament in August that the High Court would absolutely,  according to Turnbull, make sure that Joyce was still sitting in the chair of Deputy Prime  Minister. As we've seen, that judgment was hopelessly wrong, underlining the poor  judgment.    

 So if there's domestic issues in Australia, they rest 100 per cent at the feet of the poor  judgment of our current Prime Minister.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you aware whether the PM will meet with any of the Palestinian  Authority leaders (inaudible) delayed trip. Is that a good look?   

 SHORTEN: Well I understand that the turmoil in Australia caused by Mr Turnbull which  might interfere with his calendar here. I haven't come to Israel or Palestine to start  commenting about the Government in terms of its Middle Eastern policies.   

 Again, as I said earlier in this discussion, I am not here to forensically debate Australian  politics. I think that when Australian leaders travel overseas, we should leave the vast  bulk of the detail of domestic politics to those back in Australia.   

 JOURNALIST: During your meetings here, will you be raising the issue of the three  sisters from Melbourne who were allegedly abused (inaudible)   

 SHORTEN: Yes, I hope to have further discussions with Israeli Government  representatives. I think that the best way justice can be resolved is for justice to be  dispensed in Australia. I think it is a very serious matter and I will be raising it with the  Israeli Government.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, what do you think is behind that shift in the ALP grassroots  to have that motion passed at six state and territory conferences - what's behind that?   

 SHORTEN: Well, without getting into the ins and outs of every person and every  person's view in the Labor Party, I think there is genuine frustration at the lack of  progress towards a two-state solution. Let's also be really candid, I think that is a  general frustration shared by people in Australia and around the world, but also here in  Israel. So I don't think it is any different to a lot of debates which happen in Israeli  politics and right around the rest of world either.   

 Thanks everybody, see you all tomorrow.   

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

