---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra: 14 February 2017: Turnbull Governments unfair cuts; Closing the Gap; US/Australia refugee deal"
date: "2017-02-14"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Turnbull Governments unfair cuts"
  - "Closing the Gap"
  - "US/Australia refugee deal"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/241711065
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5098117%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND  ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS 

 MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 14 FEBRUARY 2017    

 SUBJECT/S: Turnbull Governments unfair cuts; Closing the Gap; US/Australia  refugee deal                                                                                              

 JOURNALIST: What do you make of Senator Xenophon's decision not to back the  Omnibus Bill?   

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Fantastic news. The idea that  the only way you can fun childcare improvements is to take money off parents of  older children is obnoxious and abhorrent. You can't rob Peter to pay Paul. This was  a con job which does nothing to help families, when 1.5 million Australian families  are seeing a reduction in their family payments, that's out of touch, it doesn't help  anyone and their living standards.   

 JOURNALIST: So where to from here, what would be the best case scenario?   

 SHORTEN: I think the Government should drop their cuts to family payments. We're  not saying that improvements to childcare aren't worth negotiating over. But the  number of hours they are proposing is insufficient, they're doing nothing to help  Indigenous kids but when you tie the childcare changes to massive cuts to  pensioners, reducing their energy supplements, to make young unemployed people  wait a lot longer before they get any money at all. To requiring 1.5 million families to  see a reduction in their payments, at the same time, what the Government should  do, if they want to actually help families, help childcare and help build a bit of  confidence back in the community, drop the $50 billion corporate tax cuts. Australia  can't afford to give $50 billion in corporate tax cuts when we're damaging pensioners  and we're damaging low income families. We've got to make a choice, and Mr  Turnbull has to make a choice, do you try and drive the economy and improve the  society and the direction of the nation by giving $50 billion in corporate cuts or do  you actually stand up for families? Labor stands on the side of families and 

 pensioners and we don't believe this is the right time for $50 billion in corporate tax  cuts.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you agree with Kevin Rudd's assessment that we could be  heading towards a second stolen generation with the number of indigenous children  [inaudible]   

 SHORTEN: I have spoken now for a couple of years about the worrying trend that  we see aboriginal kids be taken out of homes, that we're seeing young aboriginals  far more likely to be put into jail than non-Aboriginal Australians. We've got to have a  better justice system and a better system of care where the default position isn't to  send people based on their skin colour to jail. It's as simple as that. Your skin colour  in this country should not be a predictor to be more likely to end up in jail. It is wrong  that an 18 year old Aboriginal man is more likely to go to jail than to go to university  and we need to improve our justice system and we do need to, as Kevin has said,  make sure we're not slipping into a situation where we start taking so many kids  away from their families that just disrupts their whole lives.    

 JOURNALIST: What do you make of reports that US authorities will be on Manus  Island this week starting the resettlement process?   

 SHORTEN: I sincerely hope that the refugee deal goes ahead. I'm interested to see  if the Prime Minister or his office have had any subsequent contact with President  Trump or his office. But on this matter, Labor is as committed as the conservatives to  making sure that we resolve this situation with so many of those people on Manus  and Nauru.    

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

