---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 29 January 2017: schools' funding; US immigration ban; US refugee resettlement deal; banking Royal Commission."
date: "2017-01-29"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "schools' funding"
  - "US immigration ban"
  - "US refugee resettlement deal"
  - "banking Royal Commission."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/241037914
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5070027%22
---

 

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN 

 MEMBER FOR SYDNEY 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SYDNEY  SUNDAY, 29 JANUARY 2017                                    

 SUBJECTS: Schools’ funding; US immigration ban; US refugee resettlement deal;  Banking Royal Commission.   

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning. I wanted to  come out this morning to make a few comments about the Liberals’ announcement of setting up  an advisory group to formulate a new test for six year-olds. A new test for six year-olds will  never make up for $30 billion worth of cuts to our schools. The simple fact is that the Liberals  are saying they want a new test to identify kids who are falling behind, but they don’t want to  properly fund the one-on-one teaching that would help those kids catch up. $30 billion worth of  cuts to our schools is the equivalent of cutting one in seven teachers. We know what helps kids  who are falling behind, and that’s specialised, one-on-one attention to help them catch up.  That’s what they’ll lose under the Liberals’ $30 billion of cuts to Australian schools. Any  questions?   

 JOURNALIST: The issue of funding here, I mean obviously we have seen an issue where there  has been huge increases to funding of education and the results are still plateauing. How would  you fix it without just simply throwing money at it?   

 PLIBERSEK: The Liberals like to say there have been huge increases in funding, but that’s  simply not the case. We’ve seen some increase in funding, driven by the fact that there are  more kids going to school, and we’ve seen some increase in teacher wages. But Australia is  slightly below average when it comes to international funding for our schools. We’ve certainly  only seen a fraction of the extra funding that was promised to Australians schools, less than 10  per cent of the extra needs-based funding has flown to our schools. The Liberals claim that  there’s a lot of money going into our schooling, but the facts just don’t support that. Only a  fraction of the extra needs-based funding. Most of the increase is driven by inflation and more  kids attending school.    

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible] Australian kids are at risk of becoming second-rate when it comes to  education?   

 PLIBERSEK: Well we’ve seen a number of test results at the end of last year that give great  cause for concern. Educators, parents, everyone’s concerned about the fact that Australian  children are sliding in international rankings when it comes to science, maths and literacy.  School systems that exist in countries much poorer than Australia are actually out-performing  Australian school systems. Australian school kids are declining compared with their international  cousins. Of course this is cause for concern. You can’t fix what’s going wrong in Australian  schools when you cut $30 billion from our schools. The $30 billion that the Liberals are cutting is  the equivalent of cutting one in seven teachers. It means less one-on-one attention for our kids.  It means less focus on the basics. It means reading, maths, literacy, all of these things are  suffering because teachers don’t have the time and the resources to help kids. This new test -  the Government is saying we want a new test to work out which kids are falling behind, but  we’re not prepared to invest in the one-on-one teaching that would help those kids catch up.    

 JOURNALIST: The national education union has said that this is just a distraction from the lack  of commitment to Gonski funding, do you agree with that sentiment?   

 PLIBERSEK: I think this is completely a distraction from the $30 billion of cuts that the Liberals  have inflicted on our school system.    

 JOURNALIST: Donald Trump’s immigration order has caused outrage across the world, are  you worried about what this could mean for dual citizens here in Australia?   

 PLIBERSEK: I think it’s for Americans to answer questions about how this policy, how it will  operate in the United States. What I would say is that for 40 years, Australia has had a non-discriminatory immigration policy, and our Australian Government needs to be crystal clear that  that will continue in Australia. Of course every country has the right to do strong background  checks on people that they are considering for permanent residency or citizenship, but those  background checks shouldn’t be based on assumptions based on a person’s country of origin,  ethnicity or religion.    

 JOURNALIST: That refugee resettlement program that was agreed upon by the Federal  Government and with the Obama administration, do you think that’s now at risk under the  Trump administration?   

 PLIBERSEK: Well I think the refugee resettlement from Manus Island and Nauru has been one  of the greatest failures of the Abbott and Turnbull Governments. Manus Island and Nauru were  never intended to be permanent places of detention. Peter Dutton has completely dropped the  ball on third country resettlement. We have a Government that says that it has a deal with the  United States. That deal is shrouded in secrecy. We don’t know any of the details, we don’t  know whether the deal will be honoured by the incoming administration. It’s up to this  Government to find a solution quickly to take people off Manus Island and Nauru, where they  have been for too long, much too long.   

 JOURNALIST: The banks today have come out and said that they’re listening to customers and  they’re going to put in a billion dollar fund to fix the problems that customers care about. Is this  simply a smokescreen, a PR exercise in an attempt to help stave off a Royal Commission?   

 PLIBERSEK: Well we know that the banks are desperate to avoid a Royal Commission. They’re  prepared to do anything and sadly we’ve got a government, a Liberal Government, that’s  prepared to help them get away with not answering the series of questions that have come up, 

 year after year. Every time there’s a banking scandal the banks say no we’re all over it, we’re  reforming, we’ve got this in hand, we’ll take action ourselves to fix the problem. And then six  months later, a year later, we have another banking scandal. Only a Royal Commission will get  to the bottom of systemic problems in the system.    

 JOURNALIST: People have looked at the countries singled out in President Trump’s executive  order and said his actions are tantamount to a Muslim ban on immigration. Do you think that’s  right, do you think we’re seeing discriminatory policy here, and will Labor condemn it even  though it’s being perpetrated by America?    

 PLIBERSEK: Well I think it’s clearly a discriminatory immigration policy, and I don’t think the  President of the United States would say anything other than that. I think he’s been very clear  that that’s his intention and we are very clear, as a Labor Party, that we don’t support a  discriminatory immigration policy, that 40 years of immigration policy in Australia has shown that  we are stronger when we are united.    

 JOURNALIST: Bank bashing is obviously a national sport in Australia, but do you think that our  big banks have serious questions to answer and that any sort of guarantees by them can’t be  trusted?   

 PLIBERSEK: Well Labor supports a Royal Commission because we believe that there are deep  and systemic problems in the way that banks have treated their customers. We’ve seen  revelation after revelation of poor behaviour and it’s important to have a Royal Commission, with  all the powers of a Royal Commission, to get to the bottom of those episodes of poor behaviour. 

 ENDS 

 MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350 

 

