---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 4 February 2017: marriage equality; refugee deal"
date: "2017-02-04"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "marriage equality"
  - "refugee deal"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/241358665
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5083133%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND  ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS 

 MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE  SATURDAY, 4 FEBRUARY 2017   

 SUBJECT/S: Marriage equality; refugee deal   

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I promised at the National Press  Club this week that I'd be out listening to the voices of ordinary Australians. I did that  in Perth in Belmont on Thursday. Now here I am in Berwick in the seat of La Trobe,  listening to hundreds of people talk about their issues and priorities.   

 Today with me listening was Labor's candidate at the last Federal election, Simon  Curtis. Labor intends to be a party for the regions and the outer-suburbs in the  capital cities of this country. And Australians are telling me loud and clear, Bill, we  just want the politicians to stop squabbling and get on with the issues.   

 To that end, I reiterate my invitation to Malcolm Turnbull, let's have a free vote on  marriage equality. Plenty of people in the Liberal Party want it, plenty of people in  Labor want it and plenty of Australians just want to get on and be on and be done  with it.    

 I say to Malcolm Turnbull, let's just get on with marriage equality - there is no reason  for delay. The Australian people are saying, let's have a free vote on marriage  equality. Let's be done with it so we can focus on all the other issues.   

 Happy to take a couple of quick questions.   

 JOURNALIST: What do you make of continuing uncertainty over the refugee deal in  the US?   

 SHORTEN: I am completely supportive of the Government's efforts to see the  refugee deal honoured with the United States. I take what the Prime Minister has  said, that the deal is going to be honoured. Labor supports this, full stop, a hundred  per cent.    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053    

