---
title: "Time for Turnbull to show some leadership on Manus and Nauru"
date: "2017-11-05"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/251423753
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5616716%22
---

 

 SHAYNE NEUMANN MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR    

 TIME FOR TURNBULL TO SHOW SOME LEADERSHIP ON MANUS AND NAURU    

 Malcolm Turnbull needs to show some leadership and discuss the New Zealand Prime  Minister’s constructive offer to resettle eligible refugees from Australian-funded offshore  regional processing centres at their meeting today.    

 NZ Prime Minister Ardern has reconfirmed New Zealand’s offer to resettle refugees  from both Manus Island and Nauru.    

 Manus Island and Nauru were set up as regional transit processing facilities but have  become places of indefinite detention because of Turnbull’s failure to negotiate other  third country resettlement options.    

 The conservatives have been in Government for over four years and have shirked their  responsibility, leaving refugees on Manus and Nauru to languish under the woefully  incompetent Dutton who has proven his inability to manage offshore processing  arrangements.    

 It has been Labor’s long-held position that eligible refugees require viable third country  resettlement options and Turnbull should negotiate them as a priority.    

 Turnbull has chosen to ignore a recommendation made on 18 April 2017 to consider  New Zealand’s offer to resettle eligible refugees.    

 The Senate Inquiry into serious allegations of abuse, self-harm and neglect of asylum  seekers on Nauru and like-minded allegations on Manus Island recommended:    

 Recommendation 7: The committee recommends that the Australian  Government give serious consideration to all resettlement offers it receives,  including the Government of New Zealand’s offer to resettle refugees from Papua  New Guinea and the Republic of Nauru.  Further, if particular resettlement offers  are considered unsuitable, the Government should clearly outline the reasons. 

 

 Labor’s policy on asylum seekers is clear. Labor will never let the people smugglers  back in business and that is why Australia is not, and must not be, a resettlement  option.    

 Labor strongly supports the US refugee resettlement agreement and any similar  agreement with New Zealand must have appropriate conditions to ensure people  smugglers do not exploit vulnerable people.    

 Turnbull can no longer ignore his responsibility to work with other countries to negotiate  resettlement options. Doing nothing is not an option.    

 If Turnbull doesn’t discuss and seriously consider this offer from New Zealand today, it  would be another failure of leadership from this out of touch Prime Minister.    

 SUNDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2017    

 MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110    

