---
title: "Finn Pratt AO PSM"
date: "2017-09-07"
creators:
  - "Porter, Christian"
source: "MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/250581820
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5500808%22
---

 

 

 

 Media Release  Minister for Social Services  The Hon. Christian Porter MP   

 

 Thursday, 7th September 2017 

 

 Finn Pratt AO PSM  

 

 I sincerely thank Mr Finn Pratt AO PSM for his dedicated service as Secretary of the  Department of Social Services (DSS) and congratulate him on his new appointment as the  Secretary of the Department of the Environment and Energy.   

 Mr Pratt has been Secretary of the Department of Social Services since it was established in  2013 after the federal election.  Before that he was Secretary of the predecessor of DSS, the  Department of Family and Community Services and Indigenous Affairs and earlier led the  Department of Human Services and Centrelink.   

 I personally have been privileged to work with Mr Pratt over the past two years since I was  sworn in as Minister for Social Services in 2015.   

 Mr Pratt is a committed public servant with more than 30 years’ experience in social policy,  program management and service delivery and has served in Secretary/CEO roles under both  Coalition and Labor Governments.  As secretary of DSS, Mr Pratt has had responsibility for  the department with the largest financial share of the Federal Budget.  In the four years since  2013, Mr Pratt has worked with the Government to restrain and make the Australian welfare  budget sustainable and in the last two years has also overseen the Government’s major  reform of the welfare system which is now before Parliament.     

 Mr Pratt has also implemented significant reform in disability services, including the  establishment of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, which is making a positive change  in the lives of many people with disability, their families and carers.   

 Under Mr Pratt’s stewardship of DSS, more than 210,000 more families are meeting  immunisation requirements through the Department’s successful implementation of the No  Jab, No Pay policy in 2016 and he has been integral to the delivery of settlement services to  refugees, including 12,000 refugees fleeing conflict in Syria and Iraq.   

 Mr Pratt’s dedication to the public service and its role in improving the lives of Australians was  recognised in 2008 when he was awarded the Public Service Medal and again in 2015 when  he was awarded the Officer of the Order of Australia.   

 I wish him well in his new role as Secretary of the Department of the Environment and Energy.   

 I have already worked closely with Kathryn Campbell in her capacity as Secretary of the  Department of Human Services, where she has been responsible for implementing the  delivery of the Government’s welfare reforms. I look forward to working with her in her new  capacity as Secretary of my Department and congratulate her on her appointment.   

 Minister’s media contact:   Kevin Donnellan 0408 491 956 / Aimee Jones 0476 823 034 

