---
title: "Turnbull fails to accept New Zealand's resettlement offer"
date: "2017-11-05"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/251423755
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5616741%22
---

 

 SHAYNE NEUMANN MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR    

 TURNBULL FAILS TO ACCEPT NEW ZEALAND’S RESETTLEMENT OFFER    

 Malcolm Turnbull has failed to explain why he won’t accept New Zealand’s offer to  resettle eligible refugees from Manus and Nauru despite being recommended by a  Senate Inquiry, vocal community concern, calls from Labor, and even his own Liberal  MPs urging him to do so.    

 Turnbull continues to shy away from New Zealand’s offer, despite it being similar to the  US refugee resettlement agreement already in place.    

 Any similar agreement with New Zealand must have appropriate conditions to ensure  people smugglers do not exploit vulnerable people.     

 Turnbull’s refusal puts him at odds with the Department of Immigration and Border  Protection who were open to the prospect of a resettlement agreement with New  Zealand during Senate Estimates only two weeks ago.    

 Senator Kim Carr: So it is not being rejected out of hand? 

 Secretary Pezzullo: We would never not engage with New Zealand. We would 

 always have a discussion with New Zealand. It is a very frank, full and very close 

 and intimate relationship, and I can't imagine that we would do anything other 

 than engage with them very earnestly on any matters that were on the minds of 

 their Prime Minister or other members of their government. 

 

 Labor will never let the people smugglers back in business and that is why Australia is  not, and must not be, a resettlement option.    

 The US refugee resettlement deal won’t resettle every eligible refugee and that’s why it  is essential Turnbull immediately negotiates other third country agreements to get  refugees off Manus and Nauru.    

 Labor thanks the New Zealand Prime Minister for reconfirming New Zealand’s  constructive and generous offer to resettle refugees from both Manus Island and Nauru.    

 Why won’t Turnbull do the job Australians expect him to do and successfully negotiate  resettlement options for refugees on Manus and Nauru?    

 Turnbull’s attempt to play politics and refuse New Zealand’s offer rather than show  decisive leadership is proof of how out of touch this Prime Minister really is.    

 SUNDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2017    

 MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110    

