---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Adelaide: 17 November 2017: marriage equality; Christopher Pyne; New Zealand settlement for refugees"
date: "2017-11-17"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "marriage equality"
  - "Christopher Pyne"
  - "New Zealand settlement for refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/251601773
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5636845%22
---

 

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND ABORIGINAL  AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP - POOL CAMERA  ADELAIDE  FRIDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2017    

 SUBJECT/S: Marriage equality; Christopher Pyne; New Zealand settlement for  refugees   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, a question from Canberra. If New Zealand takes the Manus  Island refugees, what impact do you think that might have on New Zealand? 

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: If New Zealand wants to take the  people from Manus Island, Australia shouldn't get in the way, they should be allowed to  go. It's a solution. I do not know why Australia wants to get in the way. If New Zealand  wants to take the people from Manus Island, Australia shouldn't get in the way. 

 JOURNALIST: You don't think it will strain relations at all? 

 SHORTEN: No, I don't at all. I actually think New Zealand, in good faith, is offering to  take these people, and I think that if New Zealand, in good faith, wants to take these  people from Manus Island, then Australia should not get in the way. 

 JOURNALIST: Because we need a solution don't we? 

 SHORTEN: We need a solution, and if New Zealand wants to take these people from  Manus Island, Australia should not get in the way. 

 JOURNALIST: Sam-sex marriage, would Labor be open to waiting until the new year to  legislate for religious protections? 

 SHORTEN: I think we need to get on with marriage equality. The $120 million survey  has told us what we already knew: that Australia is ready for marriage equality. Now  we've had the survey, I think it would be tremendously insulting to Australians, and  highlight a waste of $120 million, if we don't legislate for marriage equality in the  remaining two weeks of Parliament. 

 This issue has been around the place for many years. Let's just get on and do it,  because there's many other issues that we need to get into. We need to be talking  about penalty rates, banking royal commission, we need to be talking about young  people being able to afford their first home, we need to talk about out of control  energy  prices. We've had enough discussion on marriage equality, let's just do it right, do it  once, and let's get on with it. 

 JOURNALIST: Religious protections though, now or next year? 

 SHORTEN: In terms of religious freedom, people should have a right to religious  freedom in this country. But voting for marriage equality doesn't undermine religious  freedom at all. Full stop. 

 JOURNALIST: Christopher Pyne hack, should we leave it at that or does further action  need to be taken? 

 SHORTEN: I feel for Christopher Pyne, it's highly embarrassing. I've spoken to the  Government, they have certainly reassured me that there's no national security  implication. If there was, the Government would need to explain it, but they've reassured  me about that. And I think that Senator Bernadi, who famously doesn't like Christopher  Pyne, I think that issue shouldn't cloud the rest of the matter. 

 JOURANLIST: So you don't agree with Bernadi's push to - 

 SHORTEN: No I spoke to the Government overnight. I feel for Christopher Pyne, it's  embarrassing for him and his family. The Government has made it very clear that  there's not a national security implication. If there was, it should be investigated, but in  this case the Government has said there is not. So I think Senator Bernadi's fight with  Mr Pyne shouldn't take up the time of Parliament. 

 JOURNALIST: And again, just on same-sex marriage. Do you agree there should be  religious exceptions involved, that it should be an option, and should we get it done now  or later? 

 SHORTEN: Let's get marriage equality done now. That's what the Australian people  expect of the Parliament. In terms of religious freedom, it's an important point, but  marriage equality does not compromise religious freedom, the ability of churches to  decide who gets married in their church, or synagogue or mosque. 

 And by the way, the nation now needs to move on. People have voted no, I can respect  that, I'm pleased that the yes vote got up. The nation now needs to move on/ Parliament  needs to do its job, that's what we're paid to do, and there are a lot of other big issues 

 Australians want us to address. Housing affordability, energy prices, making sure we do  something about flat wages in this country which see people falling behind. 

 JOURNALIST: And how quickly can we get it done? 

 SHORTEN: I believe that with some good will from the Parliament, we can resolve  marriage equality in the remaining two weeks of Parliament, then we can get onto other  matters. 

 JOURNALIST: Thanks very much. 

 SHORTEN: Good on you. 

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

