---
title: "Humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan and Pakistan"
date: "2017-06-20"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/248454138
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5349044%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP 

 

 20 June 2017 

 

 HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE TO AFGHANISTAN AND PAKISTAN   

 Today on World Refugee Day I announce that the Australian Government will provide  humanitarian assistance to support Afghan refugees in Pakistan, people returning to  Afghanistan from neighbouring countries, and Afghan people who have been displaced  by conflict.    

 The United Nations estimates over 3.3 million Afghan people are currently displaced  across Afghanistan and Pakistan. Additionally, since January 2016 over 1.1 million  people have returned to Afghanistan from neighbouring countries. Many returnees are  in urgent need of assistance with resettlement and reintegration.   

 Australia’s assistance of $15 million will provide vital protection services, healthcare  and nutrition to Afghan refugees in Pakistan, people returning from neighbouring  countries, people displaced by conflict and host communities in Pakistan. It will focus  on protecting the most vulnerable, including women and children and people with  disabilities.   

 Our assistance in Afghanistan and Pakistan will be provided through the UN High  Commissioner for Refugees, UN Children’s Fund, International Organisation for  Migration, and the UN Population Fund.    

 The number of refugees and displaced people globally is the highest it has been since  World War II. Australia continues to play its part resettling refugees from Afghanistan  and other countries, and providing humanitarian aid overseas to assist refugees and  their host communities.   

 Foreign Minister’s Office:  Rachel Obradovic 0478 488 874  Phoebe Nolan 0408 275 340 

