---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 17 January 2017: Australian jobs;Trans-Pacific Partnership; Yahoo data breach; refugee resettlement; Turnbull's budget mismanagement; Centrelink debt debacle"
date: "2017-01-17"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Australian jobs;Trans-Pacific Partnership"
  - "Yahoo data breach"
  - "refugee resettlement"
  - "Turnbull's budget mismanagement"
  - "Centrelink debt debacle"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/240338459
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5046543%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND  ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS 

 MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SYDNEY  TUESDAY, 17 JANUARY 2017    

 SUBJECT/S: Australian jobs; Trans-Pacific Partnership; Yahoo data breach;  Refugee resettlement; Turnbull’s Budget mismanagement; Centrelink debt  debacle    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: This is a great Australian  company with not just operations in Port Botany in Sydney but right around Australia.  We have had the privilege of speaking to some of the workforce amongst the 400  people employed here in permanent, quality jobs. I'm here today, on my second day  back from leave, not only testing the engines of the forklift, but we are going to start  testing the Government's resolve on Australian jobs in 2017.    

 There is nothing more important for a parliamentarian, no matter what their political  affiliation, nothing more important for a politician and the Government than standing  up and supporting Australian jobs. Good quality jobs like the jobs we see here.    

 We have heard today of the importance of government getting behind more truckie  training. We have heard today, again, the importance of Labor's policy of supporting  the road bottlenecks and gridlocks by supporting greater rail investment between this  facility and other parts of Sydney.    

 I, in 2017, and my Labor team, will fight for Australian jobs and we will do whatever it  takes to keep jobs and create jobs, and create quality jobs which put the food on the  table for working class and middle class families in Sydney and right around  Australia.    

 By contrast today, whilst Linda and I are out here hearing the policies, listening to  people about how we can promote more Australian jobs, Malcolm Turnbull is in the  bunker trying to reshuffle their existing ministerial jobs. This is the problem with 

 Australia under the Turnbull Government. Australians want a government who is  standing up for their jobs. Instead, Malcolm Turnbull is fighting for his own job.    

 And we see the remarkable situation where Malcolm Turnbull is so bereft of  supporters in his Cabinet that he is going to recycle the dodgy Senator Sinodinos  and give him a frontline position because he doesn't want to bring Tony Abbott back  into the Cabinet or cause a wider reshuffle. The only reason Malcolm Turnbull is  having a reshuffle is because one of his Government Ministers was simply  mistreating the expenses system and making Australians really angry at all  politicians.    

 What Malcolm Turnbull should be doing today is not recycling the dodgy Senator  Sinodinos, he should, instead, be focusing on policies which help this company and  thousands of companies like it around Australia promote and maintain Australian  jobs.    

 We are happy to take questions on this and other matters.    

 JOURNALIST: Just on the TPP, the ACTU has demanded that Labor rule out  supporting that agreement. Will you rule it out?    

 SHORTEN: Malcolm Turnbull has started this year very poorly. Returning from his  summer of scandal and stuff-ups, not the least of which has been the Centrelink  mess, Malcolm Turnbull has decided to distract Australia by talking about signing or  ratifying the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Malcolm Turnbull's asking Australian politics  to invest in a treaty with America which President Trump has said that he is going to  rip up. President Trump has described the TPP, this agreement, he has described it  in his language as a sort of rape of the American economy, to paraphrase President  Trump.    

 President Trump is not about to turn around, and just because Malcolm Turnbull  says he would like us to sign this treaty, the Americans aren't going to change. So  we are left in this farcical situation where you have got Malcolm Turnbull basically  asking the Australian Parliament to vote on last year's grand final. The result's over,  the verdict's in. The TPP is dead in the water.  

 So in terms of it, we will see what the legislation is when the Government presents it,  they haven't even got the legislation to present to us. But the TPP is over. It's dead.  It's not going anywhere. Trump has said this. Everyone knows it. So why is Malcolm  Turnbull not getting on with sorting out and protecting Australian jobs?    

 What he should do is do the sort of things which have been suggested to us today.  Get behind more training for skilled transport drivers and logistics operators. What he  should do is help cure the bottleneck, the lack of rail infrastructure around Port  Botany and what he should also do, if he wants to do something effective for  standing up for Australian jobs, is he should review and reform and revise the rorts in  the 457 and temporary guest worker visa schemes which see foreign workers ripped  off and Australian dole queues getting longer.    

 JOURNALIST: If the TPP does go ahead, would you support it or are you saying  that you wouldn't decide until you see the detail?    

 SHORTEN: I'm not going to get into hypotheticals. Trump has said it is over. When I  see the Americans say that it is not over and President Trump, then we will come  back and have a look at the matter. But who on earth thinks Donald Trump is going  to change his mind on what he said about the TPP except for Malcolm Turnbull?     

 Malcolm Turnbull's clutching at straws. He is just trying to stage arguments about  decisions which have already been made because he hasn't got any other ideas in  his policy cupboard. He is out of ideas. That's why he is trying to re-litigate  something which was decided by the American election.    

 JOURNALIST: What if a smaller TPP is salvaged without the US, would you be  open to that?    

 SHORTEN: Well then it is not the TPP. What we need trade which includes America  in terms of the regional architecture. If Mr Turnbull has another plan, put it on the  table. But in the meantime, we have 50,000 people who lost full-time jobs last year.  We don't want to see a repeat of last year's job losses this year. We've got Holden  closing. We've got older Australians who regularly report extended periods of  unemployment because they can't get jobs. We've got young people not able to get  apprenticeships. We've got companies crying out for more work and more skills and  more training. Malcolm Turnbull should worry about the things that he can  meaningfully change and stop talking about the things he can't change.    

 JOURNALIST: Does the TPP have any merit in terms of economic benefits? And if  so why not got ahead and legislate it even if Trump disagrees with it?    

 SHORTEN: Because Australia legislating a treaty with America isn't worth the paper  it's on if the Americans don't legislate that treaty. It's just a waste of time. What  Malcolm Turnbull could do, if he is fair dinkum about Australian jobs rather than  worrying about his own job, is he could start funding more apprenticeship places, he  can start building more rail infrastructure to help decongest the roads in Sydney.  Malcolm Turnbull needs to get on and fix up the temporary guest worker schemes in  Australia. These are things which Malcolm Turnbull can do. Instead he spends all his  time talking about pipe dreams which aren't going to happen and worrying about who  he should put into the Health Ministry to help make sure that Malcolm Turnbull can  keep his job.    

 JOURNALIST: More than 3,000 government officials have been victims of the  Yahoo data breach. Do you think there needs to be an urgent investigation into what  information has been accessed?    

 SHORTEN: As I understand it, this breach happened three years ago, so some of it  would be  a bit like shutting the gate after the horse has bolted. But the Yahoo data  breach is a timely reminder that business and people who hold personal information  and passwords need to make all efforts to protect that data. I think there probably is  a role, and we will work with the Turnbull Government on this constructively, to make  sure that government reaches out to business and to other people who hold that 

 personal information and passwords, to see what we can do to use our skills to  strengthen Australia's response against cybercrime. So I think in the case of Yahoo,  it is a timely reminder all of those who keep secure information of people's  passwords and important personal information electronically, we do need to do more  to help protect that and there is a role for Government to liaise with business to  ensure that this breach which happened in the past isn't repeated in the future.    

 JOURNALIST: Community leaders in Fairfield in Sydney's west have called for more  Federal Government assistance to help settle refugees. They are set to get about  half of the 12,000 special intake. Do you think they should get more help and how do  you think it has been handled so far?    

 SHORTEN: I do think It is important that for refugees who are officially approved and  able to come here, that there is appropriate levels of support to ensure their  absorption into the community is done as effectively as possible. We'll certainly be  talking and my Shadow will be talking to the Fairfield community about their  concerns.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think there should be so many people settled in the one local  council area?    

 SHORTEN: First of all, that's a matter for Fairfield to decide and I will get my  Shadow spokespeople to talk to them.    

 JOURNALIST: The Treasurer is expected to allow Government debt to rise above  $500 billion this year. What message do you think this will send the ratings agencies  and the markets?    

 SHORTEN: The Government is not managing the economy at all well. On one hand,  we've got unemployment near per cent, we've got more people than ever on the  disability support pension and we've got a lot of discouraged job seekers. So we do  have an unemployment problem in this country. On the other hand, the Government  seems incapable of protecting our credit rating and they're not making the sort of  hard decisions which need to be made to improve the Government and the Budget  and the taxpayers' bottom line.     

 The Government can help protect the ratings, the important credit ratings, of the  Australian Government by taking the following measures: drop the $50 billion  corporate tax cut to large companies, institute sensible reforms to negative gearing  and capital gains tax deduction rules which will also have the added benefit of  helping Australians be able to afford their first home, and the Government needs to  reconsider the tax cuts it is currently proposing for millionaires.     

 This will add tens of billions of dollars to the bottom line and it will do so in a way  which doesn't mean we have to see a repetition of the summer's scandalous  treatment of people who owe nothing to Centrelink, being chased like common  criminals for the debts which the Government acknowledges, many of them, they  know don't exist.     

 I might ask my colleague, Linda Burney who has been acting in this area over  summer, to talk more about if the Government's fair dinkum, it doesn't pick on the  most vulnerable.    

 LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES: Thanks and  good morning everyone.     

 Well, if the Government wanted to do something in relation to Centrelink, something  decent, they would be doing what we are doing here today, Bill Shorten and myself,  and that's talking to companies about employment, talking to companies about  apprenticeships and what can be done in relation to creating that employment.     

 Instead, today is the 21st day since I have written to Alan Tudge to ask him to  suspend the Centrelink robo-call debt automated collection system. I have heard  absolutely nothing back from Alan Tudge. He has had 21 days to respond and yet he  gives those people that Bill Shorten has referred to, the people that owe nothing to  Centrelink, 21 days to pay up. It is a real story of it's okay for the Government, the  Turnbull Government to have one set of values, one way of action, but it doesn't  apply to the rest of the community. It is absolute hypocrisy.     

 Two quick points. First of all, Alan Tudge admitted that there were problems  yesterday by saying that he would make changes to the system. There wasn't even  the Centrelink number on the letter that initially went out to people who supposedly  owed money and they could not get the addresses right. But, more significantly, he is  now saying that people will not have to start repaying their so-called debt until their  review takes place.     

 Labor is calling on two things: a, for the system to be suspended and, b, for those  people already caught up, that there be a retrospective rule applied that they can  stop paying back a debt they don't even know, and Centrelink doesn't even know,  whether it exists.    

 One rule for the Government, another rule for the rest of the community. It's  hypocrisy and that's what we are seeing writ-large here by Alan Tudge. And we've  just learnt, we've just learnt that this automated robo-system of so-called debt  collection, if it goes ahead, will be applied to people on the age pension so that they  can collect over $1 billion. Why doesn't the Government look at creating jobs,  creating apprenticeships, instead of chasing people that do not owe them money and  are yet being forced to pay back money and debts that don't exist?    

 SHORTEN: Perhaps we might take one last question if there is one? I just want to  finish, just making the point about Australian jobs. The Turnbull Government needs  to focus on creating and maintaining quality Australian jobs. They can't run a  Census, they can't run Centrelink, they can't run their own ministers' expenses  system. And now today, the biggest question in front of Malcolm Turnbull is which  discredited or dodgy former minister are they going to recycle back into the Health  Ministry. What we need in this country is a proper policy on apprentices training.  What we need in this country is a proper policy to build rail so that we can help take  the big cargos off the roads, and what we need in this country is a government fair 

 dinkum about tackling some of the rorts and  issues amongst the temporary guest  worker scheme.     

 Labor, today and every day for 2017, is going to be a champion for Australian jobs,  the people expect nothing else.    

 Thank you very much.    

 ENDS 

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

