---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 17 October 2017: energy policy; UN Human Rights Council; asylum seekers"
date: "2017-10-17"
creators:
  - "Cameron, Doug"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS"
subjects:
  - "energy policy"
  - "UN Human Rights Council"
  - "asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/251199884
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5577476%22
---

 

 SENATOR THE HON. DOUG CAMERON  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SKILLS AND APPRENTICESHIPS  SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP   PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 17 OCTOBER 2017   

 SUBJECT/S: Energy policy, UN Human Rights Council, asylum seekers   

 SENATOR DOUG CAMERON, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND  HOMELESSNESS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR SKILLS AND APPRENTICESHIPS: I  have said on a number of occasions that Malcolm Turnbull is the weakest Prime  Minister we have ever seen in this country.   

 I think that has been demonstrated by his complete capitulation to the troglodytes in the  Liberal Party.   

 It’s actually a good thing that this guy has got no backbone because he has been  twisted into so many positions by the extremists in his party that you just don’t know  what shape this guy will be in the next day.   

 This is a terrible government, this is a government that just has no leadership, it’s a  government that just can’t see what the future is and to capitulate to Tony Abbott and  Eric Abetz and to all the worst elements of the Liberal Party is an absolute disgrace.   

 JOURNALIST: From what we have heard about the new proposed energy policy  framework, what’s your reaction to that and is that the end of bipartisanship with the  loss of the CET?   

 

 CAMERON: Well we have to see what the details are but it would seem to me that we  have gone from a Prime Minister who supported a market based approach, a Prime  Minister who actually funded an analysis that came out with the view that we should  have an emissions intensity scheme - he did that with Nick Xenophon - and now he has  moved to a position where he won’t even recognise the importance of new technology,  new jobs and a new way of dealing with energy in this country.  

 

 He set up the Finkel inquiry, the Finkel inquiry came down clearly and said that if you  put a clean energy target in place that that will result in lower prices but he is not  sufficiently strong, he doesn’t have the courage and he doesn’t have the commitment to  actually deal with the issues that his own inquiries say you should deal with.   

 JOURNALIST: Australia was elected to the U.N. Human Rights Council overnight.  What do you think our priorities should be on that Council?   

 CAMERON: Well there is lots of priorities, human rights are something that we need to  look at in Australia.     

 Workers human rights are destroyed in this country day in day out by Michaelia Cash  and the government taking rights away that are internationally recognised as human  rights in this country, so maybe we should have a look at what’s happening here before  we start preaching to the rest of the world.  So that’s the first issue for me.   

 JOURNALIST: Michaelia Cash yesterday speaking about the closing of the Manus  detention centre twice refused to rule out the use of force in returning non refugee  residents back to their home countries.  What’s your response to that? How should  Australia deal with that situation?   

 CAMERON: Well certainly we shouldn’t be using force on people that are in the terrible  position that these people are in. I have said consistently that people in Manus and  Nauru should be treated with dignity and respect.    

 We should not be locking them up forever. This government under Malcolm Turnbull  has been incapable of identifying other areas where these asylum seekers could go.    

 So this is a big problem. They don’t have any answers. They don’t have answers on  jobs, they don’t have answers on energy prices, and they don’t have answers on energy  security.   

 This is a government in terminal decline. The sooner they go the better.   

 ENDS 

 MEDIA CONTACT: LUKE WHITINGTON 0422 265 775   

