---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 27 August 2017: drug testing trials for welfare recipients; long-term welfare dependence; asylum seeker income support"
date: "2017-08-27"
creators:
  - "Tudge, Alan"
source: "MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "drug testing trials for welfare recipients"
  - "long-term welfare dependence"
  - "asylum seeker income support"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/250540506
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5483537%22
---

  1 

 

 The Hon Alan Tudge MP  Minister for Human Services 

 TRANSCRIPT 

 DOORSTOP 

 27 AUGUST 2017 

 Topics: Drug Testing Trials for welfare recipients, Long-term welfare dependence, Asylum  Seeker income support. 

 E&OE... 

 ALAN TUDGE: 

 Today we have seen figures which show that we have a real problem with long-term welfare  dependence. There are over 100,000 people who have been on unemployment benefits  continuously for over five years and almost 20,000 for more than 10 years continuously. 

 The most disturbing thing about this is that half of those people entered into the welfare  system in the prime of their life in their 20’s and their 30’s. This means it is not just a cost to  the taxpayer to support those people, but it is a waste of human potential for people to be  on benefits for such long periods of time. 

 The Government is doing everything it can to get people off welfare and into work. We are  obviously growing the economy to create more jobs and just last year 240,000 new jobs  were created. 

 We are introducing important new programs, such as PaTH which provides specific  opportunities for unemployed people. But equally importantly, we are changing the  compliance system to encourage people to do the right thing; to take the job interviews, to  do the job search so they are more likely to get work. 

 We have been concerned that in the past this compliance system has been too weak, so we  are toughening the compliance system so that those people who do the wrong thing face  more serious consequences. 

 Can I just make a comment also about drug testing. Today we will be announcing the third  and final location of our drug testing trials in Mandurah in Western Australia. 

 That will complement ones in Western Sydney as well as Logan in Queensland. This of  course is just one further measure in addition to these other which will be encouraging  people and supporting people to get off drugs and into the workforce. 

  2 

 Everything we are doing is designed to do that because we know that the best form of  welfare is, ultimately, a job. 

 JOURNALIST:  Why is the Government making this move to cut welfare and income support for these 100  asylum seekers so, seemingly, suddenly? 

 ALAN TUDGE:  These are people who have come from Nauru or Manus Island with the specific objective of  getting treatment here in Australia because of a medical condition. That treatment has now  been provided and now they are under an obligation to return to Nauru or to Manus or  indeed, back to their own country. 

 Given they are under that obligation, I do not think it is unreasonable for the taxpayer to say  we are no longer going to support you here in the country. 

 JOURNALIST:  So they were really only here on that basis? They were getting medical care? 

 ALAN TUDGE:  That is exactly right. As you know, we have got a very firm principle that anyone who arrives  by boat, unlawfully to our shores will not be able to stay in Australia. These particular  people came here because they had medical conditions which needed to be treated in  Australian hospitals. 

 They have been treated and now they have to return to Nauru and to PNG. 

 [ENDS] 

