---
title: "Government delivering employment support for refugees resettling in NSW"
date: "2017-10-09"
creators:
  - "Cash, Michaelia"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/251054140
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5563891%22
---

 

 Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT  MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE 

 SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA   

 THE HON John Barilaro MP  DEPUTY PREMIER OF NEW SOUTH WALES  MINISTER FOR SKILLS  MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 9 October 2017 

 

 GOVERNMENT DELIVERING EMPLOYMENT SUPPORT FOR  REFUGEES RESETTLING IN NSW   

 An employment information expo to connect refugees looking for work with organisations that  can assist them will be held in Liverpool, Sydney, tomorrow.   

 The Refugee Employment Information Expo is being hosted by the Australian Government in  partnership with the New South Wales Department of Industry and Multicultural NSW, and will  be opened by NSW Coordinator-General for Refugee Resettlement, Professor Peter Shergold.   

 “This expo will be an ideal opportunity for refugees to find out how to go about getting a job in  Australia, particularly in western Sydney and the Illawarra,” Professor Shergold said.   

 “I’ve seen firsthand the crucial difference that overseas skills recognition, local training and  careers guidance can make for refugees beginning new lives here in NSW. Many are highly skilled  and experienced workers who have so much to contribute and are eager to give back.”   

 Minister for Employment, Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash, said the expo would be a one-stop  shop for refugees wanting to learn how to join the Australian workforce. Attendees will be able to  talk to representatives from a wide range of support services, government agencies and local  employers. Numerous workshops will also be held on the day.   

 “The aim of the workshops is to impart information about Australian work rights and to help build  the confidence of refugees for their job search,” Minister Cash said.   

 “The Turnbull Government is committed to assisting refugees to become job-ready and move into  the workforce. Since jobactive commenced on 1 July 2015, there have been more than 32,000 job  placements for jobactive refugee job seekers nationally, with more than 11,000 job placements  since the start of 2017.”   

 “I encourage all employers to consider the skills and experience this group of Australians has to  offer when recruiting.”   

 In New South Wales alone in 2017, jobactive providers achieved more than 3,000 job placements  for refugees, connecting refugees looking for work with employment opportunities. Refugees  represent a large and diverse talent pool for employers to draw upon to meet their business needs.   

 Deputy Premier and Minister for Skills, John Barilaro, encouraged refugees living in the Sydney  region to attend the expo to learn of the support available to help them look for work.   

 “Helping refugees and asylum seekers integrate into our community offers them a fresh start for  the future and addresses skills shortages in key areas of our economy,” Mr Barilaro said.   

 “The New South Wales Government has invested $22 million in a Refugee Employment Support  Program, which has attracted 1,100 enrolments since July this year. All of those participants are  now becoming job-ready, receiving recognition for their overseas skills and qualifications and  have undertaken work experience with employers.”   

 Professor Shergold said the Refugee Employment Support Program has been well received.   

 “We’re seeing encouraging results from organisations, including some of Australia’s largest  employers, who have offered employment to refugees and humanitarian entrants as part of the  state government’s $22 million Refugee Employment Support Program,” Professor Shergold said.   

 “Governments have a vital role to play in helping refugees find their way into meaningful long-term employment, and our nation will be the better for it.”   

 Interpreters will be available on the day.   

 Refugee Employment Information Expo  Tuesday 10 October 2017, 10 am to 3:30 pm  Whitlam Leisure Centre, 90 Memorial Avenue, Liverpool   

 For more information about the expo and/or to register for the event, please visit:  https://www.ivvy.com.au/event/Expo10   

 

 Media contacts:  Office of Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash: (02) 6277 7320   Dave De Garis 0427 019 692 / Andrew Hudgson 0429 500 913  Office of the Hon John Barilaro: Ellie Laing 0427 066 603  Professor Peter Shergold: media@dpc.nsw.gov.au  Federal Department of Employment Media: media@employment.gov.au 

