---
title: "Creating a brighter future for Australian girls"
date: "2017-10-11"
creators:
  - "Cash, Michaelia"
source: "MINISTER FOR WOMEN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/251165118
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5565582%22
---

 

 Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT  MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE 

 SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 11 October 2017 

 

 CREATING A BRIGHTER FUTURE FOR AUSTRALIAN GIRLS   

 On the International Day of the Girl Child, Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash, has  reinforced Australia’s commitment to the United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals and outlined  Australia’s success in getting more women than ever before into work.   

 “Today is a chance to reflect on the future we are building for our young women. The International Day of  the Girl Child recognises endemic issues which prevent young women and girls around the world from  living lives of equal opportunity,” Minister Cash said.   

 “Increasing women’s participation in the workplace is a key driver of equality. I am so proud today that a  record number of women are in work in Australia and that female workforce participation, for the first time  in our nation’s history, has reached 60 per cent.”   

 The Turnbull Government is focused on increasing Australian girls’ participation in STEM education and  training to set them up for the jobs of tomorrow.    

 “I want Australian girls to dream big about their future role in the world. I know that women are still under- represented in many areas of science, technology, engineering and maths,” Minister Cash said.     

 “We need to harness the full potential of our girls, in order to reach our potential as a country, which is why  the Government is focused on supporting women and girls into STEM-based education and careers.”   

 In Adelaide today Minister Cash launched the new Harmony Alliance, led by the Migration Council of  Australia, which will amplify the voices of Australia’s migrant and refugee women.   

 “The Harmony Alliance will empower migrant women to directly influence the issues that impact on their  safety, health and wellbeing, and their economic empowerment,” Minister Cash said.   

 “Removing barriers to inclusion and participation has both economic and social benefits and as a society we  become enriched with the knowledge and experience of these women.”   

 The Harmony Alliance is supported through the Women’s Leadership and Development Strategy.    

 Media contacts:  Office of Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash: (02) 6277 7320   David De Garis 0427 019 692 / Andrew Hudgson 0429 500 913 

