---
title: "Manus update"
date: "2017-11-24"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/251653443
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5650102%22
---

 1 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

  MEDIA RELEASE 

 24 November 2017  

 MANUS UPDATE 

 

 The Australian Government is aware that all men previously refusing to leave the  former Manus Island Regional Processing Centre (RPC) have now departed the  complex for alternative accommodation. 

 The Australian Government welcomes this development. 

 The Papua New Guinea Government has been clear since mid-2016 that it would  close the RPC.  

 Since May, information was provided on a weekly basis that the RPC was closing  and services and support would transition to the alternative accommodation sites.   

 Refugees could relocate to the East Lorengau Refugee Transit Centre (ELRTC) or  West Lorengau Haus. Non-refugees could relocate to Hillside Haus. 

 This alternative accommodation has been available to house all inhabitants of the  former RPC since October 31. 

 PNG continues to add capacity to West Lorengau Haus to cater for the return of  those currently transferred to Port Moresby for medical treatment. 

 Food services, cleaning, security and the ELRTC-medical clinic are all operational  and have been available since October 31.  

 Advocates in Australia are again today making inaccurate and exaggerated claims of  violence and injuries on Manus, but fail to produce any evidence to prove these  allegations. 

 What is clear is that there has been an organised attempt to provoke trouble and  d  isrupt the new facilities. 

 The Australian Government has been advised that some equipment has been  sabotaged at the alternative accommodation centres, including damage to backup  generators.  

 Vandalism has also occurred to water infrastructure.  

 2 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 The equipment is being repaired or replaced and the Government understands these  matters are under investigation.    

 Advocates should now desist from holding out false hope to these men that they will  ever be brought to Australia. 

 Instead advocates should now encourage them to engage with PNG authorities for  resettlement either through the US resettlement process or in PNG and for non-refugees to accept assistance packages to return to their home country. 

 

 

 For further information: Minister’s Office - 02 6277 7860    

