---
title: "Tackling encryption and border security key priorities at Five-Eyes meeting in Ottawa"
date: "2017-06-25"
creators:
  - "Brandis, George"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/248731955
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5359588%22
---

 SENATOR THE HON GEORGE BRANDIS QC   

 ATTORNEY-GENERAL  LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE   

 THE HON PETER DUTTON MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION   

 JOINT MEDIA RELEASE   

 TACKLING ENCRYPTION AND BORDER SECURITY KEY PRIORITIES AT FIVE-EYES MEETING IN OTTAWA   

 The Attorney-General, Senator the Hon George Brandis, and the Minister for Immigration and Border  Protection, the Hon Peter Dutton MP, will travel to Ottawa today for important meetings with Five-Eyes  counterparts.   Senator Brandis and Mr Dutton will attend the Five Country Ministerial (FCM) on  National Security.  Senator Brandis will also attend the Quintet meeting of Attorneys-General.   

 "As the Prime Minister said yesterday, the use by terrorists of cyberspace is an issue of critical concern  to intelligence and law enforcement agencies.   Australia will lead the discussion of ways to address this  issue; in particular the involvement of industry in thwarting the encryption of terrorist messaging,"  Senator Brandis said.   

 "We all share the global challenges of terrorism, foreign fighters and protecting our borders. The next  two days will provide us with an opportunity to share our experiences and learn from our partners in the  United Kingdom, Canada, New Zealand and the United States."   

 “As Australia’s priority issue, I will raise the need to address ongoing challenges posed by terrorists and  criminals using encryption. These discussions will focus on the need to cooperate with service providers  to ensure reasonable assistance is provided to law enforcement and security agencies,” Senator Brandis  said.   

 “The countries meeting in Ottawa are among the most important partners for Australia in ensuring the  integrity of our borders. This was demonstrated in part by cooperation in the screening of Australia’s  12,000 refugees from Syria and Iraq,” Mr Dutton said.   

 The FCM meeting is an opportunity for the Minister to discuss Australia’s strong border protection  policies, including the proposed strengthening of citizenship arrangements which will bring us into line  with partner countries.   

 Mr Dutton will engage with other Five Eyes countries on issues relating to border security.   

 “I look forward to discussing with my counterparts the growing challenges we all face from increasing  cross-border movements of people and goods and the importance of strengthening our intelligence  exchanges and operational collaboration,” Mr Dutton said.   

 Cooperation with our Five Eyes partners is critical to keeping Australians safe and we look forward to 

 these important meetings.   

 25 June 2017 

