---
title: "Refugee Week 2017"
date: "2017-06-20"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/248454149
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5349031%22
---

 1 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 The Hon Alex Hawke MP  Assistant Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 

 JOINT MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 20 June 2017   

 REFUGEE WEEK 2017 

 

 World Refugee Day is a chance to celebrate Australia’s Humanitarian Programme and  focus on the great contribution humanitarian entrants make to Australia.   

 Australia is one of the few countries in the world to welcome Yazidi refugees who were  facing genocide at the hands ISIS because of their religious beliefs. Since settling in  regional New South Wales they have embraced and adopted the Australian way of life.     

 The Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton recognised Australia’s  long-standing contribution to resettlement of refugees through the Humanitarian  Programme and the success stories of humanitarian entrants who have come through  the programme at a Refugee Week function at Parliament House.     

 “A lot of Australians wouldn't have heard of the Yazidis, but it's worth having a look at  their story and the history of these amazing people. They have a terrible story of  persecution, but they are the most peace loving, wonderful people who love their kids  and they're so grateful for the opportunity that's been given them by coming to our  country. Australians should feel proud that they have offered these women a future that  they probably could not have imagined,” Mr Dutton said.   

 Mr Dutton said the Turnbull Government continues its commitment to the Humanitarian  Programme which is increasing to 16,250 places in 2017-18 and to 18,750 places in  2018-19. This will consolidate Australia’s role as a key international partner in providing  durable solutions for refugees who have no other option available to them.”   

 The Assistant Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Alex Hawke said World  Refugee Week 2017 is a great reminder of the positive contributions made by  humanitarian entrants to Australian society.     

 2 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 “It is very satisfying to know that Australia has helped people facing persecution and  discrimination and those in refugee camps to have a new chance at life,” Mr Hawke  said.   

 “Australia has a proud record of resettling people in humanitarian need and is one of the  world’s top three contributors to international refugee resettlement efforts.”    

 Many of these individuals have reached elite sporting levels, begun successful  businesses, achieved academic success and volunteered their time and effort to assist  people in the Australian community; these and many more stories are being celebrated  across the country this Refugee Week between 18 June and 24 June.   

 

 Further information: Minister’s Office: - 02 6277 7860  

