---
title: "Transcript of doorstop: Bloomberg and the Asia Society: Sydney: 29 September 2017: Shorten Labor's FutureAsia deeper engagement framework; Turnbull Government's cut to penalty rates; why won't SloMo release the Treasury report on wages and inequality; Peter Dutton on economic refugees"
date: "2017-09-29"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "29 September 2017: Shorten Labor's FutureAsia deeper engagement framework"
  - "Turnbull Government's cut to penalty rates"
  - "why won't SloMo release the Treasury report on wages and inequality"
  - "Peter Dutton on economic refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/250895265
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5550817%22
---

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  BLOOMBERG & THE ASIA SOCIETY, SYDNEY  FRIDAY, 29 SEPTEMBER MAY 2017   

 SUBJECTS: Shorten Labor’s FutureAsia deeper engagement framework; Turnbull  Government’s cut to penalty rates; why won’t SloMo release the Treasury report  on wages and inequality; Peter Dutton on economic refugees.   

 CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Well thanks for coming everybody. Today  the Labor Opposition has announced our approach to deepening and broadening our  economic engagement with Asia. A very key part of our economic growth plan for  Australia, FutureAsia will be the framework under which all future policy initiatives in  relation to economic engagement with Asia will be placed and as Treasurer I will be  reporting annually in a Shorten Labor Government to Parliament on progress. We've  made some detailed policy announcements today, working to increase the level of  Asian experience on our company boards, top ASX200 boards, working to embrace the  Asian diasporas in Australia to ensure that the Chinese and Indian communities with  their considered business expertise are harnessed in the national interest to broaden  and deepen our economic engagement and the establishment of the Australian-ASEAN  Studies Centre at universities in partnership between Australia and South-East Asian  universities. Important first steps but very much only the first steps in the FutureAsia  policy.    

 I'd like to thank my colleagues, Bill Shorten, Penny Wong, Tanya Plibersek for  their  engagement in bringing this together and Jason Clare, the Shadow Minister for  Trade and Resources and Northern Australia, obviously a key economic partner of mine  in developing these policies and the Shadow Assistant to the Treasurer Matt  Thistlethwaite who has been very active in working with me on these policies. This will  be an important hallmark of a Shorten Labor Government, a step change in our  economic engagement with Asia   

 Two other matters I’ll cover just before taking your questions. Of course this weekend is  a long weekend, a long weekend around the country either today in Victoria or Monday  for others. And of course on this long weekend there will be Australians are being paid  less for working, working on Sunday, committing no crime other than spending time  away from their family on this long weekend. And under this Government they will be  paid less. An important report out today from the McKell Institute shows that around 

 $9.5 million in income collectively this weekend alone will be lost to Australia's workers.  So we will have no lectures from the Government about low and middle income earners  and the need to boost wages growth when they are standing by as Australian workers  who are working this weekend will have a wages cut compared to the last long weekend  in which they worked   

 Now the other matter I will just cover briefly is the Treasurer made a speech last night in  which he referred to so-called Treasury modelling claiming in his continual campaign  against inequality reality that actually income inequality in Australia is not on the rise  and that Australias low income earners are actually doing relatively well he claimed. He  said that this was based on treasury modelling and it's been confirmed today the  Government is not releasing that modelling if it exists.    

 Now if the Treasurer is going to make speeches like this he needs to back up his facts  or he is entitled to be seen as tricky and evasive. If there is really Treasury modelling,  get it out of there. Let's have a debate. If the Treasurer wants to continue with his  inequality denial and claim that inequality is not the rise in Australia, he claims he has  facts to back that up then he will do so. If he doesn't release that modelling today, this  alleged modelling then he will be entitled to be seen as a blatant political trick on his  behalf which has become quite infamous, this trick of saying that there is Treasury  modelling or that there is a Parliamentary Budget Office advice or modelling which  simply does not exist. If the Treasurer believes he has it, put it out there and we will  have that debate.    

 Happy to take your questions on those or any other matters.   

 JOURNALIST: Chris, a question from our Canberra bureau. Will Labor continue to fund  the Coalition’s new Colombo scholarship program which sends Aussie university  students to internships in Asia?   

 BOWEN: Penny Wong and I will have more to say about that under a FutureAsia policy.  One of the points I've made in my speech today is that for too long incoming  Governments have just thrown out everything the previous Government has done. That  won't be our approach. With the Government has got something right we will say so, we  will continue it, we will refine it and improve it potentially but we will continue it. In  relation to specifically the Colombo plan initiative, we continue to look at that and will  have more statements to make but where the Government has got something right and  is working, we reserve the right to make improvements but we certainly won’t be  throwing out the baby with the bathwater   

 JOURNALIST: Is Peter Dutton's comment that people on Manus Island and Nauru are  economic refugees false?   

 BOWEN: I think Peter Dutton should spend less time being the fashion police and more  time trying to get genuine third-party resettlement for those who are on Manus Island  and Nauru. Now here's an important point, these people on who's fashion sense he was  commenting who are going to America by virtue of definition of the fact that they are  going to the United States have been classified by his Government as refugees,  genuine refugees. By definition. And yet he chooses to spend his time commenting on  their clothes. Most of the clothes would have been supplied by the Government or by  charity over the last few years but put that aside, how about actually working to get 

 these people resettled in third party countries rather than demonizing their choice of  clothes. They are refugees, they have been found by him and his Government to be  genuine refugees under the convention and he might choose to point that out rather  than being the commentator on the efficacy or otherwise of their clothing   

 Any other questions?   

 JOURNALIST: Yeah, getting back to financial services, we’ve noticed that big banks in  Australia have been pulling out of Asia and coming back to Australia. Now that shows  that they are not engaging in Asia, quite the opposite and their clients I presume are  coming back too. How would you reverse that if you want to be more engaged with  Asia?   

 BOWEN: Obviously any individual decision is up to the company. It won’t be my-- I  won't be calling in the chief executives and giving them a talking to about they need to  invest more in Asia. We will be setting the policy framework. One of the ones I  announced today will be working in partnership with the Australian institute of Company  Directors to lift the level of Asian expertise on boards. We will get the framework right,  the policy settings right but the individual decisions will continue to be a matter for  companies, the companies’ boards will act in the best interests of their shareholders but  if there is an increased level of engagement and understanding of Asian economies at  the board level and the very senior management level, then the decisions will flow from  that.   

 Okay, that's a wrap. Thanks very much.   

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879   

