---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Ipswich, Queensland: 21 May 2017: Government's announcement on asylum seekers"
date: "2017-05-21"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Government's announcement on asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/246693888
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5291113%22
---

 

 SHAYNE NEUMANN 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION 

 FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  IPSWICH, QLD  SUNDAY, 21 MAY 2017 

 SUBJECTS: Government’s announcement on asylum seekers. 

 SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Thank you for coming here today. It’s no wonder the Administrative  Appeals Tribunal has overturned nearly forty percent of Minister Peter Dutton’s  decisions in relation to migration when today he feels bound to actually call people “fake  refugees” before they’ve actually lodged their application seeking refugee status. I think  the public will see what this is all about. It’s about Peter Dutton putting his name in the  paper, angling for the Prime Ministership, not doing his job and angling for Malcolm  Turnbull’s job. Now if you’re an eligible asylum seeker, it’s Labor’s position that you  should make an application as soon as possible in a timely way, to seek refugee status.  That’s what should happen. And people cannot stay in this country indefinitely without  making those applications. But the Government’s been in power nearly four years and  Minister Dutton’s been in his role in excess of two years, and today he’s decided he’s  got a problem. Labor will be asking questions of the Government when Senate  Estimates start on Monday in relation to this issue. We’ll be taking our response through  our usual processes and we’ll be asking the Government to release full details of their  policy announcement with their arbitrary deadline of the 1st of October as soon as  possible. Happy to take any questions. 

 JOURNALIST: What is wrong with having a deadline? 

 NEUMANN: Well our position is that we need to go through this. It’s important that  people make their application as soon as possible. The Government’s been in power for  about four years now and today they’ve made announcement without actually briefing  the Opposition or consulting with anyone as far as we’re aware in relation to this  arbitrary deadline. We’ll consider the policy when the Government releases it in detail. 

 JOURNALIST: Does this jeopardise any level of bipartisanship in these policies? 

 NEUMANN: Well Labor believes strongly in terms of a bipartisan policy in relation to  turn backs when safe to do so, offshore processing and regional resettlement. Why?  Because it saves lives and it works. We don’t want the people smugglers back in  business. But it’s irresponsible for Minister Dutton to keep misconceiving and  misinterpreting Labor’s policy. It sends the wrong message to people smugglers and it’s  irresponsible for him claim Labor’s policy is otherwise than it is, and it has been for  some years. 

 JOURNALIST: You claim that he is partly motivated by his desire for Malcolm  Turnbull’s job. Can you explain that? What’s going on? 

 NEUMANN: Well it’s clear that Minister Dutton has been in the news quite a lot lately,  angling and claiming he’s the champion of conservative values, putting himself forward,  talking about how he has batons in his knapsack and always interested in putting his  name forward. This is a Department that’s in meltdown. We’ve had the auditor-general  whose three reports in relation to the Department and the failure of the Department to  actually conduct itself. We’ve had real problems in the area of the Immigration portfolio  and the Minister has been a tick-and-flick Minister not concentrating on his job and after  two years in his job, has found out he has a problem today. We want people to be  treated fairly. We urge them to make applications. But this is not conducive to good  policy.  The Minister labelling people as “fake refugees” before they’ve actually made an  application to have their refugee status assessed. No wonder the AAT has overturned  the Minister forty percent of the time. 

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110   

