---
title: "Senate releases Nauru files Senate Inquiry report"
date: "2017-04-21"
creators:
  - "Pratt, Louise"
source: "SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/245270585
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5236764%22
---

 

 SHAYNE NEUMANN MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR    

 SENATOR LOUISE PRATT 

 ASSISTANT SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND  COMMMUNITIES  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA  CHAIR OF THE SENATE LEGAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS 

 REFERENCES COMMITTEE   

 

 SENATE RELEASES NAURU FILES SENATE INQUIRY REPORT   

 A Senate Inquiry into allegations of harm, abuse and mistreatment of asylum seekers in  offshore processing centres on Manus Island and Nauru has today made  recommendations to the Turnbull Government.   

 Manus Island and Nauru were set up as regional transit processing facilities but have  become places of indefinite detention because of the inaction of the Turnbull  Government.   

 Labor initiated this Senate Inquiry because the Turnbull Government failed to act on  serious allegations of harm, abuse and mistreatment of asylum seekers outlined in the  Nauru Files.    

 The Chair’s report recommends the Turnbull Government work with the Nauruan  Government to improve protection of children by introducing an independent children’s  advocate, review medical transfer processes and commission an external investigation  into allegations contractors downgraded incident reports.   

 During the Inquiry, immigration officials were forced to admit the Turnbull Government  was not negotiating with any other countries to resettle refugees currently living on  Manus Island and Nauru.   

 This leaves few options for those potentially hundreds of refugees on Manus Island and  Nauru who may miss out on the opportunity to resettle in the United States.   

 Labor wants every refugee who is eligible to have the opportunity to apply to resettle in  the United States, including those refugees from Manus Island and Nauru who are  currently in Australia receiving medical treatment.   

 Refugees currently in Australia receiving medical treatment should not be forced to  return to Manus Island or Nauru to apply for the US refugee resettlement deal.     

 There is still much work to be done by the Turnbull Government, including supporting  families to pursue options to resettle together.    

 Labor has made clear our commitment to offshore processing, regional resettlement  and boat turn backs, when safe to do so, because we know it saves lives.   

 We want refugees out of offshore processing centres and resettled into third countries,  but while they are living in Australian funded offshore processing centres, Australia has  an obligation to ensure they are not subjected to any harm or violence.     

 Labor is very disappointed by Turnbull Government Senators offhanded dismissal of the  Chair’s report, conclusions and recommendations.   

 This Senate Inquiry has identified the issues and the Chair’s report has made sensible  recommendations.  The ball is now firmly in the Turnbull Government’s court.   

 FRIDAY, 21 APRIL 2017   

 MEDIA CONTACT: MELISSA HOCKEY 0418 511 529 (NEUMANN)    

