---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Adelaide: 9 January 2017: Sussan Ley's use of taxpayer funded travel to buy a Gold Coast apartment; the Prime Minister's failure to act; cessation of Timor-Leste/Australia Treaty; US/Australia agreement on refugee resettlement"
date: "2017-01-09"
creators:
  - "Wong, Penny"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE"
subjects:
  - "Sussan Ley's use of taxpayer funded travel to buy a Gold Coast apartment"
  - "the Prime Minister's failure to act"
  - "cessation of Timor-Leste/Australia Treaty"
  - "US/Australia agreement on refugee resettlement"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/239999528
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5034806%22
---

 

 SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  ADELAIDE  MONDAY, 9 JANUARY 2017   

 SUBJECT: Sussan Ley's use of taxpayer funded travel to buy a Gold Coast  apartment, the Prime Minister’s failure act; cessation of Timor-Leste/Australia  Treaty; US/Australia agreement on refugee resettlement.    

 PENNY WONG, ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Today we’ve seen another  weak response from a weak Prime Minister.     

 Today was a test of Malcolm Turnbull's judgement, and yet again in that test, he has  shown Australians just how weak he is.     

 Now, let's recall this - by her own admission, Sussan Ley has breached the ministerial  standards and, by her own statement, she says the Prime Minister agrees. So both  Mr Turnbull and Ms Ley agree that she has breached the ministerial standards which  are expected of her. But instead of doing the right thing and moving to remove Ms Ley  from his frontbench, to sack her from the Cabinet, we have a Prime Minister who, yet  again, goes for the weak option.     

 A weak Prime Minister demonstrating, yet again, his own weakness and his lack of  judgement.     

 Happy to take questions.     

 JOURNALIST: Sussan Ley says that she hasn't broken any rules, though - you  obviously disagree?    

 WONG: Well, that's not what she said in her statement yesterday. In her statement  yesterday, she made clear that her behaviour did not accord with the standards that  are expected of Cabinet ministers - of ministers.    

 She says, in yesterday's statement that the Prime Minister has agreed with her. Yet  what we see is the Prime Minister squibbing it, and he is squibbing it again.  

 

 This is a pattern of behaviour from Malcolm Turnbull. We saw that with Mr Roberts, we  saw that with Mr Brough - both of them were stood aside before they were  eventually removed from the frontbench and he is doing it again.    

 I mean, you have to ask Mr Turnbull this - what are your Ministerial Standards  worth? What are they worth?     

 It is clear that they have been breached by your Minister's own admission and yet, what  do we have again? Yet another weak decision by a weak Prime Minister.    

 JOURNALIST: So do you think that she should resign altogether?    

 WONG: I think the Prime Minister should have removed her from the Cabinet, because  she has breached ministerial guidelines by her own admission - by her own admission.     

 Now, let's understand - I saw some breaking news before I came down to this press  conference. We're not talking about a small number of trips to the Gold Coast. As I  understand it, we're talking around about 37 nights spent on the Gold Coast, a number  of them were weekends. Now, by her own admission, Ms Ley says her behaviour did  not comply with the standards expected of ministers.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think her diary should be released? She said she is not going to  be doing that.    

 WONG: Well, I saw her explanation in the press conference. She should release  sufficient details to demonstrate that the trips she says were taken for public purposes  were, in fact, taken for public purposes.     

 So no one is saying, "Release confidential details of patients". Nobody is saying  “Release information that shouldn't be in the public arena”. But she should  release sufficient details to confirm any assertion that a trip was taken for public  purposes.    

 JOURNALIST: How is this different from Mark Dreyfus a few years ago paying back a  ski trip?    

 WONG: Well, I don’t recall all the details of that, but as you said he repaid it. What we  have had, day after day here, revelation after revelation and ridiculous explanations. I  mean, did anyone in Australia really believe that you have an impulse purchase of an  apartment?    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think there are other Ministers in Mr Turnbull’s team that could  have potentially done similar things like this in the past?    

 WONG: Well that is a question for Mr Turnbull, isn’t it? I mean what we do know, from  Mr Turnbull’s behaviour now, is that he does not enforce his Ministerial Standards and  that is the key thing for Australians.    

 We do expect Ministers to behave according to higher standards. The Ministerial  Standards are there for a reason and yet what we see is Mr Turnbull saying “Well, 

 they’re kind of optional, because even though I agree they have been breached, even  though the Minister says they have been breached, we’ll just stand her aside, we won’t  remove her from Cabinet.” It’s quite clear that the Minister Standards are an optional  extra when it comes to Malcolm Turnbull.    

 JOURNALIST: Is reform needed here so these things can’t happen so politicians can’t  move around the system?    

 WONG: Well all politicians should comply with the rules. I know that there has been a  review. The Government is yet to act on that and we look forward to the Government  taking a constructive approach in its response to that review.    

 JOURNALIST: So what is your reaction to Arthur Sinodinos potentially stepping in?    

 WONG: Well, there is some irony isn’t there? The Minister who was before the  Independent Commission Against Corruption, the Minister about whom the Independent  Commission Against Corruption said his evidence was “difficult to accept”. That was the  finding. It wasn’t that ICAC cleared him. They said that his evidence was “difficult to  accept”. He is now acting as the Health Minister. Well, as I said, yet more weakness  from Malcolm Turnbull. He should resolve this properly.    

 JOURNALIST: So his breaches were just as serious?    

 WONG: Well I think that Australians looked with real doubt at Mr Sinodinos’ past  explanations. He was a very senior person in the Liberal party at the time that some  very questionable things happened in terms of finances. Obviously, that’s a matter for  ICAC and ICAC has provided some of its reports on that, and I will leave it to do its  work.    

 JOURNALIST: So you don’t believe it’s enough for her to pay back the expenses?    

 WONG: I think out of her own mouth the Minister has said that she has breached the  Ministerial Standards. By her own statement the Prime Minister has agreed. In those  circumstances there is only one option and that is for her to be removed from the  Cabinet. She ought to have resigned and a strong Prime Minister would have done the  right thing and removed her if she refused to resign.     

 JOURNALIST: What I took from her press conference today was that she was saying  that she doesn’t believe that she has done anything wrong.    

 WONG: Well, I don’t know that you can square that away or reconcile that - as George  Brandis would like me to say - I don’t think you can reconcile that with her statement  from yesterday.     

 I mean she herself in writing yesterday said, and I can quote it to you if you like, “I have  spoken to the Prime Minister and he agrees that this claim does not meet the highest  standards he expects of Ministers. I apologise for the error of judgement.” That is what  she said. Now that is not the statement of someone who has said they have done  anything wrong.     

 So both statements can’t be true. You can’t say “I have done nothing wrong” and issue  a statement yesterday where you say “I apologise for doing something wrong.”     

 The reality is this. There are Ministerial Standards. They have clearly been breached.  The Prime Minister should abandon his fail to act. Yet more weakness, weakness in  judgement, from Malcolm Turnbull.     

 JOURNALIST: Just on another issue, what do you make of the announcement today  that the treaty between Australia and East Timor will be ceased.    

 WONG: Yes, I saw that as I was on my way here. I will make a couple of comments  about that. As I understand it this statement is being released as part of a conciliation  process, the International Conciliation Process. We urge the Government to participate  in that conciliation process constructively and we urge them to continue doing so.     

 In relation to the maritime boundary with East Timor, what I would say is this: Labor  made clear before the election our position, we think this dispute has gone on too long  and has been damaging for Australia’s interests as well as for East Timor’s. We urge  the Government to resolve the maritime boundary through this conciliation process.       

 JOURNALIST: And also on US Congressman Brian Babin said that Donald Trump will  halt the refugee agreement between US and Australia.    

 WONG: Ultimately, that is a matter for Prime Minister Turnbull to resolve with the  incoming President. What we have said is we urge the Government to find countries of  resettlement. It has taken many years and the Government has been very tardy in  seeking resettlement options for the people on Manus and that would be a real  disappointment if the agreement, which the Prime Minister announced, did not proceed.    

 Obviously, this is commentary within the United States. It is a matter ultimately for the  Prime Minister to resolve with the President.   ENDS  MEDIA CONTACT: THOMAS MOONEY 0412 942 594   

 

