---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 3 February 2017: schools' funding; US refugee deal; cuts to Indigenous programs"
date: "2017-02-03"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "schools' funding"
  - "US refugee deal"
  - "cuts to Indigenous programs"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/241283687
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5077086%22
---

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN 

 MEMBER FOR SYDNEY 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE  FRIDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2017                                    

 SUBJECTS: Schools’ funding; US refugee deal; Cuts to Indigenous programs. 

 ANDREW GILES, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR SCHOOLS: It’s so great  to be able to welcome Tanya Plibersek to Mill Park Primary School, a fantastic  school servicing a great community, and a school that’s really in touch with the  community. So I’m so pleased that Lu Alessi, the principal, has been able to take  some time to show Tanya and me around with some Year 1 students. What I’ve  been really struck by is also how excited these kids are, but talking to the teachers  about the difference that Labor’s needs-based investment has made in this school,  where speech pathology has made kids who are struggling to adapt to school -  confident, articulate and effective learners. It saddens me that this school may not be  able to continue to offer this service and that kids in this community may not be able  to get the education they deserve, and we all deserve and expect for them. So  Tanya, it’s been terrific to show this off, and I really look forward to continuing to talk  to you about the needs of Mill Park and all the schools in Melbourne’s northern  suburbs.  

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you so  much Andrew, it’s terrific to be here with my colleague Andrew Giles and to get such  a warm welcome from Mill Park Primary School. The principal Lu Alessi, the children  and teachers that we’ve met today. Andrew is quite right in saying that this school  was very well able to tell us what the extra funding it has received has meant for its  children. Speech pathology, as Andrew said, and a whole range of other services  that make kids keen to come to school, which really improve their educational  outcomes too. That’s why Labor will never accept $30 billion of cuts to our schools.  That’s why Labor will never accept $800 million of cuts to the Victorian school  system over the next two years alone, and well over $20 million in Andrew’s  electorate. You think about the time, the energy, the effort that parents put into 

 choosing a school for their children and into supporting their children’s schooling.  Parents staying up late at night baking cakes for the cake sale the next day, turning  up on election day for the democracy sausage sizzle, turning up to the trivia nights  and the other school fundraisers. They do it because they know resources make a  difference. $30 billion of cuts means fewer teachers, it means less one-on-one  attention, and it means less help with the basics. $30 billion of cuts is like cutting one  in seven teachers from our school system. It means children who are struggling,  children who are struggling with their literacy and their numeracy, with problems at  home that mean they’re not turning up to school and they’re not learning effectively,  they won’t get the help they need. And, you know, all of those basic subjects -  maths, English, reading, writing, science, computing studies - all of those things  suffer when schools don’t have the resources they need. So we will never accept the  $30 billion of cuts proposed by the Liberal Federal Government.  

 I’d also like to add just a couple of words about reports today that some state  governments have cut their investment in schools. And I’d like to say how  disappointing this is, but how predictable it was. When Christopher Pyne was  Education Minister, he said to all the states and territories - you know that deal you  made with Labor where, for extra Commonwealth investment, you also have to  increase your investment in your school system? Well that deal’s off. Doesn’t matter  if you cut funding. Christopher Pyne said to the states and territories - you know  those reforms we agreed to? The better teacher training, the better support to make  sure teachers are the best possible teachers they can be in the classroom, extra  intensive work on literacy and numeracy. You know what? All those reforms, they’re  off too. You can do what you like in your school system. Christopher Pyne boasted  about the fact that the Commonwealth Government required nothing of the states  and territories. So this is the result of that. It is very disappointing to have a federal  government that says to the states and territories, do what you like, we don’t care.  But it’s very predictable that when you say that, you’ll see funding cuts, particularly  from those Coalition state governments that never had a commitment to better  investment in school education. Any questions? 

 JOURNALIST: Just on the refugee deal, the Prime Minister says he stood up for  Australia and has secured it, if it does go ahead isn’t that a big win for the  Government? 

 PLIBERSEK: Well look, we certainly hope that the arrangement will go ahead,  because people have been on Manus Island and Nauru for much too long. This has  been one of the great failures of the Coalition Government and of Peter Dutton, the  Minister, in particular. What I would say is this confusion over the last few days  reminds us that the Liberals should have backed Labor’s arrangement with Malaysia  when they had the chance. We would not still be having this conversation if the  Liberals had put a pragmatic solution ahead of their own political advantage. They  would be living in Malaysia now, with work rights and children in school, proper  healthcare, instead of this being a continuing argument.  

 I’d also like to just add one more thing though. I am, as an Australian, a little  offended by the treatment of Australia’s Prime Minister and the leaking of a  conversation that should have been a confidential conversation. Australia has been  an excellent ally of the United States, we have stood beside the United States in 

 every conflict this century and last, including some of the ones that we shouldn’t  have been involved in, like the first invasion of Iraq. And our Prime Minister,  whatever his political persuasion, whether it’s a Liberal Prime Minister or a Labor  Prime Minister, should be entitled to have a confidential conversation with the  President of the United States, including a conversation that is a tough conversation.  Relationships between nations rely on their leaders being able to pick up the phone  and know that conversation won’t be leaked. 

 JOURNALIST: If Labor was in power, how would you have handled the refugee deal  and talks with the Trump administration? 

 PLIBERSEK: Well, we would’ve, if we’d had our way, had an arrangement with  Malaysia that would make this deal completely unnecessary. People forget that we  had an arrangement secured with the Malaysian Government, that would’ve seen  people transferred to Malaysia with full work rights, with support to live in the  community, with their children able to attend school, with healthcare provided, and  Malcolm Turnbull, Peter Dutton, all these people cried big crocodile tears in our  Parliament and said they couldn’t possibly support that deal, and meanwhile we’ve  got people on Manus Island and Nauru languishing there for years.   

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister says it’s your fault though that they’re on Manus  because they arrived were sent offshore under Labor, has there got to be truth to  that? 

 PLIBERSEK: Yeah, really? I mean, we had a proposition with Malaysia that they  should’ve backed, there’s nothing clearer than that. And these continued delays, the  continued uncertainty shows that they should’ve backed that deal at the time. They  didn’t for their own political reasons, and they are reaping the consequences of that.  What’s worse, is that people who’ve been sitting on Manus Island and Nauru for  three years are suffering the consequences of it. 

 JOURNALIST: There’s a report coming out today on the Indigenous Advancement  Strategy, how do you evaluate the changes made under Coalition? 

 PLIBERSEK: Well they’ve cut half a billion dollars. I mean, how do I evaluate the  changes? They’ve cut half a billion dollars, they’ve introduced extraordinary  uncertainty with programs that have been successful programs, funded for years  with strong results, not knowing whether they would be refunded, in some cases not  being refunded. It’s been a disaster, it’s been a debacle, and I think looking back to  Tony Abbott who said he was going to the Prime Minister for Indigenous Australians,  they have comprehensively failed in their duty to our first Australians.   

 JOURNALIST: And what do you think of the $40 million they’ve set aside for the  program evaluation improvements?  

 PLIBERSEK: Well again, you cut $500 million dollars or more from Indigenous  programs, and then ask yourself: are we going to get the same results as we used  to? I think you can probably guess the answer to that one. The cuts have been one  thing, the chaos in the administration of these programs, you can ask anyone who’s 

 involved in this area and they’ll tell you about the chaos and uncertainty, it’s a pretty  predictable outcome.  

 ENDS 

 MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350 

 

