---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 31 May 2017:"
date: "2017-05-31"
creators:
  - "Canavan, Matthew"
source: "MINISTER FOR RESOURCES AND NORTHERN AUSTRALIA"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/247260375
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5308733%22
---

 

 

 SENATOR THE HON MATTHEW CANAVAN  Minister for Resources and Northern Australia    

 TRANSCRIPT 

 MORNING DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE  Wednesday 31 May, 2017 

 

 E&OE    

 Subjects: Adani Carmichael Mine; cyber-security; revelations regarding anti-mining groups;  refugee cases    

 MINISTER CANAVAN:  Look tonight, today, in the lead up to Origin, it's great to see all of Queensland united, not  just behind our football team tonight, but all major political parties are now on board with  the Carmichael Mine, the Adani Mine in North Queensland. I welcome the fact that  belatedly, the Queensland Government has sorted out their internal ructions and divisions  and are now fully behind the project, signing a deal last night with Adani to proceed with  the project on a royalties arrangement. And the Queensland Government has confirmed  that they will play their role in regards to any funding from the Northern Australia  Infrastructure Facility.    

 We now need to get on with the job, and we also need to hear from the Federal Labor Party  here, particularly the Queensland representatives of the Federal Labor Party. Are you  behind your Queensland Labor Party colleagues at the state level? Are you behind North  Queensland and the thousands of jobs that will be created by this project? We desperately  need these jobs in North Queensland. We need some hope. We need some opportunity.  And this project could start in a matter of months, employing people building an airport and  work camp on the site. And that's the kind of relief that just average hard working North  Queenslanders want. They want an opportunity in life. They want the ability to have a job  and provide for their family. And they want a future for their children as well, because it's  not just the construction of the rail line and mine that will create thousands of jobs, it's  ongoing jobs for at least a 60 year mine life.    

 So it's a huge potential for North Queensland, really positive news. Hopefully Queensland  will have more positive news this evening. Some Queensland politicians down here are  debating selections and all that sort of rubbish. I just want to see our boys win. I don't care  who they select, they've all got to a maroon jumper on and I'll be right behind them tonight. 

 

 REPORTER:  Experts and politicians are meeting in Canberra today to discuss cyber-security. I’m just  wondering, do you have concerns? We’ve seen some of the effects on elections overseas.  For elections here, do you have any concerns?    

 MINISTER CANAVAN:  Yeah look, I think this is a modern day, well cyber security threats are a modern day twist on  age old propaganda. Ever since modern democracy was formulated, there's always the risk  of propaganda both from within a country and from outside seeking to undermine the  foundations of free and fair elections. So in this sense, the modern day tools of internet use,  social media aren't a different theme, but they are certainly different tools that we need to  respond to, just as we have laws and regulations in place to protect against nefarious  propaganda from direct mail and other sources. This is something of course that now needs  to be looked into. I know the Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters is looking into  aspects of this.    

 In terms of the last few election campaigns, not necessarily from state actors overseas, but  there are also non-state actors as well - non-governmental organisations that are very well  financed and can spread mistruths through our community. I particularly refer to some  revelations in The Australian yesterday, with the Tides Foundation from the United States  are funding groups here to oppose mining and development of projects in North  Queensland. We don't have the same level of transparency about the funding of these  organisations as we do over political parties, and they don't have the same restraints in  terms of limits on taxable donations. So I think that's something absolutely we do need to  be focused on. It's nothing to panic about, but it's certainly something to update our laws  and regulations in response to these modern day threats.    

 REPORTER:  Senator, one last one. This is a bit out of left field, but [inaudible] Coptic Christians are set to  be deported to Egypt. Their asylum cases have been rejected, so they’re being deported.  Given what’s been going on in Egypt, should the Government consider at least delaying  [inaudible]?    

 MINISTER CANAVAN:  Look I'm very concerned about the treatment we have seen from a broad range of Christian  and other faiths in the Middle East in the last few years. I don't myself have the detailed  information on the situation in Egypt. I do trust the authorities that they will be properly  assessing those aspects. We take a large amount of refugees into Australia. A large amount  of those seeking asylum do qualify, and in terms of the developed world, we are one of the  largest recipients of asylum seekers. So I trust that our authorities look at these things  properly. I don't have enough information myself to comment in particular on that case.    

 

