---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 15 April 2017: Manus Island"
date: "2017-04-15"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/244903073
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5222069%22
---

 

 SHAYNE NEUMANN MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR    

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SATURDAY, 15 APRIL 2017    

 SUBJECTS:  Manus Island    

 SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Overnight reports of weapons being discharged and rocks being  thrown on the Manus Island regional processing facility demand a full investigation  by the Turnbull Government.  Those people seeking asylum have a right to have  their application for refugee status dealt with in a timely manner but also in a safe  manner.    

 What we need to know is what happened in this incident, how it happened, how the  authorities responded and what needs to be done to prevent this type of thing  happening in the future.  The culture of secrecy in relation to these offshore  processing facilities must come to an end.     

 The Government must come clean with the Australian public.  The Australian public  who pay for these facilities; these are taxpayer funded facilities, paid for by the  Australian public, demand to know what went on, and demand that those people who  are asylum seekers, refugees or indeed Australian staff working in these facilities are  safe.    

 So I’m calling on the Government to investigate fully in cooperation with the PNG  authorities to make sure that those people living in these facilities or staying there  are treated in a safe way and their applications for asylum are dealt with in the timely  way.  The incident demands action and the Government needs to investigate and to  come clean about what happened overnight.    

 JOURNALIST: Shayne, the Department of Immigration says the PNG authorities are  investigating this.  Does Labor not trust them to do that job properly?    

 NEUMANN:  We welcome the fact the PNG authorities are investigating but these  are facilities in which there are Australian personnel, the Australian tax payer pays  billions of dollars towards and they have been operating for some years.  It’s  impossible to argue the Australian public doesn’t have an interest in this, that we 

 don’t have a duty to those people there, whether they are Australian staff or indeed  they are asylum seekers.  So Labor is calling on the Government... [inaudiable]    

 

 JOURNALIST: [inaudiable] ... that would be followed if Labor were in Government  though?  That the PNG authorities would investigate?    

 

 NEUMANN: Of course the PNG authorities should investigate, but there needs to be  a proper investigation and I think the Government need to do that.  I’m asking for the  Government to give the Opposition a full brief in relation to what’s happened.  Media  reports overnight are very concerning and troubling.  We see incidences of discharge  of weapons; there are reports of PNG military personal associated with this as well  as residents in PNG.  Of course, it’s up to the PNG Government to undertake their  own investigation but of the Australian Government needs to undertake proper  investigations and come clean on what has happened.  They need to be upfront  about what has happened overnight.    

 JOURNALIST:  What concerns do you have now for the safety of the people living in  the Centre?    

 NEUMANN:  Well there is uncertainty of what’s going on.  It must be terribly  concerning for people to have rocks thrown, to have discharge of weapons near the  facility, but it’s also uncertain as to the future for these people.  We believe the  Turnbull Government is doing the right thing with the US refugee deal, but what  happens for the rest of those people who aren’t picked up in that deal?  This doesn’t  bode well for integration into the PNG society and we are calling on the Government  to look at third country options in relation to those people left behind and to make  sure these facilities are safe.    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: MELISSA HOCKEY 0418 511 529   

