---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Los Angeles, United States: 29 January 2017: G'day USA event; President Trump's immigration executive order; refugee resettlement"
date: "2017-01-29"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "G'day USA event"
  - "President Trump's immigration executive order"
  - "refugee resettlement"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/241037922
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5071735%22
---

 Doorstop - Los Angeles, United States  Transcript, E&OE 

 29 January 2017 

 

 

 

 MINISTER BISHOP: I’m here with my colleague the Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment, Steve  Ciobo, on another special day here in Los Angeles as we celebrate G’day USA.   After last night’s gala    where we honoured three outstanding Australians in Ben Mendelsohn, Catherine Martin and David Hill,    today we’re celebrating another fantastic collaboration between Warner Brothers and the Australian  animation and visual effects firm, Animal Logic. This is the second film that Warner Brothers and Animal   Logic have made in the Lego series and today we’re having an advanced screening of The Lego Batman  movie. This is a fantastic example of Australian creative talent being able to contribute to an extraordinary  global production,  and it  reflects the creativity,  the ingenuity and the inventiveness of  Australians in the    film and television  industry. 

 

 This G’day USA event  has been an outstanding success.   We have met many people who want  to invest     in Australia, we have seen many business partnerships flourish, our sponsors,  including Qantas, have had     a pretty special week, particularly Qantas because they were able to also launch and open their new A380  hangar at Los Angeles airport - the only one of its kind in North America. So I’ll hand over to Steve Ciobo     to say a few words. 

 

 MINISTER CIOBO: Thanks Julie. Well, this has been a very good G’Day USA. It’s part of, of course, the  Australian Government’s outreach here in North America and I’m very pleased that we’ve had Austrade     and Tourism Australia who’ve been able to be key partners this year as well. It’s part of the vision that      we’ve got to make sure that we continue to build Brand Australia to keep enticing North Americans to    come down to Australia for their holidays, as well as of course to expand the reach of G’Day USA to    include, for example, this year Austin, Texas - the opportunity that I had to sit down with a number of  potential key investors to talk about trade relationships, to talk about the fact that as a country Australia is  very committed to ongoing engagement when it comes to trade and investment and tourism with respect      to North America. 

 

 The other key success I think we’ve had, Julie, is some very,  very fruitful discussions with major studios     over the past 48-72 hours, the opportunity to re-affirm our strong commitment to the growth of Australia’s  film and TV industry and the recognition that we certainly punch above our weight when it comes to not    only stars on the screen but also stars that lay behind the screen and on the production side and the post-  production side. 

 

 So I’ll leave my remarks at that and over to you    guys. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Are you aware, is the Australian Government aware, of any Australian citizens who’ve  been denied entry into the US  because of  Mr Trump’s executive  order? 

 

 MINISTER BISHOP:  The  Australian  Government is working  very  closely with  the  Administration  and  the    US officials and we want to ensure that Australians continue to have access to the United States as they  have in the past, as people from the United States have access to Australia. So, our consular staff are 

 working closely with the US officials but I won’t go into any details, but we are certainly there on the  ground ensuring that Australians can continue to access the United    States. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Have you had a chance to speak to the Prime Minister since his phone call with the  President? 

 

 MINISTER BISHOP: Yes, I have. He was very pleased with the call, it was very warm, it was very  engaging,  they discussed a whole range of bilateral, regional and global    issues. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Did it provide, I guess,  reassurance that Australians would not be adversely affected at all   by his Administration? 

 

 MINISTER BISHOP: I’ve had two very constructive conversations now over the past two days with Vice  President Mike Pence, and he re-iterated the significance of the Australian US relationship. He was very    well briefed on all of the details of the US-Australia alliance and I’m confident that we will continue to build  our alliance. It will continue to go from strength to strength. That was the sentiment that Vice President  Pence passed on to me and I’m sure it was reflected in the Prime Minister’s conversation with President  Trump. 

 

 JOURNALIST: The refugee resettlement deal under the Obama Administration is that going ahead? 

 

 MINISTER BISHOP: I’m very confident that Australia and the United States will continue to work together  and co-operate on ensuring that our respective immigration and border protection policies can be  implemented and that we will not in any way encourage the people smuggling trade to re-establish their 

 business models and send people, essentially,  to their death on dangerous journeys to   Australia. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Are you confident the original deal signed under the Obama administration will continue in    its previous form or could that  change? 

 

 MINISTER BISHOP: I’m confident that the Australian government and the US  government  will continue   to support each other in ensuring that we can implement our strong immigration and border protection  policies.   

 

 Media enquiries 

 

 Minister's office: (02) 6277  7500   

 DFAT  Media Liaison:  (02) 6261 1555 

