---
title: "Turnbull Government targets most vulnerable asylum seekers"
date: "2017-08-27"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/250540505
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5483531%22
---

 

 SHAYNE NEUMANN MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR   

 TURNBULL GOVERNMENT TARGETS MOST VULNERABLE ASYLUM SEEKERS   

 The Turnbull Government has sunk to a new low with reports Peter Dutton plans to  immediately cut financial support and housing for to up to 400 asylum seekers  transferred from Manus Island and Nauru to Australia for medical treatment.   

 The changes come without any warning and reports suggest the first 100 people will  have their financial assistance cut off as soon as tomorrow and need to find new  housing within three weeks.   

 By purposefully making these people destitute and homeless, the Turnbull Government  can only be exacerbating the health conditions which asylum seekers were originally  transferred to Australia to be treated for.   

 The long term issue of these people being in Australia could be avoided entirely if Peter  Dutton simply let these asylum seekers apply to resettle in the United States but he has  denied them that opportunity.   

 Labor strongly supports the US refugee resettlement agreement and wants all eligible  refugees - including those here for medical treatment - to have the opportunity to apply  to resettle there.   

 The recent Senate Inquiry into serious allegations of abuse, self-harm and neglect of  asylum seekers in Nauru and Manus Island recommended that the Turnbull  Government publicly confirm asylum seekers transferred to Australia for medical  reasons can apply to participate in the US refugee resettlement arrangement.   

 Peter Dutton has completely failed to make a case for why these people haven’t been  allowed to apply for resettlement in the US while receiving medical treatment in  Australia.   

 Manus Island and Nauru were set up as regional transit processing facilities but have  become places of indefinite detention under the Abbott-Turnbull Government.   

 Today’s news is even more proof of Peter Dutton’s incompetence in the management of  offshore processing centres and his failure to negotiate other third country resettlement  options.   

 SUNDAY, 27 AUGUST 2017    

 MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110   

