---
title: "Papua New Guinea and Nauru resettlement arrangements"
date: "2017-09-20"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/250706040
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5526179%22
---

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 STATEMENT 

 

 20 September 2017    

 PAPUA NEW GUINEA AND NAURU RESETTLEMENT ARRANGEMENTS   

 The first group of refugees from Papua New Guinea and Nauru are expected to depart  PNG and Nauru in coming weeks.     

 The refugees will receive notification of the outcome of their application to resettle under  the US Refugee Admissions Program in coming days.  Processing of other individuals  continues and further decisions by US authorities are expected in due course.   

 The resettlement arrangement demonstrates the strength of Australia’s relationship with  the US. I want to thank the United States for their cooperation. We have a long history  of working together on a range of global refugee and humanitarian issues.   

 As we have made clear from the outset the resettlement arrangements will take time  and will not be rushed. I repeat that we will not be providing running commentary on this  matter.   

 My message to people thinking about coming to Australia illegally by boat is that this is  a one-off arrangement that will not be available to any future illegal maritime arrival.   

 Any people smuggling boats that attempt to reach Australia will be intercepted and  turned back.   

 

 Minister Dutton’s Office - 02 6277 7860 

