---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Perth: 2 February 2017: Labor's plan for jobs and apprenticeships; refugee deal with the US; West Australian election; Turnbull's $1.75 million donation; GST"
date: "2017-02-02"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Labor's plan for jobs and apprenticeships"
  - "refugee deal with the US"
  - "West Australian election"
  - "Turnbull's $1.75 million donation"
  - "GST"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/241283711
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5077032%22
---

 

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND  ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS 

 MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT 

 DOORSTOP  PERTH  THURSDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2017   

 SUBJECT/S: Labor’s plan for jobs and apprenticeships; Refugee deal with the  US; West Australian election; Turnbull’s $1.75 million donation; GST.   

 BILL SHORTEN: Good morning everybody, it's great to be at St Norbert’s with Mark  McGowan, talking about Mark McGowan's number one priority, my number one  priority and the number one priority of all Australians and that's jobs. And the only  way we can do more to generate good quality jobs in Australia in the future, is to  make sure that not only do we have a plan for jobs, but we have a plan for  apprenticeships. Australia is a tradie nation - 1.6 million Australians have a trades  qualification. But we are in danger of losing our advantage as a tradie nation  because at the moment it is too easy to import the skills rather than train our own.  That's why it's great to be here at this marvellous school. What we've got to do is  send out a message to our young people and their parents that vocational education  in the trades is not a second-class option.   

 We believe that young people should have the choice to go to university or to do a  trade and we want to make sure that if people do a trade, that they are confident  there are jobs at the end of it. That's why I've outlined this year already some of our  plans to put apprentices first and to give locals the first chance to do an  apprenticeship and get training. A Commonwealth Government that I lead will make  sure that on all the significant projects, at least one in every 10 employees is an  apprentice, and we'll back that up by clamping down on some of the rorts in the visa  system, and we'll also make sure that we clean up the TAFE and the training sector  by prioritising public TAFE at the centre of all we do.   

 That's Labor for you at the national level. I will invite Mark to speak about his great  plans for jobs and apprentices at the state level, but one thing is for sure; if you want  your kids to do an apprenticeship, if you think doing a trade is good and worthwhile  career for your kids or for adults seeking to retrain, you'd be voting for Mark  McGowan at the next state election. 

 MARK MCGOWAN: Thanks, Bill, and can I also thank St Norbert’s for the  opportunity to come and see their great trade training centre and to meet the  students. I want all West Australians to understand this, training and apprenticeships  will be at the heart of everything we do if we are elected to office on 11 March.  Training and apprenticeships are important. I believe in training and apprenticeships.  I go to school graduations in my own electorate of Rockingham and I meet lots of  young people who are finding it difficult now to obtain apprenticeships. This has to  stop. We have to make sure there are more opportunities for training and  apprenticeships for West Australian young people coming out of school so that they  can get good jobs in the future.   

 This Government has been very focused on making sure jobs go offshore. They  send a list to Canberra each and every year promoting overseas workers into  Western Australia in traditional trades where we already have large numbers of  unemployed West Australians here at home. They send jobs overseas. The latest  example of the Malaysian footbridge, that bridge should have been built here in  Western Australia. It should have been built here in Western Australia. The fact the  Government sent that bridge overseas to be built is a disgrace and they need to  account for the fact it’s now late and it was built overseas when workshops here are  empty and we need to provide apprenticeships and traineeships for West  Australians.   

 So one of the things we are going to do is we're going to make it law that  government departments including education, health, transport and housing are  required to provide more apprenticeships for local people. We're going to put in place  West Australian industry participation plan. That will require as part of all bidding  processes for construction work across government, actual details and a  consideration as part of the bidding process that there be apprenticeships and  traineeships provided to local people. What the current Government does is they  send the work overseas, we're going to make sure there is more work here in  Western Australia and we're going to make it the law that education, transport,  housing and health and other Government agencies are required to provide more  apprenticeships for local people. This has been done in other states, it is time it was  done here because we need to make sure that local people get our jobs first  because there is a job crisis in Western Australia. I get told by people all the time, all  the time, families come to see me, people stop me on the street, young people  graduating from high school, advise me they can't get an apprenticeship and their  families can't get a job. That has to change and under a Government I lead that will  change.   

 SHORTEN: Thanks Mark. Are there any questions of myself and Mark on any  matters?   

 JOURNALIST: On a national matter, Opposition Leader, there is a story breaking  that Donald Trump effectively hung up on Malcolm Turnbull during a phone call that  they had recently, 25 minutes into a one hour call after berating him over the refugee  deal and accusing him of exporting the next Boston bomber to the United States.  Have you got any comments on that exchange at all? 

 SHORTEN: Well, first of all, I think the Washington Post has reported this - that's a  pretty reputable American newspaper. I think Mr Turnbull needs to confirm or deny  the accuracy of that report. He made it clear that he had a constructive discussion  and that the refugee deal which Labor supports, was on track. But now it appears  another different version of the same conversation has emerged. I just say to  Turnbull, talk straight to the Australian people. Tell us what's going on. We want to  see the refugee deal happen, but clearly President Trump and his people are saying  one thing happened in this conversation, which is completely at odds with what  Prime Minister Turnbull has told the Australian people. They both can't be right and I  think it's in the interests of the Australian people for Mr Turnbull just to be straight  with the people and tell us what's really going on. We don't want to find out our news  from the Washington Post, we should hear it first from our Prime Minister.   

 JOURNALIST: Just to follow up from that, our Foreign Minister has issued a press  release congratulating Tillerson on being appointed Secretary of State. In it she says  we work closely together across foreign policy, defence and security, economic,  scientific, cultural pursuits and have done so for many decades - it sounds like that  relationship is starting to fail.   

 SHORTEN: I've said that I hope that President Trump surprises us in Australia and  doesn't necessarily keep to all the things he said in the election. The Turnbull  Government has criticised me for expressing some previous concerns about some of  the views of the President of the United States. The American Alliance should be  stronger than individuals. But it is most important that whoever is in power in  Canberra or in the White House, that we treat our allies with respect. If I was Prime  Minister, I would want the United States to be our ally, and I'm sure that the  Americans want Australia to be their ally, but if I was Prime Minister I would never  just be a satellite of the United States, and it is important that Australia speaks its  mind. I'm not going to make a habit of commenting on every in and out of American  politics and I would expect the Americans to respect that about Australian politics.  But sometimes silence can be interpreted as agreement, and I think it is important  that Australia takes a robust, pro-Australian position in its dealing with the United  States, and again I ask Malcolm Turnbull just be straight with us. We're on the side  of Australia. I just wish he would tell us what's going on and we shouldn't be finding  out what's happening to Australia in foreign newspapers. Our own Prime Minister  should be honest with the Australian people and not be tricky.   

 JOURNALIST: Well, respect cuts both ways. It doesn't sound like Donald Trump  from that Washington Post report is being very respectful of either our Prime Minister  or our country. Are you becoming increasingly worried or alarmed about Donald  Trump now that he is in the White House?   

 SHORTEN: I think we just need to get more facts on the table. I think Malcolm  Turnbull can put this debate to rest very quickly. There were two people in this  telephone conversation.   

 JOURNALIST: Well, apparently there was more than that, because this was  referring to Washington officials who have been quoted by the Washington Post. 

 SHORTEN: I agree with you, I think it is a worry if Prime Minister Turnbull has given  us one version of events which seem pretty good, we were happy about that. Now it  has emerged that President Trump and his people have a different view of events. I  think Prime Minister Turnbull just needs to be straight with the Australian people. We  want to see the refugee deal happen, but I think when you're dealing with other large  countries, it is important that you don't keep your own people in the dark about  what's going on.  JOURNALIST: Is this a slight against our country to have details of this high level  phone call leaked from the White House?   

 SHORTEN: Well, before we get into who is slighting who and all of that sort of,  opinion, we just need to get some facts on the table. I just ask Malcolm Turnbull on  behalf of the Australian people, we are all committed to Australia's national interest.  This refugee deal is in our national interest and Malcolm Turnbull has got to start  trusting the Australian people. I think so we can avoid the confusion, the legitimate  questions which the Australian media are asking, Malcolm Turnbull just needs to be  upfront with us. We shouldn't be finding out about what's happening to Australian  policy through the newspapers of foreign countries. I think our own Prime Minister  should be telling us straight what's going on.   

 JOURNALIST: Mathias Cormann was on the radio this morning saying that the $1.2  billion for Perth Freight Link, which Mr McGowan wants to re-purpose to other  projects, won't be permitted to be re-purposed. Do you think it's fair enough for an  incoming state government to reallocate money which is being allocated by the  Commonwealth?   

 SHORTEN: Why don't we both have an answer because I think Mark would have  legitimate views on this matter. But can I just say, we've seen this trick before by the  Liberals in Canberra. It is complete rubbish.   

 Before the Victorian state election, the Labor opposition, the then opposition, now  government, had one policy on a road whether it should go ahead or not, and what  the Coalition Government in Canberra said is that if Labor got in and they put their  policy forward, that the money which was allocated to the project wouldn't be  forthcoming. Well, that was just complete rubbish. It was an attempt by the Coalition  to blackmail people into voting for the Liberals at the last election, and I can tell you  what happened in Victoria afterwards, the Coalition Government has found the 

 money and repurposed it for the projects that the duly democratically elected State  Government has nominated.   

 McGOWAN: Look, Mr Cormann is talking rubbish. It's rubbish, rubbish, rubbish! I'm  not going to give into blackmail by a Federal senator against the wishes of the  democratically elected government of Western Australia after March 11.   

 If we are elected to government in March 11, we will make decisions about how  infrastructure dollars are spent in Western Australia, and we are going to spend the  money on congestion-busting projects and rail projects across Western Australia that  create jobs.   

 All Mr Cormann is trying to do is to help his mate, Mr Barnett. He is not acting in the 

 interests of Western Australia. And I tell you what, the reason they won't carry out  with this - I tell you what, the reason they won't carry through with this attempted  blackmail is because if they did, they would lose Pearce, Swan, Hasluck, Sterling  and Canning. Because West Australians will not stand up for being bullied by a  Federal senator.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Cormann also said that the best chance WA has of getting a  fairer chance of GST is for the Feds to renegotiate with a re-elected Barnett  Government. Are you concerned that West Australians could potentially be punished  for voting Labor?   

 McGOWAN: Well, again, Mr Cormann just talks rot. This is absolute rot. Mr Barnett  was part of signing the original GST deal. Since Mr Barnett has been in power, our  share in the dollar has gone from 80 cents down to 30 cents, and despite all of Mr  Barnett's bluff and bluster, nothing has come to Western Australia apart from a  reduced share of GST.   

 The best way of getting a better share of GST is to elect a government that will stand  up to the Federal Liberals, because the performance so far by the Federal and state  Liberals has been terrible.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, how is Malcolm Turnbull’s donation to the Liberal Party  different to say, the unions donating to the Labor Party?   

 SHORTEN: On this whole Turnbull donation matter, I don't think most Australians  can comprehend spending $1.75 million, full stop. I mean to be fair, it's Turnbull's  money, it's his choice if he wants to drop a couple of million dollars on his cause, the  Liberal Party, I guess that's ultimately his choice. But what I don't understand is why  Mr Turnbull had to be dragged kicking and screaming to disclose the amount of  money.   

 I think we would all agree that the largest political donation in Australian history is out  of the ordinary. It's clearly relevant to people to know that that has happened. Why  did Mr Turnbull drop the donation on July 1 and therefore avoid - give himself longer  to report it? I mean, this is out of the ordinary. I think Mr Turnbull at the very least  has exercised appalling judgement in the manner in which he's been forced to  disclose the amount of money.   

 I mean, this is a monster donation. Wouldn't matter if it was a Chinese businessman,  a large bank or a trade union, or Mr Turnbull. When you're giving this sort of money -  seven digit amounts of money to a political party, the voters, I believe, have got a  right to know about it in real-time, it should be a factor they can take into account in  an election. After all, it's the people's democracy, it's the people's election campaign.  The people have to right to know in real-time.   

 Mr Turnbull loves to talk about transparency but he acts tricky, and I think that now,  we should at least get something positive out of this and turn the fire up on having  campaign donation reform. That's what I think needs to be done. People should find  out in real-time if you're giving millions of dollars in an election, which will have an  influence in an election - you should find out about this in real-time, not wait 12 or 18 

 months, well after the election has been fought and won and lost.   

 JOURNALIST: He says that he's Mr Harbourside Mansion, yeah, he has a house  that he paid for whereas you want to be Mr Harbourside Mansion in Kirribilli House  which is paid for by the taxpayer.   

 SHORTEN: I think it's clear that Mr Turnbull likes to attack me because he's  seriously annoyed at the fact that I say that he's seriously out of touch. You know,  whether or not he gives $2 million to the Liberal Party, that's for the people to decide  what they think about that, but every decision Turnbull makes is out of touch.   

 I think it's out of touch on one hand to propose giving tax cuts to the very rich, to give  $50 billion in tax giveaway to large corporations and multinationals and banks, and  on the other hand, what he then does, is he cuts Medicare, he goes after the  pensioners and he treats Centrelink recipients as quasi-criminals. He is seriously out  of touch in every policy he tackles.   

 JOURNALIST: They say though that when you criticise him for being out of touch  that it's you showing resentment to his wealth. Do you resent his wealth?   

 SHORTEN: No. I mean, he's welcome to his wealth - good luck to him. But I think he  makes the mistake of thinking that's what motivates everybody else. He may  measure success by how many dollars he has in the bank, I measure success as a  prime minister on how many people you find a job, how many kids you've got doing  an apprenticeship, what the bulk-billing rates are like, are pensioners feeling secure 

 or feeling concerned about their entitlements and what they're getting. For me this  question of being seriously out of touch goes to a range of issues. I think he was  seriously out of touch to think that it wasn't relevant to the Australian people, making  the biggest political donation in history.   

 Now, what's that classic saying? If you've got nothing to fear, then you've got nothing  to hide. And what he's done is he's said that he's acted within his legal obligations  but I don't think he's acted within his ethical obligations. When you're going to make  a monster donation, you have to be out of touch to think that's not relevant. But of  course, then we've got all of his other decisions that I said. On one hand, he's the  best friend that big banks have ever had, he's the best friend for tax cuts for  millionaires, but on the other hand, if you're on Centrelink, he'll send the people after  you to try and collect any money, he'll change the asset rules for pensioners and of  course, he hasn't done anything to stop his dreadful cuts to Medicare.   

 Perhaps if I can have a couple more questions on Federal issues and then if there's  any other state matters -   

 JOURNALIST: What do make of reports that war veterans are being tracked on  social media to determine whether or not they should be eligible for support for  PTSD?   

 SHORTEN: There they go again, the Turnbull Government. I think our veterans  should be treated with respect. No one should get a payment they're not entitled to,  but this idea that under the Turnbull Government, that anyone who receives a 

 government payment is treated as a default position, that they don't deserve it, I think  that's wrong. PTSD is a shocking problem amongst our veterans. I don't think our  veterans deserve to treated like potential cheats, they deserve to be treated like  heroes and that's the way we would do it if we were the government.   

 JOURNALIST: We should ask you about the GST every time you come here.  Senator Cormann said on the radio today that it would not be reasonable for any  federal government to side with one state over other states. Would it be appropriate  to do that if you acknowledge, as the Federal Government has, that the current  arrangement is unfair? If it's something unfair then shouldn't it be appropriate to fix  it?   

 SHORTEN: Well first of all, let's go to what Senator Cormann said and then your  question. I love the Turnbull Government, on the East Coast they're all things East  Coast, on the West Coast they're all things West Coast. Seems like they change  their policies as they fly over the Nullarbor. The fact of the matter is, Colin Barnett's  been in power for a very long time and he's asking people to believe that if they give  them another chance he will turn around and do everything that he's never been able  to do in the previous, what is it, eight years? At a certain point, asking to vote for  Colin Barnett is the triumph of hope over experience. And I think West Australians  deserve better and they deserve a fighter like Mark.   

 In terms of Senator Cormann, well I don't blame him for trying to keep his mate in  power but he should have a better argument than the GST, because Mark  McGowan's enumerated, under this government the Coalition Government, West  Australia's share of the GST has gone down. Now I think that what West Australians  need is someone who'll fight for Western Australia first and that's what Mark will do.   

 In terms of what's fair generally, I'd like an independent process, but it's got to make  sure that the independent process takes into account all of the factors which states  have for their revenue, and that's something that I know Mark will talk to us about if  he gets elected on March 11.   

 MEDIA CONTACTS: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053 

