---
title: "New drug to help over 200,000 Australians"
date: "2017-07-28"
creators:
  - "Hunt, Greg"
source: "MINISTER FOR HEALTH"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/250148684
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5420515%22
---

 

 

 The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health  Minister for Sport 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 28 July 2017 

 

 New drug to help over 200,000 Australians   

 The Turnbull Government has taken another significant step to eliminate hepatitis C from Australia  by subsidising a new drug which can treat all forms of the disease with an expected success rate of  90%.    

 The drug known as Epclusa® will be comfort for around 200,000 Australians who face many  challenges of living with hepatitis C.    

 Each year, around 800 Australians will die from hepatitis C infection and our investment in this  drug is aimed at reversing this unacceptable statistic.    

 The August 1 listing on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) means patients will only pay a  maximum of $38.80 per month for the medicines, with concessional patients paying just $6.30.    

 Without this listing, the cost would be in excess of $20,000 per treatment.   

 Epclusa® is the first of the new direct acting antivirals that can be used to treat people with any  genotype of hepatitis C, meaning it can treat all types of the disease.    

 This will make it simpler for doctors to prescribe this breakthrough treatment and will boost uptake  rates, particularly for rural and regional patients.    

 Eliminating hepatitis C from Australia will take a coordinated effort from GPs, specialists, nurses,  patients and the Government.    

 Today is World Hepatitis Day and I want to reiterate the Government’s commitment to eliminate  hepatitis C in Australia by 2030.    

 Australia was one of the first countries in the world to subsidise new medicines for all people over  the age of 18 who have chronic hepatitis C.    

 A range of these new medicines became available through the PBS from 1 March 2016. Since this  time, more than 42,000 people have received a PBS-subsidised medicine to treat chronic hepatitis  C.   

 The Australian Government has allocated more than $1 billion to fund these new medicines through  the PBS over the next five years in line with the Government’s Fourth National Hepatitis C  Strategy.    

 New medicines for treating chronic hepatitis C have become available after recent advances in the  development of antiviral treatment.   

 The Australian Government will continue to fund hepatitis B and hepatitis C education activities for  health care professionals.    

 In addition, we continue to fund hepatitis B vaccination of all infants through the National  Immunisation Program (NIP).  The hepatitis B infant vaccination program has resulted in more than  96 per cent of 2 year old infants being vaccinated.   

 From 1 July 2017, all 10-19 year olds and all refugees and other humanitarian entrants became  eligible for free catch-up vaccines, including hepatitis B, on an ongoing basis through the NIP.    

 (ENDS)   

