---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 30 January 2017: the Liberals' $30 billion cuts hurting Australian schools; US immigration ban; US refugee resettlement deal"
date: "2017-01-30"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "the Liberals' $30 billion cuts hurting Australian schools"
  - "US immigration ban"
  - "US refugee resettlement deal"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/241037899
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5071731%22
---

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN 

 MEMBER FOR SYDNEY 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SYDNEY  MONDAY, 30 JANUARY 2017                                    

 SUBJECTS: The Liberals’ $30 billion cuts hurting Australian schools; US  immigration ban; US refugee resettlement deal.  

 KELLY BOURIS, PRINCIPAL OUR LADY OF MOUNT CARMEL: I’d just like to  welcome you all, and welcome Tanya, to Our Lady of Mount Carmel. Tanya is a regular  visitor here and we are always pleased to see her. It was lovely when she went in to say  good morning to the children this morning, some of them recognised her face and had a  big grin. We are very appreciative of our visits and our time spent with Tanya. The  funding we have received over the last few years has helped our needs - meet the  needs of our children - so that they’re on an equal playing field to any child in any  school, and we’re very grateful for all that funding. 

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I want to thank Kelly  Bouris, the new principal of Our Lady of Mount Carmel for such a warm welcome today.  This is a school that I love to visit. It is a school that cares for its students deeply and I  know in my discussions in the past here at Our Lady of Mount Carmel, with the previous  principal, that this school invested its extra needs-based funding from the Gonski  education reforms into speech pathology and occupational therapy. So kids who are  starting school, in some respects, behind their peers, were able to catch up and make  sure that their whole schooling benefited from those early interventions.  

 So today we see a lot of parents around the country waving their children off to their first  day of kindy, first day of high school, just back to school. We’re seeing a lot of children  going back to school last week, this week and next week right around Australia. And I  think any parent will tell you that there’s been a few sleepless nights. Some of it’s been 

 the kids, nervous about starting school But a lot more of it has been parents worried  about how their children will fare at school this year.  

 Parents worry a lot about their children’s schooling, whether the school is the right  school for their child, whether they’ll fit in and whether they’ll get a great education. And  we worry about these things because we know that a great education is the foundation  for a great life. We know that investing in education means that individual children have  every opportunity to succeed in life. And also that this investment is a great economic  driver; it’s a great investment in productivity for our nation. John Dewey said that what  the best and wisest parent wants for their child, that’s what society should want for all its  children. And that’s really true of a great education. Parents agonise about it because  it’s important, and governments should agonise about it because it’s important, for  individual children and for our prosperity as a nation.  

 That’s why Labor will never accept $30 billion of cuts to our children’s schooling. $30  billion of cuts to schooling means fewer teachers - it’s like sacking one in seven  teachers. $30 billion means fewer teachers, it means less one-on-one attention, it  means less help with the basics. Today we’ve got the Federal Government out talking  about a new test for six year olds, but I ask the Federal Education Minister: what is the  point of a new test for six year olds when you are not prepared to put in the funding, if  those kids are falling behind, to help them catch up? What’s the point of a new test that  identifies kids who are falling behind when you are not prepared to fund the help they  need to catch up? Any questions? 

 JOURNALIST: So can you outline why Labor thinks it’s unreasonable if the Minister has  identified some schools that are getting too much money, why they shouldn’t have their  funds cut? 

 PLIBERSEK: Well I’d like the Minister to say which schools, how much and what he’s  going to cut. This is just years and years of uncertainty from the Federal Government.  What we know for certain is that $30 billion will mean that every child in every school is  worse off. We’ve got a Federal Education Minister who wants to cut funding to public  schools, we’ve got a Prime Minister who has said that the Federal Government  shouldn’t be funding public schools at all. We know that the Catholic systemic system  will be worse off, we know that some independent schools will be worse off. The $30  billion of cuts will hit every kid in every school. 

 JOURNALIST: Do we want a list? Has the Opposition seen a list or do we know what  schools? 

 PLIBERSEK: No, like most education policy from this Government, it’s vague and in the  never-never. If the Federal Government is proposing that some schools should have  their funding cut more than others, Simon Birmingham should be clear about that. But at  the moment, this Federal Government has a proposal on the table that would cut  funding to every school - to every single school. If he wants to cut funding to some  private schools more than that, well I think he should put a list on the table.  

 JOURNALIST: The funding runs out at the end of the year, what’s happening after that? 

 PLIBERSEK: Who knows? This is the problem for schools. This school for example,  has invested in speech pathology and occupational therapy, they have scraped together  the funding to keep investing in those vital services for their young children. Beyond  next year, who knows? This is not just uncertainty for this school, it’s at every school.  Extra funding has been put into extra teachers, more one-on-one attention, more  support, more help for kids who are struggling to help them catch up, more extension  activities for kids who are gifted and talented. But schools can’t employ teachers on  long-term contracts when their funding is uncertain beyond next year. School systems  can’t employ extra teachers, can’t invest in extra resources, when there’s no funding  certainty beyond next year. It is absolutely unacceptable that we are staring down the  barrel of a funding crisis in every school system in every state because this government  can’t get its act together. 

 JOURNALIST: On other matters, what should be the response to Donald Trump’s visa  ban? 

 PLIBERSEK: Well I think it’s extraordinary that the Australian Government seems  missing in action on this action from the United States. We don’t know how this ban will  affect Australian citizens or permanent residents who come from a background where  they were born in one of these countries. I think it’s absolutely vital now that the  Australian Government seek clarification about how this will affect Australian citizens.  We’ve seen the UK Prime Minister, Theresa May, make clear that she does not support  this travel ban. It would be, I think, very important for the Australian Government to  make a clear statement about its view on this discriminatory travel ban. 

 JOURNALIST: We have heard from Julie Bishop in Los Angeles, isn’t that enough to  hear that they’re basically going to work with the US Government? 

 PLIBERSEK: Well, I’m not really sure what that means. It would be very important, I  think, for the Prime Minister to stand up today and seek clarification on how this will  affect Australian citizens and permanent residents.  

 JOURNALIST: Do you believe that the new regime that Donald Trump proposes is  racist? 

 PLIBERSEK: Well I think it’s very important that policies, immigration policies - all  Government policies - are not based on race or religion or ethnic background or country  of origin. Australia has had a non-discriminatory immigration policy for 40 years and  that’s served us very well. We are stronger as a nation when we are united, when we  fight discrimination. Of course any country has the right to do background checks, to be  careful and cautious about who it invites to become a permanent resident or a citizen.  But flat-out discrimination based on religion, ethnicity or country of origin has never  served us well. 

 JOURNALIST: We heard that during the conversation with Mr Turnbull and Mr Trump  they talked about the immigration deal from Manus, do you think that was a sort of  agreement that there wasn’t going to be any discussion from Australia if they accepted  this one-off deal to resettle? 

 PLIBERSEK: Well who knows? I mean, there’s been, the deal around Manus Island  and Nauru has been shrouded in secrecy. It’s not clear what the Australian Government  has given up or committed to to get this deal in the first place. It has taken way too long  for people on Manus Island and Nauru to be resettled, there are continuing delays. The  Government should explain immediately when it is likely that people will be moved from  Manus Island and Nauru. They have been waiting too long. And they should make clear  as well whether everyone will be moved from Manus Island and Nauru, or whether this  visa ban will affect some of the people who would otherwise be included in this  arrangement. 

 JOURNALIST: Does Mr Turnbull deserve any credit for keeping that deal alive? The  fact that there was yesterday an exemption, or appeared to be an exemption for  Australia with this deal. 

 PLIBERSEK: Well let’s just see how things play out over the next few days. 

 ENDS 

 MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350 

 

