---
title: "Government and FFA ready to help newly arrived youngsters kick goals"
date: "2017-10-10"
creators:
  - "Seselja, Zed"
source: "ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SERVICES AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/251165148
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5565486%22
---

 

 

 

 SENATOR THE HON. ZED SESELJA  LIBERAL SENATOR FOR THE ACT  ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SERVICES   AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

 

 10th October 2017   

 MEDIA RELEASE    Government and FFA ready to help newly arrived  youngsters kick goals 

 The Australian Government and the Football Federation Australia (FFA) have  teamed up to help young new arrivals settle into Australian life, Assistant Minister for  Social Services and Multicultural Affairs, Zed Seselja announced today.     

 Speaking before the World Cup qualifying match between the Socceroos and Syria  in Sydney today, Assistant Minister Seselja said the Government had allocated  $100,000 to support the establishment of the FFA Multicultural Settlement Program.   

 “The program will help migrant families feel more connected to the broader  community and less isolated.” Assistant Minister Seselja said.    

 FFA will establish a multicultural unit to enable it to better engage with newly arrived  migrants and multicultural communities.     

 As part of the program, FFA will increase participation of new arrivals, aged between  5 and 11, in organised football activities.   

 “Football is a common interest for many newly arrived migrants and multicultural  communities.   

 “The ‘world game’ represents an opportunity for people of many cultural and diverse  backgrounds to come together.   

 “Taking part in football will enable these families to connect with other migrants and  the mainstream community.    

 “It will provide a safe and welcoming space for boys and girls of all abilities to play  modified football games - delivering a fun, engaging, and structured football  experience.”   

 Assistant Minister Seselja said the program would also enhance the children’s  physical and mental health through sports activities and weekly physical activity and  enable them to make friends and build links with mentors.   

 

 FOR ALL MEDIA ENQUIRIES PLEASE CONTACT ANGELA MCGUINNESS ON 0427 839 164 OR (02) 6247 6444   

 “Our partnership with the FFA is part of our support for humanitarian entrants and  migrants in participating equitably in Australian society,” he said.   

 “I am delighted that the Government and FFA can work together to make a real  difference in the lives of children and their families who have moved to Australia to  build a new life.”   

 For more information on how the Australian Government supports migrants and  refugees visit the Department of Social Services website, the DSS Media Hub page  and the Government support page. You can also view inspiring stories from refugees  on their journey of settling in Australia from the Department of Social Services  website.   

 

